He who (the heart of) all matters hath proven let him teach the nation, He who all knowledge possesseth, therein shall he school all the people, He shall his wisdom impart (?) and (so) shall they share it together. Gilgamish (?)—he was the Master of wisdom, with knowledge of all things, He ’twas discovered the secret concealed . . . (Aye), handed down the tradition relating to (things) prediluvian, Went on a journey afar, (all) aweary and worn with his toiling (?), Graved on a table of stone all the travail.
Of Erech, the high-wall’d, He (it was) built up the ramparts; (and) he (it was) clamp’d the foundation, Like unto brass, of E-Anna, the sacred, the treasury hallow’d, Strengthen’d its base to grant wayleave to no one . . . the threshold which from of old (?) . . . E-Anna . . . to grant wayleave to no one (?) . . .
(About thirty lines wanting. The description of Gilgamish runs on to the beginning of the next Column).
Two-thirds of him are divine, and one-third of him human, . . . The form of his body . . . He hath forced to take . . .
(Gap of about three lines).
“. . . of Erech ’tis he who hath taken, . . . (while) tow’reth his crest like an aurochs, Ne’er hath the shock of his weapons (its) peer; are driven his fellows Into the toils, while cow’d are the heroes of Erech un- . . . Gilgamish leaveth no son to his father, his arrogance swelling (Each) day and night; aye, he is the shepherd of Erech, the high-wall’d, He is our (?) shepherd . . . masterful, dominant, subtle . . . Gilgamish leaveth no maid to her mother, nor daughter to hero, (Nay), nor a spouse to a husband.”
(And so), to (th’ appeal of) their wailing Gave ear th’ Immortals: the gods of high heaven address’d the god Anu, (Him who was) Seigneur of Erech: “’Tis thou a son hast begotten, (Aye, in sooth, all) tyrannous, while tow’reth his crest like an aurochs, Ne’er hath the shock of his weapons (its) peer; are driven his fellows Into the toils, while cow’d are the heroes of Erech un- . . . Gilgamish leaveth no son to his father, his arrogance swelling (Each) day and night; aye, he is the shepherd of Erech, the high-wall’d, He is their shepherd . . . masterful, dominant, subtle . . . Gilgamish leaveth no maid to her mother, nor daughter to hero, (Nay), nor a spouse to a husband.”
(And so), to (th’ appeal of) their wailing Anu gave ear, call’d the lady Aruru: “’Twas thou, O Aruru, Madest (primeval seed of) mankind (?): do now make its fellow, So that he happen on Gilgamish, yea, on the day of his pleasure, So that they strive with each other, and he unto Erech give surcease.”
So when the goddess Aruru heard this, in her mind she imagined (Straightway, this) Concept of Anu, and, washing her hands, (then) Aruru Finger’d some clay, on the desert she moulded (it): (thus) on the desert Enkidu made she, a warrior, (as he were) born (and) begotten, (Yea), of Ninurta the double, and put forth the whole of his body Hair: in the way of a woman he snooded his locks (in a fillet); Sprouted luxuriant growth of his hair-like (the awns of) the barley, Nor knew he people nor land; he was clad in a garb like Sumuqan. E’en with gazelles did he pasture on herbage, along with the cattle Drank he his fill, with the beasts did his heart delight at the water.
(Then) did a hunter, a trapper, come face to face with this (fellow), Came on him one, two, three days, at the place where (the beasts) drank (their) water; (Sooth), when the hunter espied him, his face o’ermantled with terror, He and his cattle went unto his steading, dismay’d (and) affrighted, Crying aloud, distress’d in his heart, (and) his face overclouded, . . . woe in his belly . . . (Aye, and) his face was the same as of one who hath gone a far journey.
Open’d his mouth (then) the hunter, and spake, addressing his father: “Father, there is a great fellow come forth from out of the mountains, (O, but) his strength is the greatest (the length and breadth) of the country, Like to a double of Anu’s own self his strength is enormous, Ever (?) he rangeth at large o’er the mountains, (and) ever with cattle Grazeth on herbage (and) ever he setteth his foot to the water, So that I fear to approach him. The pits which I myself hollow’d (With mine own hands) hath he fill’d in (again), (and) the traps of my setting Torn up, (and) out of my clutches hath holpen escape (all) the cattle, Beasts of the desert: to work at my fieldcraft he will not allow me.”
Open’d his mouth (then) his father, and spake, addressing the hunter: “Gilgamish dwelleth in Erech, my son, whom no one hath vanquish’d, (Nay, but) ’tis his strength is greatest (the length and breadth) of the country, Like to a double of Anu’s own self, his strength is enormous, Go, set thy face towards Erech: and when he hears of a monster, He will say ‘Go, O hunter, a courtesan-girl, a hetaera Take with thee . . . like a strong one; When he the cattle shall gather again to the place of (their) drinking, So shall she put off her mantle (the charm of) her beauty revealing; (Then) shall he spy her, and (sooth) will embrace her, (and thenceforth) his cattle, Which in his very own deserts were rear’d, will (straightway) deny him.’”
Unto the rede of his father the hunter hath hearken’d, (and straightway) He will away unto Gilgamish. Taking the road towards Erech Turn’d he his steps, and to Gilgamish came, his speech thus addressing: (Saying): “There is a great fellow come forth from out of the mountains, (O, but) his strength is the greatest, (the length and breadth) of the country, Like to a double of Anu’s own self his strength is enormous, Ever (?) he rangeth at large o’er the mountains, (and) ever with cattle Grazeth on herbage, (and) ever he setteth his foot to the water, So that I fear to approach him. The pits which I myself hollow’d (With mine own hands) hath he fill’d in (again, and) the traps of my setting Torn up, (and) out of my clutches hath holpen escape (all) the cattle, Beasts of the desert: to work at my fieldcraft he will not allow me.”
Gilgamish unto him, unto the hunter made answer (in this wise): “Go, (good) my hunter, take with thee a courtesan-girl, a hetaera, When he the cattle shall gather again to the place of (their) drinking, So shall she put off her mantle, (the charm of her) beauty revealing, (Then) shall he spy her, and (sooth) will embrace her, (and thenceforth) his cattle Which in his very own deserts were rear’d will (straightway) deny him.”
Forth went the hunter, took with him a courtesan-girl, a hetaera, (So) did they start on their travels, went forth on their journey (together), (Aye), at the term of three days arrived at the pleasaunce appointed. Sate they down in their ambush (?), the hunter and the hetaera, One day, two days they sat by the place where (the beasts) drank (their) water. (Then) at last came the cattle to take their fill in their drinking.
Thither the animals came that their hearts might delight in the water, (Aye), there was Enkidu also, he whom the mountains had gender’d, E’en with gazelles did he pasture on herbage, along with the cattle Drank he his fill, with the beasts did his heart delight at the water, So beheld him the courtesan-girl, the lusty great fellow, (O but) a monster (all) savage from out of the depths of the desert! “’Tis he, O girl! O, discover thy beauty, thy comeliness shew (him), So that thy loveliness he may possess—(O), in no wise be bashful, Ravish the soul of him—(certes), as soon as his eye on thee falleth, He, forsooth, will approach thee, and thou—O, loosen thy mantle, So that he clasp thee, and (then) with the wiles of a woman shalt ply him; (Wherefore) his animals, bred in his desert, will (straightway) deny him, (Since) to his breast he hath held thee.”
The girl, displaying her bosom, Shew’d him her comeliness, (yea) so that he of her beauty possess’d him, Bashful she was not, (but) ravish’d the soul of him, loosing her mantle, So that he clasp’d her, (and then) with the wiles of a woman she plied him, Holding her unto his breast. (’Twas thus that) Enkidu dallied Six days, (aye) seven nights, with the courtesan-girl in his mating.
Sated at length with her charms, he turn’d his face to his cattle, O the gazelles, (how) they scamper’d away, as soon as they saw him! Him, yea, Enkidu,—fled from his presence the beasts of the desert! Enkidu losing his innocence—so, when the cattle fled from him, Failed his knees, and he slack’d in his running, (not) as aforetime: Natheless he (thus) hath attain’d his full growth and hath broaden’d (his) wisdom.
Sat he again at the feet of the woman, the woman his features Scanning, and, while she was speaking, his ears heard (the words) she was saying: “Comely thou art, e’en like to a god, O Enkidu, shalt be, Why with the beasts (of the field) dost thou (ever) range over the desert? Up! for I’ll lead thee to Erech, the high-wall’d—(in sooth), to the Temple Sacred, the dwelling of Anu and Ishtar, where, highest in power, Gilgamish is, and prevaileth o’er men like an aurochs.”
Her counsel E’en as she spake it found favour, (for) conscious he was of his longing Some companion to seek; so unto the courtesan spake he: “Up, then, O girl, to the Temple, the holy (and) sacred, invite me, Me, to the dwelling of Anu and Ishtar, where, highest in power, Gilgamish is, and prevaileth o’er men like an aurochs—for I, too, I, I will summon him, challenging boldly (and) crying through Erech, ‘I, too, am mighty!’ Nay, I, forsooth I, will (e’en) destiny alter—(Truly), ’tis he who is born in the desert whose vigour is greatest! . . . I will please thee, . . . whatever there be, that would I know.”
“Enkidu, come (then) to Erech, the high-wall’d, where people array them Gorgeous in festal attire, (and) each day the day is a revel, Eunuch-priests clashing (their) cymbals, and dancing-girls . . . flown with their wantoning, gleeful, and keeping the nobles Out of their beds! (Nay), Enkidu, joy in thy life (to its fullest) Thou shalt taste—(forsooth) will I shew thee a man who is happy, Gilgamish! View him, O look on his face, (how) comely his manhood! Dower’d with lustiness is he, the whole of his body with power Brimming, his vigour is stronger than thine, (all) day and night restless! Enkidu, temper thine arrogance—Gilgamish, loveth him Shamash, Anu, (and) Enlil, and Ea have dower’d his wisdom with largesse. (Sooth), or ever from out of thy mountains thou camest, in Erech Gilgamish thee had beheld in a dream; so, Gilgamish coming Spake to his mother, the dream to reveal. ‘O my mother, a vision Which I beheld in my night-time. (Behold), there were stars of the heavens, When something like unto Anu’s own self fell down on my shoulders, (Ah, though) I heaved him, he was o’erstrong for me, (and though) his grapple Loosed I, I was unable to shake him (from off me): (and now, all the meanwhile), People from Erech were standing about him, the artisans pressing On him behind, (while) throng’d him the heroes; my (very) companions Kissing his feet; I, I to my breast like a woman did hold him, (Then) I presented him low at thy feet, that as mine own equal. Thou might’st account him.’ She who knoweth all wisdom (thus) to her Seigneur she answer’d, She who knoweth all wisdom, to Gilgamish (thus) did she answer: ‘(Lo), by the stars of the heavens are represented thy comrades, That which was like unto Anu’s own self, which fell on thy shoulders, Which thou didst heave, but he was o’erstrong for thee, (aye), though his grapple Thou didst unloose, but to shake him from off thee thou wert unable, So didst present him low at my feet, that as thine own equal I might account him—and thou to thy breast like a woman didst hold him: This is a stoutheart, a friend, one ready to stand by a comrade, One whose strength is the greatest, (the length and breadth) of the country, Like to a double of Anu’s own self his strength is enormous. (Now), since thou to thy breast didst hold him the way of a woman, This is a sign that thou art the one he will never abandon: This of thy dream is the meaning.’ Again he spake to his mother, ‘Mother, a second dream did I see: Into Erech, the high-wall’d, Hurtled an axe, and they gather’d about it: the meanwhile, from Erech People were standing about it, the people (all) thronging before it, Artisans pressing behind it, while I at thy feet did present it, I, like a woman I held it to me that thou might’st account it, As mine own equal.’ She the all-wise, who knoweth all wisdom, (thus) answer’d her offspring, She the all-wise who knoweth all wisdom, to Gilgamish answer’d: ‘(Lo, that) Axe thou didst see (is) a Man; like a woman didst hold him, Unto thy breast, that as thine own equal I might account him, This is a stoutheart, a friend, one ready to stand by a comrade, One whose strength is the greatest (the length and breadth) of the country, Like to a double of Anu’s own self, his strength is enormous.’ Gilgamish open’d his mouth, and addressing his mother, (thus spake he): ‘Though great danger (?) befall, a friend (?) shall I have . . .’”
