Stood they and stared at the Forest, they gazed at the height of the Cedars, Scanning the avenue into the Forest: (and there) where Humbaba Stalk’d, was a path, (and) straight were his tracks, and good was the passage. (Eke) they beheld the Mount of the Cedar, the home of th’ Immortals, Shrine of Irnini, the Cedar uplifting its pride ’gainst the mountain, Fair was its shade, (all) full of delight, with bushes (there) spreading, Spread, too, the . . . the Cedar the incense . . .
(After a few mutilated lines the Column breaks: the upper part of Column II contains about twenty lines badly mutilated; then the lower part is more complete, beginning with visions granted to the hero).
“Then came another dream to me, comrade, and this second vision Pleasant, indeed, which I saw, (for) we (?) twain were standing together High on (?) a peak of the mountains, and then did the mountain peak topple, Leaving us twain (?) to be like . . . (?) which are born in the desert.”
Enkidu spake to his comrade the dream (?) to interpret, (thus saying): “Comrade, (in sooth, this) vision of thine unto us good fortune (forbodeth), (Aye), ’tis a dream of great gain thou didst see, (for, bethink you), O comrade, (Surely) the mountain which thou hast beholden must needs be Humbaba (?). (Thus doth it mean) we shall capture Humbaba, (and) throw down his carcase, Leaving his corpse in abasement—to-morrow’s (outcome) will I shew thee.”
(Now) at the fortieth league did they break their fast with a morsel, (Now) at the sixtieth rested, and hollow’d a pit in the sunshine . . . Gilgamish mounted above it . . . (and) pour’d out his meal for the mountain: “Mountain, a dream do thou grant . . . breathe on him . . .”
Granted the mountain a dream . . . it breathed on him . . . Then a chill wind-blast up-sprang (and) a gust passing over . . . Made him to cower, and . . . thereat he sway’d like the corn of the mountains . . .
Gilgamish, squatting bent-kneed, supported his haunches, (and straightway) Sleep (such as) floweth on man descended upon him: at midnight Ending his slumber (all sudden), he hied him to speak to his comrade: “Didst thou not call me, O friend? (O), why am I waken’d (from slumber)? Didst thou not touch me—(for), why am I fearful (?), (or) hath not some spirit Pass’d (me)? (Or,) why is my flesh (all) a-quiver? A third dream, O comrade, I have beheld: but all awesome (this) dream which I have beholden: (Loud) did the firmament roar, (and) earth (with the echo) resounded, Sombre the day, with darkness uprising, (and) levin bolts flashing, Kindled were flames, and there, too, was Pestilence (?) fill’d to o’erflowing, Gorgéd was Death! (Then) faded the glare, (then) faded the fires, Falling, the brands turn’d to ashes—Come, let us go down to the desert, That we may counsel together.”
Enkidu (now) to interpret his dream unto Gilgamish speaketh . . .
(Remainder of Column III broken away).
(Column IV is all lost, and hardly anything of Column V remains. Column VI once contained the story of the great fight, but except for a few broken lines at the end it is all lost.)
. . . they cut off the head of Humbaba.
