(About a column and a half of the beginning of the Old Babylonian version on the Yale tablet are so broken that almost all the text is lost.)
“He lifted up his foot to the door . . . They raged furiously . . . Enkidu hath not his equal . . . unkempt is the hair . . . (Aye) he was born in the desert, and no one his presence can equal.”
Enkidu (there) as he stood gave ear to his utterance (?), grieving Sitting in sorrow: his eyes fill’d with tears, and his arms lost their power, Slack’d was his bodily vigour. Each clasp’d the hand of the other. Holding like brothers their grip . . . (and) to Gilgamish Enkidu answer’d: “Friend, ’tis my darling hath circled (her arms) round my neck (to farewell me), (Wherefore) my arms lose their power, my bodily vigour is slacken’d.”
(Gap of about two lines)
Gilgamish open’d his mouth, and to Enkidu spake he (in this wise): “I, O my friend, am determined to go to the Forest of Cedars, (Aye) and Humbaba the Fierce will o’ercome and destroy what is evil. (Then) will I cut down the Cedar . . .”
Enkidu open’d his mouth, and to Gilgamish spake he (in this wise), “Know, then, my friend, what time I was roaming with kine in the mountains I for a distance of two hours’ march from the skirts of the Forest Into its depths would go down. Humbaba—his roar was a whirlwind, Flame (in) his jaws, and his very breath Death! O, why hast desired This to accomplish? To meet (?) with Humbaba were conflict unequall’d.”
Gilgamish open’d his mouth and to Enkidu spake he (in this wise): “’Tis that I need the rich yield of its mountains I go to the Forest” . . .
(Seven mutilated lines continuing the speech of Gilgamish, and mentioning “the dwelling of the gods?” (of the beginning of the Fifth Tablet), and “the axe,” for cutting down the Cedars).
Enkidu open’d his mouth and to Gilgamish spake he (in this wise): “(But) when we go to the Forest of Cedars . . . its guard is a Fighter, Strong, never sleeping, O Gilgamish . . .”
(Three mutilated lines, apparently explaining the powers which Shamash (?), the Sun-god, and Adad, the Storm-god, have bestow’d on Humbaba).
“So that he safeguard the Forest of Cedars a terror to mortals Him hath Enlil appointed—Humbaba, his roar is a whirlwind, Flame (in) his jaws, and his very breath Death! (Aye), if he in the Forest Hear (but) a tread (?) on the road—‘Who is this come down to his Forest?’ So that he safeguard the Forest of Cedars, a terror to mortals, Him hath Enlil appointed, and fell hap will seize him who cometh Down to his Forest.”
Gilgamish open’d his mouth and to Enkidu spake he (in this wise): “Who, O my friend, is unconquer’d by death? A divinity, certes, Liveth for aye in the daylight, but mortals—their days are (all) number’d, All that they do is (but) wind—But to thee, now death thou art dreading, Proffereth nothing of substance thy courage—I, I’ll be thy va’ward! ’Tis thine own mouth shall tell thou didst fear the onslaught (of battle), (I, forsooth), if I should fall, my name will have stablish’d (for ever). Gilgamish ’twas, who fought with Humbaba, the Fierce! (In the future), After my children are born to my house, and climb up thee, (saying): ‘Tell to us all that thou knowest’ . . .”
(Four lines mutilated).
“(Yea), when thou speakest in this wise, thou grievest my heart (for) the Cedar I am determined to fell, that I may gain fame everlasting. (Now), O my friend, my charge to the craftsmen I fain would deliver, So that they cast in our presence our weapons.”
The charge they deliver’d Unto the craftsmen: the mould (?) did the workmen prepare, and the axes Monstrous they cast: (yea), the celts did they cast, each (weighing) three talents; Glaives, (too,) monstrous they cast, with hilts each (weighing) two talents, Blades, thirty manas to each, corresponding to fit them: the inlay (?), Gold thirty manas (each) sword: (so) were Gilgamish, Enkidu laden Each with ten talents.
(And now) in the Seven Bolt Portal of Erech Hearing the bruit (?) did the artisans gather, assembled the people (?), (There) in the streets of broad-marketed Erech, in Gilgamish’ honour (?), So did the Elders of Erech broad-marketed take seat before him. Gilgamish spake thus: “O Elders of Erech broad-marketed, hear me! I go against Humbaba, the Fierce, who shall say, when he heareth, ‘(Ah), let me look on (this) Gilgamish, he of whom (people) are speaking, He with whose fame the countries are fill’d’—’Tis I will o’erwhelm him, (There) in the Forest of Cedars—I’ll make the land hear (it) (How) like a giant the Scion of Erech is—(yea, for) the Cedars I am determined to fell, that I may gain fame everlasting.”
Gilgamish (thus) did the Elders of Erech broad-marketed answer: “Gilgamish, ’tis thou art young, that thy valour (o’ermuch) doth uplift thee, Nor dost thou know to the full what thou dost seek to accomplish. Unto our ears hath it come of Humbaba, his likeness is twofold. Who (of free will) then would seek to oppose in encounter his weapons? Who for a distance of two hours’ march from the skirts of the Forest Unto its depths would go down? Humbaba, his roar is a whirlwind, Flame (in) his jaws, and his very breath Death! (O), why hast desired This to accomplish? To meet (?) with Humbaba were conflict unequall’d.”
Gilgamish unto the rede of his counsellors hearken’d and ponder’d, Cried to his friend: “Now, indeed, O my friend, will I thus voice opinion. I (forsooth) dread him, and (yet) to (the depths of the) Forest I’ll take me . . .”
(About seven lines mutilated or missing in which the Elders bless Gilgamish in farewell).
“. . . may thy god (so) protect thee, Bringing thee back (safe and) sound to the walls of broad-marketed Erech.”
Gilgamish knelt before Shamash a word in his presence to utter: “Here I present myself, Shamash, to lift up my hands (in entreaty), O that hereafter my life may be spared, to the ramparts of Erech Bring me again: spread thine aegis upon me.” And Shamash made answer, Speaking his oracle . . .
(About six lines mutilated or missing).
Tears adown Gilgamish’ cheeks were (now) streaming: “A road I have never Traversed I go, on a passage (?) I know not, (but if) I be spared (So) in content will I come and will pay thee (?) due meed (?) of thy homage.”
(Two mutilated lines with the words “on seats” and “his equipment.”)
Monstrous the axes they brought (?), they deliver’d the bow and the quiver Into (his) hand; (so) taking a celt, he slung on (?) his quiver, Grasping another celt (?) he fasten’d his glaive to his baldrick. But, or ever the twain had set forth on their journey, they offer’d Gifts to the Sun-god, that home he might bring them to Erech (in safety).
(Now) do the Elders farewell him with blessings, to Gilgamish giving Counsel concerning the road: “O Gilgamish, to thine own power Trust not (alone); (but at least) let thy road be traversed before thee, Guard thou thy person; let Enkidu go before thee (as va’ward). (Aye, for) ’twas he hath discover’d the way, the road he hath travell’d. (Sooth), of the Forest the passes are all under sway (?) of Humbaba, (Yea), he who goeth as va’ward is (able) to safeguard a comrade, O that the Sun-god may grant thee success to attain thine ambition, O that he grant that thine eyes see (consummate) the words of thy utt’rance O that he level the path that is block’d, cleave a road for thy treading, Cleave, too, the berg for thy foot! May the god Lugal-banda Bring in thy night-time a message to thee, with which shalt be gladden’d, So that it help thine ambition, (for), like a boy thine ambition On the o’erthrow of Humbaba thou fixest, as thou hast settled. Wash, (then), thy feet: when thou haltest, shalt hollow a pool, so that ever Pure be the water within thy skin-bottle, (aye), cool be the water Unto the Sun-god thou pourest, (and thus) shalt remind Lugal-banda.”
Enkidu open’d his mouth, and spake unto Gilgamish, (saying): “Gilgamish, art (?) thou (in truth) full equal to making (this) foray? Let not thy heart be afraid; trust me.” On (his) shoulder his mantle Drew he, (and now) on the road to Humbaba they set forth (together).
(Five lines mutilated; the two heroes meet a man who sets them on their way).
“. . . they went with me . . . tell you . . . in joy of heart.” So when he heard this his word, the man on his way did direct him: “Gilgamish, go, . . . let thy brother (?) precede thee . . . (and) in thine ambition. O that the Sun-god (?) may shew thee success!”
“Gilgamish, put not thy faith in the strength of thine own person (solely), Quench’d be thy wishes to trusting (?) (o’ermuch) in thy (shrewdness in) smiting. (Sooth), he who goeth as va’ward is able to safeguard a comrade, He who doth know how to guide hath guarded his friend; (so) before thee, Do thou let Enkidu go, (for ’tis) he to the Forest of Cedars Knoweth the road: ’tis he lusteth for battle, and threateneth combat. Enkidu—he would watch over a friend, would safeguard a comrade, (Aye, such an one) would deliver his person from out of the pitfalls. We, O King, in our conclave have paid deep heed to thy welfare, Thou, O King, in return with an (equal) heed shalt requite us.”
Gilgamish open’d his mouth, and spake unto Enkidu, saying: “Unto the Palace of Splendour, O friend, come, let us betake us, Unto the presence of Nin-sun, the glorious Queen, (aye) to Nin-sun, Wisest of (all) clever women, all-knowing; a well-devised pathway She will prescribe for our feet.”
Clasp’d they their hands, each to each, and went to the Palace of Splendour, Gilgamish, Enkidu. Unto the glorious Queen, (aye) to Nin-sun Gilgamish came, and he enter’d in unto the presence of Nin-sun: “Nin-sun, O fain would I tell thee how I a far journey am going, (Unto) the home of Humbaba to counter a warfare I know not, Follow a road which I know not, (aye) from the time of my starting, Till my return, until I arrive at the Forest of Cedars, Till I o’erthrow Humbaba, the Fierce, and destroy from the country All that the Sun-god abhorreth of evil” . . .
(The rest of the speech of Gilgamish is lost until the end of the Column.)
“. . . garb thyself; . . . in thy presence.”
(So) to her offspring, to Gilgamish Nin-sun gave ear . . . -ly, Enter’d her chamber . . . and deck’d herself with the flowers of Tulal (?), Put on the festal garb of her body . . . Put on the festal garb of her bosom . . ., her head with a circlet Crown’d, and . . . the ground ipirani.
Climb’d she the stairway, ascended the roof, and the parapet (?) mounted, Offer’d her incense to Shamash, (her) sacrifice offer’d to Shamash, (Then) towards Shamash her hands she uplifted (in orison saying): “Why didst thou give (this) restlessness of spirit With which didst dower Gilgamish, my son? That now thou touchest him, and (straight) he starteth A journey far to where Humbaba (dwelleth), To counter warfare which he knoweth not, Follow a pathway which he knoweth not, (Aye), from the very day on which he starteth, Till he return, till to the Cedar Forest He reach; till he o’erthrow the fierce Humbaba, And from the land destroy all evil things Which thou abhor’st; the day which thou hast set As term, of (that) strong man (who) feareth thee, May Aa, (thy) bride, be thy remembrancer. He the night-watches . . .”
(Columns III, IV, and V are much mutilated.)
“(Aye, such an one) would deliver his person from out of the pitfalls. We, O King, in our conclave have paid deep heed to thy welfare, (Now), O King, in thy turn with an (equal) heed shalt requite us.”
Enkidu open’d his mouth and spake unto Gilgamish, saying: “Turn, O my friend . . . a road not . . .”
