@@ 10.0
Cam had missed the easel by an inch. She wouldn’t stop for Mr. Bankes and Lily Briscoe, even though Mr. Bankes, who would have liked a daughter of his own, reached out his hand to her. She wouldn’t stop for her father, whom she also missed by an inch; nor for her mother, who called out “Cam! I want you a moment!” as she tore by. She was off like a bird, a bullet, an arrow—but driven by what longing, fired by whom, aimed at what, who could tell? What was it, what? Mrs. Ramsay wondered, watching her. Perhaps a vision—of a shell, a wheelbarrow, a fairyland on the other side of the hedge; or perhaps just the glory of speed; nobody knew. But when Mrs. Ramsay called “Cam!” again, the missile fell to earth in mid-flight, and Cam came dragging her feet back to her mother, plucking a leaf as she went.

@@ 10.1
What was the child dreaming about? Mrs. Ramsay wondered. She stood there so absorbed in some private thought that the message had to be given twice: go and ask Mildred whether Andrew, Miss Doyle, and Mr. Rayley are back yet. The words seemed to drop into a well whose water, clear as it was, bent things so strangely that you could watch them twisting as they sank, making heaven knows what pattern on the floor of the child’s mind. What message would Cam actually deliver to the cook? Mrs. Ramsay wondered. And in fact it was only by waiting patiently, and hearing all about an old woman in the kitchen with very red cheeks who was drinking soup out of a bowl, that Mrs. Ramsay finally set off that parrot-like instinct in her. It had caught Mildred’s words quite exactly, and could now repeat them, if you were patient, in a flat singsong. Shifting from one foot to the other, Cam recited: “No, they haven’t, and I’ve told Ellen to clear away tea.”

@@ 10.2
So Minta Doyle and Paul Rayley weren’t back yet. That could mean only one thing, Mrs. Ramsay thought. Minta must accept him, or she must refuse him. Going off for a walk after lunch like this, even with Andrew along—what else could it mean? Only that she had made up her mind, and rightly, thought Mrs. Ramsay (who was very, very fond of Minta), to accept that good fellow. He might not be brilliant. But then, Mrs. Ramsay thought—aware that James was pulling at her to make her keep reading the Fisherman and his Wife aloud—deep down she infinitely preferred dunces to clever men who wrote dissertations; men like Charles Tansley. At any rate, by now it must have happened, one way or the other.

@@ 10.3
But what she read was: “The next morning the wife woke up first. It was just dawn, and from her bed she could see the lovely countryside spread out before her. Her husband was still stretching. …”

@@ 10.4
But how could Minta turn him down now? Not if she had agreed to spend entire afternoons tramping around the countryside alone with him—for Andrew would go off after his crabs—though Nancy might have been with them. Mrs. Ramsay tried to call up the picture of them standing at the front door after lunch. There they had stood, looking up at the sky and wondering what the weather would do. And she had said, partly to cover up their shyness, partly to urge them to get going (for she was on Paul’s side),

@@ 10.5
“Not a cloud for miles in any direction,” and at that she had sensed little Charles Tansley, who had trailed out after them, snickering. But she had said it deliberately. As for whether Nancy had been there, she couldn’t be sure, going from face to face in her mind’s eye.

@@ 10.6
She read on: “ ‘Oh, wife,’ said the man, ‘why should we be King? I have no wish to be King.’ ‘Well,’ the wife answered, ‘if you won’t be King, then I will. Go to the Flounder, because I will be King.’ ”

@@ 10.7
“Either come in or go out, Cam,” she said. She knew it was only the word “Flounder” that had drawn Cam, and that any minute she would start fidgeting and fighting with James the way she always did. Off Cam shot. Relieved, Mrs. Ramsay kept reading, for she and James liked the same things and were at ease with each other.

@@ 10.8
“And when he reached the sea it was a very dark gray, and the water was heaving up from underneath and had a rotten smell. Then he went and stood beside it and said,

@@ 10.9
‘Flounder, flounder, in the sea.
Come, I pray thee, here to me;
For my wife, good Ilsabil,
Wills not as I’d have her will.’

@@ 10.10
‘Well, what does she want, then?’ said the Flounder.” And where had they got to by now? Mrs. Ramsay wondered. She could read and think at once with no trouble at all, for the story of the Fisherman and his Wife was like a bass line quietly accompanying a tune, now and then running up without warning into the melody. And when was she going to be told? If nothing had happened, she would have to have a serious talk with Minta. Minta simply couldn’t go tramping all over the countryside, even with Nancy along (once more she tried, and failed, to picture their backs going down the path, and to count them). She was answerable to Minta’s parents—the Owl and the Poker. Her nicknames for them flashed into her mind as she read. The Owl and the Poker—yes, they would be displeased if they heard (and they were sure to hear) that Minta, while staying with the Ramsays, had been seen et cetera, et cetera, et cetera. “He wore a wig in the House of Commons and she ably assisted him at the head of the stairs,” she said over to herself, hauling them up out of her memory with a phrase she had invented, on the way home from some party, to amuse her husband. Dear me, Mrs. Ramsay said to herself, how had those two ever produced such an unlikely daughter? This tomboy Minta, with a hole in her stocking? How did she survive in that ponderous atmosphere, where the maid was forever sweeping into a dustpan the sand the parrot had scattered, and conversation had shrunk almost entirely to that bird’s exploits—interesting, perhaps, but limited, when all was said and done? Naturally she had invited Minta to lunch, then tea, then dinner, and in the end to come and stay with them up at Finlay. That had caused some friction with the Owl, her mother, and led to more calls, and more conversation, and more sand, until, by the end of it, she had told enough lies about parrots to last a lifetime (as she had put it to her husband that night, on the way home from the party). Still, Minta came. … Yes, she had come, Mrs. Ramsay thought, feeling some thorn caught in the tangle of this thought; and when she worked it loose, she found that it was this. A woman had once accused her of “robbing her of her daughter’s affections”; and something Mrs. Doyle had said brought that accusation back to her. That she wanted to dominate, wanted to interfere, made people do what she wanted—that was the charge against her, and she thought it deeply unfair. Could she help how she looked? Nobody could say she went to any trouble to impress. She was often ashamed of how shabby she was. Nor was she domineering, nor tyrannical. It was truer where hospitals and drains and the dairy were concerned. About things like that she did feel passionately, and, given the chance, she would have liked to grab people by the scruff of the neck and make them see. Not one hospital on the whole island. It was a disgrace. Milk left on your doorstep in London that was actually brown with dirt. There ought to be a law against it. A model dairy and a hospital here—those were the two things she would have liked to do, with her own hands. But how? With all these children? Later, when they were older, maybe she would have time; once they were all at school.

@@ 10.11
Oh, but she never wanted James to get one day older, nor Cam either. These two she would have liked to keep just as they were, forever—demons of wickedness, angels of delight—and never watch them turn into long-legged monsters. Nothing could make up for that loss. Just now, when she had read James the line “and there were numbers of soldiers with kettledrums and trumpets,” and his eyes had darkened, she had thought: why should they grow up and lose all that? Of all her children he was the most gifted, the most sensitive. But every one of them, she thought, was full of promise. Prue was an absolute angel with the others, and these days, especially in the evenings, her beauty could take your breath away. Andrew—even her husband granted that he had an extraordinary gift for mathematics. And Nancy and Roger had both turned into wild creatures, running all over the countryside from morning till night. As for Rose, her mouth was too big, but she was wonderful with her hands. When they put on charades, it was Rose who made the costumes; she made everything; what she liked best was arranging things—tables, flowers, anything at all. Mrs. Ramsay didn’t like Jasper shooting birds; but that was only a phase; they all went through phases. Why, she asked, resting her chin on the top of James’s head, must they grow up so quickly? Why must they go off to school? She would have liked always to have a baby. She was never happier than with one in her arms. Then people could call her tyrannical, domineering, overbearing, whatever they pleased; she didn’t care. And as she touched his hair with her lips she thought, he will never be this happy again—but she stopped herself, remembering how angry her husband got when she said that. Still, it was true. They were happier now than they would ever be again. A tenpenny tea set could keep Cam happy for days. The moment they woke, she heard them stamping and crowing on the floor over her head. They came clattering along the passage. Then the door burst open and in they came, fresh as roses, wide-eyed, wide awake, as if coming into the dining room after breakfast—which they did every single day of their lives—were a real occasion for them. And so it went, one thing after another, all day long, until she went up to say good night and found them caught in their cots like birds netted among the cherries and raspberries, still inventing stories about some scrap of rubbish—something they had overheard, something they had found in the garden. They each had their little treasures. … And so she went downstairs and said to her husband, Why must they grow up and lose it all? They’ll never be so happy again. And he was angry. Why take such a gloomy view of life? he said. It isn’t sensible. For it was strange—and she believed it to be true—that for all his gloom and despair he was happier than she was, more hopeful on the whole. Perhaps it was that he was less exposed to human troubles. He always had his work to fall back on. Not that she was “pessimistic” herself, as he accused her of being. It was only that she thought life—and a small strip of time appeared before her eyes, her fifty years. There it lay in front of her—life. Life, she thought, but she didn’t finish the thought. She took a look at life, because she had a distinct sense of it there, something real, something private, which she shared with neither her children nor her husband. A kind of transaction went on between the two of them, with her on one side and life on the other. She was always trying to get the upper hand of it, as it was of her; and sometimes they held talks (when she sat by herself); there had been, she remembered, great scenes of reconciliation. But mostly, oddly enough, she had to admit that she felt this thing she called life to be terrible, hostile, ready to spring on you the moment you gave it the chance. There were the eternal problems: suffering; death; the poor. Even here there was always some woman dying of cancer. And yet she had told all these children, You shall go through with it. To eight people she had said it, relentlessly (and the greenhouse bill would come to fifty pounds). And for that reason, knowing what lay in store for them—love and ambition and being miserable and alone in dreary places—she often felt: Why must they grow up and lose it all? And then, brandishing her sword at life, she told herself, Nonsense. They’ll be perfectly happy. And here she was, she thought, sensing again how sinister life was, making Minta marry Paul Rayley. Because whatever she might feel about her own transaction—and she had been through things that needn’t happen to everyone (she didn’t name them, even to herself)—she was driven on, too fast, she knew, almost as if it were an escape for her as well, to declare that people must marry; people must have children.

@@ 10.12
Was she wrong about this? she asked herself, going over how she had behaved in the last week or two, and wondering whether she really had pushed Minta, who was only twenty-four, to make up her mind. It made her uneasy. Hadn’t she laughed about it? Wasn’t she forgetting, once again, how powerfully she influenced people? Marriage called for—oh, all kinds of qualities (the greenhouse bill would come to fifty pounds); and one—she didn’t need to name it—_that_ was essential; the thing she and her husband had. Did they have it?

@@ 10.13
“Then he pulled on his trousers and ran off like a madman,” she read. “But outside a great storm was raging, and the wind blew so hard he could barely keep his feet. Houses and trees were toppling, the mountains shook, rocks went rolling into the sea, the sky was pitch-black, there was thunder and lightning, and the sea rolled in with black waves as tall as church towers and mountains, every one of them crested with white foam.”

@@ 10.14
She turned the page. Only a few lines were left, so she would finish the story, even though bedtime had passed. It was getting late. She could tell from the light in the garden; and the flowers turning white and something gray in the leaves combined to wake a feeling of anxiety in her. At first she couldn’t think what it was about. Then it came to her: Paul and Minta and Andrew weren’t back. Once more she summoned up the little group on the terrace outside the hall door, standing there looking up at the sky. Andrew had taken his net and basket. That meant he meant to catch crabs and so on. That meant he would clamber out onto some rock and be cut off by the tide. Or, coming home in single file along one of those narrow paths above the cliff, one of them might slip. He would roll, and then crash. It was getting quite dark.

@@ 10.15
But she didn’t let her voice alter in the slightest as she read the story to its end. Then, closing the book, she looked into James’s eyes and added the last words as if she had invented them herself: “And there they are, living still at this very time.”

@@ 10.16
“And that’s the end,” she said. As the interest of the story faded from his eyes, she saw something else take its place: something wondering, pale, like a reflected light, that made him gaze and marvel at once. She turned and looked out across the bay, and there, sure enough, coming steadily over the waves—first two quick strokes, then one long steady stroke—was the light of the Lighthouse. It had been lit.

@@ 10.17
Any moment now he would ask her, “Are we going to the Lighthouse?” And she would have to tell him, “No, not tomorrow; your father says not.” Fortunately Mildred came in just then to fetch them, and the bustle took their minds off it. But as Mildred carried him out, he kept looking back over his shoulder, and she was sure he was thinking, we are not going to the Lighthouse tomorrow. And she thought, he will remember that for the rest of his life.

