@@ 11.0
No, she thought, gathering up a few of the pictures he had cut out—a refrigerator, a lawn mower, a gentleman in evening dress—children never forget. That was why it mattered so much what you said and what you did, and why it came as a relief when they were in bed. Now she didn’t need to think about anyone. She could be herself, by herself. And lately that was what she often felt the need of—to think; well, not even to think. To be silent; to be alone. All the being and doing, expansive, glittering, talkative, evaporated; and with a sense of solemnity you shrank to being yourself, a wedge-shaped core of darkness, something invisible to others. Though she kept on knitting and sat upright, this was how she felt herself to be; and this self, having shed its attachments, was free for the strangest adventures. When life sank down for a moment, the range of experience seemed to have no limit. And everyone, she supposed, always had this sense of unlimited resources; one after another, she, Lily, Augustus Carmichael, must feel that our apparitions, the things you recognize us by, are simply childish. Underneath, it is all dark, it is all spreading, it is unfathomably deep; but every now and then we rise to the surface, and that is what you see us by. Her horizon seemed to her boundless. There were all the places she had never seen; the plains of India; she felt herself pushing aside the heavy leather curtain at the door of a church in Rome. This core of darkness could go anywhere, because nobody saw it. They couldn’t stop it, she thought, exulting. Here was freedom, here was peace, here was—most welcome of all—a gathering together, a resting on a platform of stability. You never found rest as yourself, in her experience (at this point her needles did something deft), but as a wedge of darkness. Once you lost your personality, you lost the fret, the hurry, the stir. And whenever things came together in this peace, this rest, this eternity, some cry of triumph over life rose to her lips. Pausing there, she looked out to meet that stroke of the Lighthouse, the long steady stroke, the last of the three, which was her stroke. For watching them in this mood, always at this hour, you couldn’t help attaching yourself to one thing above all among the things you saw; and this thing, the long steady stroke, was her stroke. Often she caught herself sitting and looking, sitting and looking, her work in her hands, until she became the thing she was looking at—that light, say. And it would lift up some little phrase or other that had been lying in her mind like that—“Children don’t forget, children don’t forget”—and she would repeat it and start adding to it. It will end, It will end, she said. It will come, it will come, when all at once she added, We are in the hands of the Lord.

@@ 11.1
But at once she was annoyed with herself for saying that. Who had said it? Not she; she had been tricked into saying something she didn’t mean. Glancing up over her knitting, she met the third stroke, and it was to her like her own eyes meeting her own eyes, searching her mind and her heart as only she could search them, and purifying that lie, any lie, out of existence. Praising the light, she praised herself, without vanity, because she was stern, she was searching, she was beautiful, like that light. How odd it was, she thought, that when you were alone you leaned toward things, lifeless things—trees, streams, flowers; you felt they expressed you; felt they became you; felt they knew you, in a sense were you; and so you felt an irrational tenderness for them (she looked at that long steady light) as if for yourself. There rose—and she looked and looked, her needles held in midair—there curled up off the floor of the mind, rose from the lake of one’s being, a mist, a bride to meet her lover.

@@ 11.2
What made her say that: “We are in the hands of the Lord”? she wondered. That insincerity, slipping in among the truths, stirred and annoyed her. She took up her knitting once more. How could any Lord have made this world? she asked. Her mind had always grasped the fact that there is no reason, no order, no justice—only suffering, death, the poor. The world would stoop to any betrayal, however low; she knew that. Happiness never lasted; she knew that. Firm and composed, she knitted, lips slightly pursed, and without realizing it she had set the lines of her face into such a habit of sternness that her husband, walking past, couldn’t help noticing it: the sternness at the heart of her beauty. He was chuckling as he passed, at the thought of Hume, the philosopher, grown enormously fat and stuck in a bog. But her look saddened him; her remoteness hurt him; going by, he felt he couldn’t protect her, and by the time he got to the hedge, he was sad. There was nothing he could do for her. He had to stand by and watch her. The damnable truth, in fact, was that he made things worse for her. He was irritable—he was touchy. He had lost his temper over the Lighthouse. He stared into the hedge, into its tangle, its darkness.

@@ 11.3
Always, Mrs. Ramsay felt, you pulled yourself out of solitude unwillingly, grabbing hold of some small odd or end, some sound, some sight. She listened, but all was very quiet; the cricket was finished; the children were in their baths; there was only the sound of the sea. She stopped knitting; for a moment the long reddish-brown stocking hung from her hands. Again she saw the light. Her questioning had some irony in it, since once you woke up at all, your relations changed. She looked at the steady light, the pitiless, the remorseless, which was so much her, yet so little her; which had her at its beck and call (waking in the night, she would see it bent across their bed, stroking the floor). And yet, she thought—watching it with fascination, hypnotized, as though with its silver fingers it were stroking some sealed vessel in her brain that would flood her with delight if it burst—she had known happiness, exquisite happiness, intense happiness. And as the daylight faded, it silvered the rough waves a little more brightly, and the blue drained out of the sea, and the sea rolled in waves of pure lemon that curved and swelled and broke on the beach, and the ecstasy burst in her eyes, and waves of pure delight raced across the floor of her mind, and she felt, It is enough! It is enough!

@@ 11.4
He turned and saw her. Ah! She was lovely—lovelier now than ever, he thought. Yet he couldn’t speak to her. He couldn’t interrupt her. Now that James had gone and she was at last alone, he badly wanted to talk to her. But no, he decided; he wouldn’t interrupt. In her beauty, in her sadness, she stood apart from him now. He would leave her alone; and he went by without a word, though it hurt him that she looked so far away, that he couldn’t reach her, that there was nothing he could do for her. And once more he would have gone by without speaking, if she hadn’t, at that very moment, freely given him what she knew he would never ask for: she called to him, lifted the green shawl off the picture frame, and went to him. For he wanted, she knew, to protect her.

@@ 12.0
She drew the green shawl around her shoulders and took his arm. He was so beautiful, she said, launching straight into the subject of Kennedy the gardener; so terribly good-looking that she couldn’t bring herself to fire him. A ladder leaned against the greenhouse, and little lumps of putty were stuck about, since they were starting on repairs to the greenhouse roof. Yes, but strolling along with her husband, she felt that this particular worry had been dealt with. “It’ll cost fifty pounds” was on the tip of her tongue as they walked; instead, because her nerve failed her where money was concerned, she brought up Jasper shooting birds. At once he soothed her: it was natural in a boy, he said, and he trusted the boy would find better amusements before long. Her husband was so sensible, so fair. So she said, “Yes; all children go through phases,” and turned her attention to the dahlias in the big bed, and wondered about next year’s flowers—and had he heard what the children called Charles Tansley? she asked. The atheist, they called him; the little atheist. “He’s hardly a polished specimen,” Mr. Ramsay said. “Far from it,” said Mrs. Ramsay.

@@ 12.1
She supposed it was fine to leave him to amuse himself, said Mrs. Ramsay, wondering whether there was any point in sending bulbs down; would anyone plant them? “Oh, he’s got his dissertation to write,” Mr. Ramsay said. She knew all about _that_, said Mrs. Ramsay. It was all he ever talked about. It concerned the influence of somebody on something. “Well, it’s the only thing he has to count on,” Mr. Ramsay said. “God forbid he should fall in love with Prue,” said Mrs. Ramsay. If she married him, he’d cut her out of his will, said Mr. Ramsay. His eyes weren’t on the flowers his wife was looking over but on a spot a foot or so above them. The young man meant no harm, he went on, and he was about to add that at any rate he was the only young man in England who admired his—when he swallowed the words. He wouldn’t trouble her about his books again. The flowers looked very creditable, Mr. Ramsay said, dropping his eyes and noticing something red, something brown. Yes, but these were ones she had planted herself, said Mrs. Ramsay. The question was what happened when she sent bulbs down; did Kennedy plant them? It was his hopeless laziness, she added, walking on. If she stood over him all day with a spade in her hand, now and then he would do a stroke of work. So they wandered on toward the red-hot pokers. “You’re teaching your daughters to exaggerate,” Mr. Ramsay said reprovingly. Her Aunt Camilla was much worse than she was, Mrs. Ramsay pointed out. “Nobody ever held up your Aunt Camilla as a model of virtue, so far as I know,” said Mr. Ramsay. “She was the most beautiful woman I ever saw,” said Mrs. Ramsay. “Somebody else was that,” Mr. Ramsay said. Prue would be far more beautiful than she was, said Mrs. Ramsay. He couldn’t see any sign of it, Mr. Ramsay said. “Well then, look tonight,” said Mrs. Ramsay. They stopped. He wished Andrew could be got to work harder. If he didn’t, he’d throw away every chance of a scholarship. “Oh, scholarships!” she said. Mr. Ramsay thought it foolish of her to say that about something as serious as a scholarship. He’d be very proud of Andrew if he won one, he said. She would be every bit as proud of him if he didn’t, she replied. They always disagreed on this, but it didn’t matter. She liked him to believe in scholarships, and he liked her to be proud of Andrew no matter what he did. All at once she remembered those little paths along the edge of the cliffs.

@@ 12.2
Wasn’t it getting late? she asked. They still weren’t home. Carelessly he flicked open his watch. But it was only just after seven. For a moment he held the watch open, making up his mind to tell her what he had felt on the terrace. First of all, it was unreasonable to be so nervous. Andrew could take care of himself. Then he wanted to tell her that just now, as he was walking on the terrace—and here he grew uneasy, as though he were intruding on that solitude, that aloofness, that remoteness of hers. … But she urged him on. What was it he’d wanted to say? she asked, supposing it was about the trip to the Lighthouse, and that he was sorry for having said “Damn you.” But no. He didn’t like to see her looking so sad, he said. She was only daydreaming, she protested, coloring slightly. Both of them felt awkward, unsure whether to go forward or turn back. She’d been reading fairy tales to James, she said. No, that they couldn’t share; that they couldn’t say.

@@ 12.3
They had come to the gap between the two clumps of red-hot pokers, and there was the Lighthouse again, but she wouldn’t allow herself to look at it. Had she known he was watching her, she thought, she would never have let herself sit there thinking. She disliked anything that reminded her she had been seen sitting and thinking. So she glanced back over her shoulder at the town. Its lights rippled and ran like drops of silver water held steady in a wind. And all the poverty, all the suffering, had turned into that, thought Mrs. Ramsay. The lights of the town, the harbor, and the boats looked like a phantom net floating there to mark the place where something had sunk. Well, if he couldn’t share her thoughts, Mr. Ramsay told himself, then he’d go off on his own. He wanted to keep thinking, to keep telling himself the story of Hume stuck in a bog; he wanted to laugh. But first, it was nonsense to worry about Andrew. At Andrew’s age he used to tramp about the countryside all day with nothing but a biscuit in his pocket, and nobody fretted about him or imagined he had fallen off a cliff. Aloud he said he thought he might go off for a day’s walk, if the weather held. He’d had just about enough of Bankes and Carmichael. He’d like a little solitude. Yes, she said. Her not protesting annoyed him. She knew he would never do it. He was too old now to walk all day with a biscuit in his pocket. The boys she worried about, but not him. Years ago, before his marriage, he thought, gazing across the bay as they stood between the clumps of red-hot pokers, he had walked all day. He had eaten bread and cheese for his meal in a pub. He had worked ten hours at a stretch, with an old woman looking in every so often to see to the fire. That was the country he loved best, over there; those sandhills fading away into the dark. You could walk all day and never meet a soul. There was hardly a house, not one village, for miles and miles. You could work things out alone. There were little sandy beaches where nobody had been since the beginning of time. The seals sat up and stared at you. Sometimes it seemed to him that in a little house out there, by himself—he broke off with a sigh. He had no right. The father of eight children—he reminded himself of that. And he’d have been a brute and a cur to wish one thing different. Andrew would turn out a better man than he had. Prue would be a beauty, her mother said. They would hold back the flood a little. On the whole, that was a good piece of work—his eight children. They proved he didn’t utterly damn the poor little universe; for on an evening like this, he thought, watching the land fade away, the little island looked pitifully small, half swallowed by the sea.

@@ 12.4
“Poor little place,” he murmured, and sighed.

@@ 12.5
She heard him. He said the gloomiest things, yet she noticed that the moment he’d said them he always seemed more cheerful than usual. All this making of phrases was a game, she thought; if she’d said half of what he said, she would have blown her brains out long ago.

@@ 12.6
This phrase-making irritated her, and in a matter-of-fact voice she told him what a perfectly lovely evening it was. And what was he groaning about? she asked, half laughing and half complaining, because she guessed what was in his mind—he would have written better books if he hadn’t married.

@@ 12.7
He wasn’t complaining, he said. She knew he never complained. She knew he had absolutely nothing to complain about. And he grabbed her hand, lifted it to his lips, and kissed it so intensely that tears came into her eyes; then he quickly let it drop.

@@ 12.8
Turning from the view, they began to walk arm in arm up the path where the silver-green, spear-shaped plants grew. His arm was almost like a young man’s, Mrs. Ramsay thought, thin and hard; and she thought with delight of how strong he still was, though over sixty, how untamed and hopeful; and how strange it was that being convinced, as he was, of every kind of horror seemed not to depress him but to cheer him. Wasn’t that odd? she reflected. At times, really, he seemed to her made differently from other people: blind, deaf, and dumb from birth to ordinary things, but to extraordinary things, eagle-eyed. How much he understood often astonished her. But did he notice the flowers? No. Did he notice the view? No. Did he even notice how beautiful his own daughter was, or whether his plate held pudding or roast beef? He would sit at the table with them like someone in a dream. And she was afraid his habit of talking aloud, or reciting poetry aloud, was getting worse; for sometimes it was embarrassing—

@@ 12.9
Best and brightest, come away!

@@ 12.10
poor Miss Giddings, when he bellowed that at her, nearly leaped out of her skin. But then—and Mrs. Ramsay sided with him instantly against all the silly Giddingses in the world—then, she thought, pressing his arm lightly to tell him he was going uphill too fast for her, and that she needed to stop a moment to see whether those molehills on the bank were fresh—then, she thought, bending down to look, a great mind like his must be unlike ours in every way. Every great man she had ever known, she thought, concluding that a rabbit must have got in, had been like that; and it was good for young men (though she found the air of lecture halls stuffy and depressing almost past bearing) simply to listen to him, simply to look at him. But unless you shot rabbits, how were you to keep their numbers down? she wondered. Maybe a rabbit; maybe a mole. Anyway, some creature was wrecking her evening primroses. And glancing up, she saw above the thin trees the first pulse of the full-throbbing star, and wanted her husband to look at it, for the sight gave her such sharp pleasure. But she held back. He never looked at things. And if he did, he would only say, Poor little world, and give one of his sighs.

@@ 12.11
Just then he said “Very fine,” to please her, and made a show of admiring the flowers. But she knew perfectly well he didn’t admire them, or even realize they were there. He was only trying to please her. … Oh, but wasn’t that Lily Briscoe strolling with William Bankes? She fixed her shortsighted eyes on the backs of a couple moving away. Yes, it certainly was. Didn’t that mean they’d marry? Yes, it had to! What a splendid idea! They must marry!

@@ 13.0
He had been to Amsterdam, Mr. Bankes was telling Lily Briscoe as they walked across the lawn. He’d seen the Rembrandts. He’d been to Madrid. Unluckily it was Good Friday, and the Prado was closed. He’d been to Rome. Had Miss Briscoe never been to Rome? Oh, she ought to— It would be a marvelous experience for her—the Sistine Chapel; Michelangelo; and Padua, with its Giottos. For years his wife’s health had been poor, so their sightseeing had been done on a modest scale.

@@ 13.1
She had been to Brussels; she had been to Paris, though only on a quick trip to visit a sick aunt. She had been to Dresden; there were masses of pictures she’d never seen; but perhaps, Lily Briscoe reflected, it was better not to see pictures: all they did was make you hopelessly dissatisfied with your own work. Mr. Bankes felt you could take that view too far. We can’t all be Titians and we can’t all be Darwins, he said; yet he doubted whether there could be any Darwin or Titian without humble people like ourselves. Lily wanted to pay him a compliment; you’re not humble, Mr. Bankes, she would have liked to say. But he didn’t want compliments (most men do, she thought), and a little ashamed of the impulse, she kept quiet while he remarked that perhaps what he’d said didn’t apply to pictures. At any rate, said Lily, dashing off her small insincerity, she would always keep on painting, because it interested her. Yes, Mr. Bankes said, he was sure of that. As they came to the end of the lawn he was asking whether she found it hard to find subjects in London, when they turned and saw the Ramsays. So that is marriage, Lily thought: a man and a woman watching a girl throw a ball. That is what Mrs. Ramsay was trying to tell me the other night, she thought. For Mrs. Ramsay had on a green shawl, and the two stood close together, watching Prue and Jasper throw catches. And suddenly the meaning that comes down on people for no reason at all—as they’re stepping out of the Underground, perhaps, or ringing a doorbell—and makes them symbolic, makes them representative, came down on these two, and turned them, standing and gazing in the dusk, into the symbols of marriage, husband and wife. Then, after an instant, the symbolic outline that rose above the real figures sank again, and as Lily and Mr. Bankes came up to them they were simply Mr. and Mrs. Ramsay watching the children throw catches. Yet for a moment still—though Mrs. Ramsay greeted them with her usual smile (oh, she thinks we’re going to get married, Lily thought) and said, “I’ve triumphed tonight,” meaning that for once Mr. Bankes had agreed to have dinner with them rather than hurrying back to his lodgings, where his manservant cooked vegetables the proper way—still, for a single moment, there was a feeling of things blown apart, of space, of irresponsibility, as the ball soared up, and their eyes followed it and lost it and found the one star and the draped branches. In the fading light they all looked sharp-edged and unearthly and set apart by great distances. Then, dashing backward across the huge space (for solidity seemed to have vanished completely), Prue ran full tilt into them and brilliantly caught the ball high up in her left hand; and her mother said, “Aren’t they back yet?” and at that the spell broke. Now Mr. Ramsay felt free to laugh out loud at Hume, who had got stuck in a bog and was rescued by an old woman on condition that he said the Lord’s Prayer; and chuckling to himself, he wandered off to his study. Mrs. Ramsay, drawing Prue back into the alliance of family life, which she had escaped while she was throwing catches, asked,

@@ 13.2
“Did Nancy go with them?”

