@@ 21.0
So, with the lamps all put out, the moon gone down, and a thin rain drumming on the roof, a great downpour of darkness began. Nothing, it seemed, could survive the flood, the sheer abundance of darkness, which crept in at keyholes and cracks, stole around window blinds, came into bedrooms, and swallowed up here a jug and basin, there a bowl of red and yellow dahlias, there the sharp edges and solid bulk of a chest of drawers. It was not only the furniture that was blurred together; there was hardly anything left of body or mind by which you could say, “This is he,” or “This is she.” Sometimes a hand was raised as if to grasp something or fend something off, or somebody groaned, or somebody laughed aloud as if sharing a joke with nothingness.

@@ 21.1
Nothing stirred in the drawing-room or the dining-room or on the staircase. Only, through the rusty hinges and the swollen, sea-damp woodwork, certain breaths of air, broken off from the body of the wind (the house was ramshackle, after all), crept around corners and ventured indoors. You could almost imagine them, as they came into the drawing-room, questioning and wondering, playing with the loose flap of hanging wallpaper, asking: would it hang much longer, when would it fall? Then, smoothly brushing the walls, they passed on thoughtfully, as if asking the red and yellow roses on the wallpaper whether they would fade, and questioning (gently, for they had time to spare) the torn letters in the wastepaper basket, the flowers, the books, all of which were now open to them — asking, Were they allies? Were they enemies? How long would they last?

@@ 21.2
So, guided by some stray light from an uncovered star, or a wandering ship, or even the Lighthouse, with its pale footfall on stair and mat, the little breaths of air climbed the staircase and nosed around the bedroom doors. But here, surely, they must stop. Whatever else may perish and disappear, what lies here is steadfast. Here you might say to those sliding lights, those fumbling airs that breathe and bend over the bed itself: here you can neither touch nor destroy. At which, wearily, ghostlike, as if they had feather-light fingers and the light persistence of feathers, they would look once at the shut eyes and the loosely clasped fingers, and wearily fold their garments and disappear. And so, nosing, rubbing, they went to the window on the staircase, to the servants’ bedrooms, to the boxes in the attics; coming down again, they whitened the apples on the dining-room table, fumbled at the petals of the roses, tried the picture on the easel, brushed the mat and blew a little sand along the floor. At last, giving up, they all stopped together, gathered together, sighed together; all together they let out an aimless gust of lament, to which some door in the kitchen answered: it swung wide, let nothing in, and slammed shut.

@@ 21.3
[At this point Mr. Carmichael, who was reading Virgil, blew out his candle. It was after midnight.]

@@ 22.0
But what, after all, is one night? A short space of time, especially when the darkness fades so soon, and so soon a bird sings, a cock crows, or a faint green stirs, like a turning leaf, in the hollow of the wave. Night, however, follows night. Winter holds a whole pack of them in reserve and deals them out equally, evenly, with tireless fingers. They lengthen; they darken. Some of them hold up clear planets, plates of brightness. The autumn trees, ravaged as they are, take on the gleam of tattered flags glowing in the gloom of cool cathedral vaults, where gold letters on marble pages describe death in battle, and bones bleaching and burning far away in Indian sands. The autumn trees shine in the yellow moonlight, in the light of harvest moons — the light that softens the energy of labor, and smooths the stubble, and brings the wave lapping blue to the shore.

@@ 22.1
It seemed now as if, moved by human repentance and all its toil, divine goodness had drawn back the curtain and shown, behind it, single and distinct, the hare standing upright; the wave falling; the boat rocking — things which, if we deserved them, would be ours always. But alas, divine goodness twitches the cord and draws the curtain shut; it does not please him; he covers his treasures in a drenching of hail, and so breaks them, so scatters them, that it seems impossible their calm should ever return, or that we should ever put together a perfect whole from their fragments, or read the clear words of truth in the littered pieces. For our repentance earns only a glimpse; our toil, only a rest.

@@ 22.2
The nights now are full of wind and destruction. The trees plunge and bend, and their leaves fly helter-skelter until the lawn is plastered with them and they lie packed in gutters, choke the rain-pipes and litter the damp paths. The sea, too, tosses itself and breaks itself; and if some sleeper, imagining that he might find on the beach an answer to his doubts, someone to share his solitude, should throw off his bedclothes and go down alone to walk on the sand, no image that seems to serve him with divine readiness comes easily to hand, bringing the night to order and making the world reflect the range of the soul. The hand dwindles in his hand; the voice bellows in his ear. It would almost seem useless, in such confusion, to ask the night those questions — what, and why, and for what purpose — that tempt the sleeper from his bed to look for an answer.

@@ 22.3
[Stumbling along a passage one dark morning, Mr. Ramsay stretched out his arms; but, Mrs. Ramsay having died rather suddenly the night before, he stretched his arms out. They stayed empty.]

@@ 23.0
So, with the house empty and the doors locked and the mattresses rolled up, those stray breaths of air, the advance guard of great armies, blustered in, brushed the bare boards, nibbled and fanned, and met nothing in bedroom or drawing-room that fully resisted them — only hangings that flapped, wood that creaked, the bare legs of tables, saucepans and china already furred, tarnished, cracked. What people had shed and left behind — a pair of shoes, a shooting cap, some faded skirts and coats in the wardrobes — these alone kept the human shape, and in the emptiness showed how once they had been filled and brought to life; how once hands had been busy with hooks and buttons; how once the looking-glass had held a face, had held a hollowed-out world in which a figure turned, a hand flashed, the door opened, and in came children rushing and tumbling, and went out again. Now, day after day, the light turned its clear image on the opposite wall, like a flower reflected in water. Only the shadows of the trees, tossing in the wind, bowed low on the wall and for a moment darkened the pool in which the light reflected itself; or birds, flying past, made a soft spot flutter slowly across the bedroom floor.

@@ 23.1
So loveliness reigned, and stillness, and together they made the shape of loveliness itself, a form that life had left; solitary, like a pool at evening, far off, seen from a train window, vanishing so quickly that the pool, pale in the evening, is hardly robbed of its solitude, though it has once been seen. Loveliness and stillness clasped hands in the bedroom; and among the shrouded jugs and sheeted chairs, even the prying of the wind, and the soft noses of the clammy sea airs, rubbing, snuffling, repeating and repeating their questions — “Will you fade? Will you perish?” — hardly disturbed the peace, the indifference, the air of pure integrity, as if the question they asked scarcely needed an answer: we remain.

@@ 23.2
Nothing, it seemed, could break that image, spoil that innocence, or disturb the swaying cloak of silence which, week after week, in the empty room, wove into itself the falling cries of birds, ships hooting, the drone and hum of the fields, a dog’s bark, a man’s shout, and folded them around the house in silence. Only once did a board spring loose on the landing; once, in the middle of the night, with a roar, with a rupture, as when after centuries of stillness a rock tears itself from the mountain and hurtles crashing into the valley, one fold of the shawl came loose and swung back and forth. Then peace came down again; and the shadow wavered; the light bowed to its own image in adoration on the bedroom wall — when Mrs. McNab, tearing the veil of silence with hands that had stood in the washtub, grinding it under boots that had crunched the shingle, came as she had been told to open all the windows and dust the bedrooms.

@@ 24.0
As she lurched (for she rolled like a ship at sea) and leered (for her eyes never fell on anything directly, but only with a sidelong glance that begged off the scorn and anger of the world — she was witless, she knew it), as she clutched the banisters and hauled herself upstairs and rolled from room to room, she sang. Rubbing the glass of the long mirror and leering sideways at her swaying figure, she let a sound come from her lips — something that had perhaps been cheerful on the stage twenty years before, had been hummed and danced to, but now, coming from this toothless, bonneted caretaker, was robbed of meaning. It was like the voice of witlessness, of humor, of persistence itself, trodden down but springing up again; so that as she lurched along, dusting, wiping, she seemed to be saying how it was all one long sorrow and trouble, how it was getting up and going to bed again, and getting things out and putting them away again. It had not been easy or cozy, this world she had known for close on seventy years. She was bowed down with weariness. How long, she asked, creaking and groaning on her knees under the bed, dusting the boards, how long is it to go on? But she hobbled to her feet again, pulled herself up, and again, with her sidelong leer that slipped and turned aside even from her own face and her own sorrows, stood and gaped in the glass, smiling at nothing, and began again the old amble and hobble, taking up mats, putting down china, looking sideways in the glass — as if, after all, she had her consolations; as if some incorrigible hope really did twine itself around her dirge. There must have been visions of joy at the washtub, say, with her children (though two had been born out of wedlock and one had deserted her), or at the pub, drinking, or turning over odds and ends in her drawers. There must have been some break in the dark, some channel in the depths of obscurity through which enough light came to twist her face into a grin in the glass, and make her, turning to her work again, mumble out the old music-hall song. Meanwhile the mystics, the visionaries, walked the beach, stirred a puddle, looked at a stone, and asked themselves, “What am I?” “What is this?” — and suddenly an answer was granted them (what it was they could not say), so that they were warm in the frost and had comfort in the desert. But Mrs. McNab went on drinking and gossiping as before.

