@@ 31.0
She seemed to have shriveled a little, he thought. She looked rather thin and wispy, but not unattractive. He liked her. There had been some talk once of her marrying William Bankes, but nothing had come of it. His wife had been fond of her. He had been a little bad-tempered at breakfast, too. And then, and then—this was one of those moments when an enormous need drove him, without his knowing what it was, to go up to any woman and force her, he did not care how, so great was his need, to give him what he wanted: sympathy.

@@ 31.1
Was anyone looking after her? he asked. Did she have everything she wanted?

@@ 31.2
“Oh, I have everything, thanks,” Lily Briscoe said nervously. No; she could not do it. She should have floated away at once on some wave of warm, expansive sympathy: the pressure on her was tremendous. Yet she stayed stuck. An awful pause followed. They both looked at the sea. Why, Mr. Ramsay thought, should she look at the sea when I am standing here? She said she hoped it would be calm enough for them to land at the Lighthouse. The Lighthouse! The Lighthouse! What has that got to do with anything? he thought impatiently. And instantly, with the force of some primeval gust (for really he could not hold it in any longer), a groan broke from him—such a groan that any other woman in the whole world would have done something, said something. Any woman except me, Lily thought, lashing out at herself bitterly: I am not a woman at all, presumably, but a peevish, bad-tempered, dried-up old maid.

@@ 31.3
Mr. Ramsay let out the fullest of sighs. He waited. Wasn’t she going to say anything? Couldn’t she see what he wanted from her? Then he told her he had a particular reason for wanting to go to the Lighthouse. His wife used to send things to the men there. The lighthouse keeper had a son, a poor boy with a tubercular hip. He gave a deep sigh. He gave a meaningful sigh. What Lily wished, and all she wished, was that this enormous flood of grief, this hunger for sympathy that could never be satisfied, this demand that she hand herself over to him completely—and even then he would have sorrows enough to keep her supplied forever—would leave her alone, would be turned aside (she kept looking at the house, hoping someone would interrupt) before its current swept her away.

@@ 31.4
“Trips like this,” said Mr. Ramsay, scraping the ground with the toe of his boot, “are very painful.” Still Lily said nothing. (She is a block of wood, she is a stone, he said to himself.) “They are very exhausting,” he said, looking at his beautiful hands with a sickly look that turned her stomach (he was acting, she felt; this great man was making a drama of himself). It was horrible, it was indecent. Would they never come? she asked herself, for she could not bear this enormous weight of sorrow, could not hold up these heavy drapes of grief (he had taken on a pose of extreme frailty; he even tottered a little as he stood there) a moment longer.

@@ 31.5
Still she could say nothing. The whole horizon seemed swept clean of things to talk about. She could only feel, in amazement, as Mr. Ramsay stood there, how his gaze seemed to fall mournfully over the sunny grass and stain it, and how it cast a veil of black mourning crape over the ruddy, drowsy, entirely contented figure of Mr. Carmichael, reading a French novel in a deck chair—as if such a life, flaunting its well-being in a world of sorrow, were enough to stir up the gloomiest thoughts of all. Look at him, he seemed to be saying, look at me; and in fact, all the time, what he was feeling was, Think of me, think of me. Oh, if only that bulk could be floated over beside them, Lily wished; if only she had set up her easel a yard or two closer to him! A man, any man, would stop this outpouring, would put an end to these laments. She was a woman, and she had provoked this horror; as a woman, she should have known how to deal with it. It counted immensely against her, as a woman, to stand there dumb. One said—what did one say?—Oh, Mr. Ramsay! Dear Mr. Ramsay! That was what that kind old lady who sketched, Mrs. Beckwith, would have said at once, and rightly. But no. They stood there, cut off from the rest of the world. His immense self-pity, his demand for sympathy, poured out and spread in pools at her feet, and all she did, miserable sinner that she was, was to draw her skirts a little closer around her ankles, so as not to get wet. She stood there in complete silence, gripping her paintbrush.

@@ 31.6
Heaven be praised, over and over! She heard sounds in the house. James and Cam must be coming. But Mr. Ramsay, as if he knew his time was running short, bore down on her lonely figure with the immense pressure of all his concentrated sorrow—his age, his frailty, his desolation—when suddenly, tossing his head impatiently, in his annoyance (for, after all, what woman could resist him?), he noticed that his bootlaces were untied. And remarkable boots they were, too, Lily thought, looking down at them: sculpted; colossal; like everything Mr. Ramsay wore, from his frayed tie to his half-buttoned vest, unmistakably his own. She could picture them walking to his room by themselves, expressing, even in his absence, his pathos, his surliness, his bad temper, his charm.

@@ 31.7
“What beautiful boots!” she exclaimed. She was ashamed of herself. To praise his boots when he had asked her to comfort his soul; when he had shown her his bleeding hands, his torn heart, and asked her to pity them—and then to say, cheerfully, “Ah, but what beautiful boots you wear!”—deserved, she knew, total annihilation in one of his sudden roars of temper. She looked up, expecting to get it.

@@ 31.8
Mr. Ramsay smiled instead. The shroud, the drapes, the infirmities all dropped off him. Ah yes, he said, raising his foot so she could look, these were first-rate boots. Only one man in England could make boots like that. Boots, he said, were among the chief curses of the human race. “Bootmakers,” he exclaimed, “make it their business to cripple and torture the human foot.” No people on earth were more stubborn and contrary. He had spent the better part of his youth getting boots made as boots ought to be made. She would please notice (up went his right foot, then his left) that she had never before seen boots of quite that shape. And the leather was the finest in the world. Most leather was mere brown paper and cardboard. Pleased with himself, he gazed at his foot, which was still in the air. They had arrived, she felt, at a sunny island where peace made its home, where sanity was in charge and the sun never stopped shining: the blessed island of good boots. She felt a warmth toward him. “Now let’s see whether you can tie a knot,” he said. He brushed aside her feeble method with scorn and demonstrated his own invention. Tie it once and it would never come undone. Three times he knotted her shoe; three times he unknotted it.

@@ 31.9
Why, at this completely inappropriate moment, when he was bending over her shoe, should she be so tormented by sympathy for him? As she bent down too, the blood rushed to her face, and, thinking of how hard she had been (she had called him a playactor), she felt her eyes swell and sting with tears. Busy like this, he seemed to her a figure of infinite pathos. He tied knots. He bought boots. There was no helping Mr. Ramsay on the journey he was making. But now, just as she wanted to say something, could perhaps have said something, here they were—Cam and James. They appeared on the terrace. They came slowly, trailing side by side, a serious, melancholy pair.

@@ 31.10
But why did they have to come like _that_? She could not help feeling annoyed with them. They might have come more cheerfully; they might have given him what she, now that they were leaving, would have no chance to give him. For she felt a sudden emptiness, a frustration. Her feeling had come too late. There it was, ready, but he no longer needed it. He had turned into a very distinguished elderly man who had no need of her whatsoever. She felt snubbed. He slung a knapsack over his shoulders. He handed out the parcels—there were a number of them, badly tied, in brown paper. He sent Cam for a cloak. He looked every inch a leader getting ready for an expedition. Then, wheeling around, he led the way down the path with his firm military step, in those wonderful boots, carrying brown paper parcels, his children following him. They looked, she thought, as if fate had given them over to some stern undertaking, and they went to meet it, still young enough to be drawn along obediently in their father’s wake, but with a paleness in their eyes that made her feel they were silently suffering something beyond their years. So they passed the edge of the lawn, and it seemed to Lily that she was watching a procession go by, drawn on by some pressure of shared feeling which made it—faltering and flagging as it was—a little company bound together, and strangely impressive to her. Politely, but very distantly, Mr. Ramsay raised his hand and saluted her as they passed.

@@ 31.11
But what a face, she thought, and at once the sympathy she had not been asked to give began troubling her, looking for a way out. What had made it like that? Thinking, night after night, she supposed—about the reality of kitchen tables, she added, remembering the symbol Andrew had given her when she was vague about what Mr. Ramsay actually thought about. (He had been killed instantly by a splinter of shell, she reminded herself.) The kitchen table was something visionary and austere; something bare, hard, not decorative. There was no color to it; it was all edges and angles; it was uncompromisingly plain. But Mr. Ramsay always kept his eyes fixed on it, never let himself be distracted or fooled, until his face too became worn and ascetic and shared in this unadorned beauty which impressed her so deeply. Then, she recalled (standing where he had left her, holding her brush), worries had worn at it—less nobly. He must have had his doubts about that table, she supposed: whether the table was a real table; whether it was worth the time he gave it; whether he was able, after all, to find it. He had had doubts, she felt, or he would have asked less of people. That was what they talked about late at night sometimes, she suspected; and then the next day Mrs. Ramsay looked tired, and Lily flew into a rage with him over some absurd little thing. But now he had nobody to talk to about that table, or his boots, or his knots; and he was like a lion seeking whom he might devour, and his face had that touch of desperation, of exaggeration, which alarmed her and made her pull her skirts around her. And then, she recalled, there was that sudden revival, that sudden flare (when she praised his boots), that sudden return of energy and interest in ordinary human things. That too passed and changed (for he was always changing, and hid nothing) into that other, final phase which was new to her, and which had, she admitted, made her ashamed of her own irritability. It seemed then as if he had shed his worries and ambitions, and the hope of sympathy and the desire for praise; as if he had entered some other region and was being drawn on, as if by curiosity, in silent conversation, whether with himself or with someone else, at the head of that little procession, out of one’s reach. An extraordinary face! The gate banged.

@@ 32.0
So they’re gone, she thought, sighing with relief and disappointment. Her sympathy seemed to fly back into her face, like a bramble springing back. She felt strangely divided, as if one part of her were drawn out there—it was a still, hazy day; this morning the Lighthouse looked immensely far away—while the other part had planted itself stubbornly, solidly, here on the lawn. She saw her canvas as if it had floated up and set itself, white and uncompromising, right in front of her. With its cold stare it seemed to scold her for all this hurry and agitation, this foolishness and waste of emotion. It called her back sharply, and it spread through her mind first a peace, as her disorderly feelings (he had gone, and she had been so sorry for him, and she had said nothing) marched off the field; and then emptiness. She looked blankly at the canvas, with its uncompromising white stare; from the canvas to the garden. There was something (she stood screwing up her little Chinese eyes in her small puckered face), something she remembered in the way those lines related, cutting across, slicing down, and in the mass of the hedge with its green cave of blues and browns, which had stayed in her mind. It had tied a knot in her mind, so that at odd moments, without meaning to, as she walked along the Brompton Road in London, as she brushed her hair, she found herself painting that picture, running her eye over it, and untying the knot in her imagination. But there was all the difference in the world between this airy planning away from the canvas and actually taking up her brush and making the first mark.

@@ 32.1
In her agitation at Mr. Ramsay’s being there, she had taken the wrong brush, and her easel, jammed into the ground so nervously, was at the wrong angle. And now that she had put that right, and in doing so had quieted the intrusions and irrelevances that tugged at her attention and reminded her that she was such-and-such a person, with such-and-such relations to people, she took her hand and raised her brush. For a moment it hung trembling in the air in a painful but exciting ecstasy. Where to begin?—that was the question; at what point should she make the first mark? One line placed on the canvas committed her to countless risks, to frequent decisions that could not be undone. Everything that seemed simple in the idea became complicated the moment she put it into practice—just as waves, seen from the top of a cliff, form themselves into symmetrical patterns, but to the swimmer among them are split by steep gulfs and foaming crests. Still, the risk had to be taken; the mark had to be made.

@@ 32.2
With a strange physical sensation, as if she were being pushed forward and at the same time had to hold herself back, she made her first quick, decisive stroke. The brush came down. It flickered brown over the white canvas; it left a running mark. She did it a second time—a third time. And so, pausing and flickering, she found a dancing, rhythmic movement, as if the pauses were one part of the rhythm and the strokes another, and all were connected. And so, lightly and swiftly pausing, striking, she scored her canvas with brown, running, nervous lines, which had no sooner settled there than they enclosed (she felt it looming out at her) a space. Down in the hollow of one wave she saw the next wave towering higher and higher above her. For what could be more formidable than that space? Here she was again, she thought, stepping back to look at it, drawn out of gossip, out of living, out of fellowship with people, into the presence of this formidable, ancient enemy of hers—this other thing, this truth, this reality, which suddenly seized her, rose up stark behind the appearance of things and demanded her attention. She was half unwilling, half reluctant. Why must she always be drawn out and dragged away? Why not be left in peace, to talk to Mr. Carmichael on the lawn? It was a demanding kind of relationship, anyway. Other objects of worship were content with worship; men, women, God, all let you kneel down flat before them. But this form, even if it was only the shape of a white lampshade looming on a wicker table, roused you to endless combat, challenged you to a fight you were bound to lose. Always (it was in her nature, or in her sex, she did not know which), before she traded the fluidity of life for the concentration of painting, she had a few moments of nakedness, when she seemed like an unborn soul, a soul torn from its body, hesitating on some windy pinnacle and exposed without protection to every blast of doubt. Why, then, did she do it? She looked at the canvas, lightly scored with running lines. It would be hung in the servants’ bedrooms. It would be rolled up and stuffed under a sofa. What was the good of doing it, then? And she heard some voice saying she couldn’t paint, saying she couldn’t create, as if she were caught up in one of those habitual currents which, after a while, form experience in the mind, so that you repeat words without being aware any longer of who first said them.

@@ 32.3
Can’t paint, can’t write, she murmured in a monotone, anxiously trying to decide on her plan of attack. For the mass loomed up before her; it stuck out; she could feel it pressing on her eyeballs. Then, as if some juice her faculties needed for oiling had squirted out all by itself, she began dipping, uncertainly, among the blues and umbers, moving her brush this way and that. But the brush was heavier now and slower, as though it had fallen in with some rhythm that what she saw was dictating to her (her eyes kept going from the hedge to the canvas), so that while her hand trembled with life, the rhythm was strong enough to carry her along on its current. She was certainly losing her awareness of things outside her. And as she lost awareness of outer things—of her name, her personality, her appearance, of whether Mr. Carmichael was there or not—her mind kept throwing up from its depths scenes and names and sayings and memories and ideas, like a fountain spurting over that glaring, horribly difficult white space, while she shaped it with greens and blues.

@@ 32.4
That was what Charles Tansley used to say, she remembered: women can’t paint, can’t write. He had come up behind her once and stood right beside her—she hated that—while she was painting here, on this very spot. “Shag tobacco,” he said, “fivepence an ounce,” making a show of his poverty and his principles. (But the war had taken the sting out of her sense of being a woman. Poor devils, you thought, poor devils of both sexes, getting into such messes.) He always had a book tucked under his arm—a purple one. He “worked.” She remembered him sitting at work in a blaze of sunshine. At dinner he would plant himself right in the middle of the view. And then, she reflected, there had been that scene on the beach. That had to be remembered. It was a windy morning, and they had all gone down to the beach. Mrs. Ramsay sat by a rock writing letters. On and on she wrote. At last she looked up at something floating in the sea. “Oh,” she said, “is it a lobster pot? Is it a boat turned upside down?” She was too nearsighted to see it, and at that Charles Tansley became as nice as he possibly could. He started playing ducks and drakes, skipping stones. The two of them picked out small flat black stones and sent them bouncing across the waves. From time to time Mrs. Ramsay looked up over her glasses and laughed at them. What they talked about, she could not remember—only herself and Charles throwing stones, suddenly getting along very well, and Mrs. Ramsay watching. She had been very aware of that. Mrs. Ramsay, she thought, stepping back and narrowing her eyes. (It must have made a big difference to the design when Mrs. Ramsay was sitting on the step with James. There must have been a shadow.) Mrs. Ramsay. Whenever she thought of Charles and herself skipping stones, and of that whole scene on the beach, it all seemed somehow to rest on Mrs. Ramsay sitting under the rock with a writing pad on her knee. (She wrote endless letters, and now and then the wind snatched one, and she and Charles just managed to save a page from the sea.) What power there was in the human soul! she thought. That woman, sitting there writing under the rock, turned everything simple; made these angers and irritations fall away like old rags. She put this together with that, and then with this, and so, out of that wretched silliness and spite (she and Charles, squabbling and sparring, had been silly and spiteful), she made something—this scene on the beach, say, this moment of friendship and liking—that had lasted all these years, whole and complete, so that Lily could dip into it to remake her memory of him, and it stayed in the mind almost like a work of art.

@@ 32.5
“Like a work of art,” she repeated, looking from her canvas to the drawing-room steps and back again. She had to rest for a moment. And as she rested, looking vaguely from one to the other, the old question that was forever crossing the sky of the soul—the vast, general question which tended to become personal at moments like these, when she let go of faculties that had been under strain—stood over her, paused over her, darkened over her. What is the meaning of life? That was all—a simple question; one that tended to close in on you as the years went by. The great revelation had never come. Perhaps the great revelation never did come. Instead there were little daily miracles, illuminations, matches struck unexpectedly in the dark; here was one. This, that, and the other; herself and Charles Tansley and the breaking wave; Mrs. Ramsay bringing them together; Mrs. Ramsay saying “Life stand still here”; Mrs. Ramsay making something permanent out of the moment (just as Lily herself, in another sphere, tried to make something permanent out of the moment)—this had the nature of a revelation. In the midst of chaos there was shape; this eternal passing and flowing (she looked at the clouds going by and the leaves shaking) was struck into stillness. Life stand still here, Mrs. Ramsay said. “Mrs. Ramsay! Mrs. Ramsay!” she repeated. She owed this revelation to her.

@@ 32.6
Everything was silent. Nobody seemed to be stirring in the house yet. She looked at it, sleeping there in the early sunlight, its windows green and blue with the reflected leaves. The faint thought she was having about Mrs. Ramsay seemed in harmony with this quiet house, this smoke, this fine early-morning air. Faint and unreal, it was amazingly pure and exciting. She hoped nobody would open a window or come out of the house, but that she would be left alone to go on thinking, to go on painting. She turned to her canvas. But pushed by some curiosity, driven by the discomfort of the sympathy she was still holding in, unreleased, she walked a step or two to the end of the lawn to see whether, down there on the beach, she could see that little company setting sail. Down there among the little boats floating on the water, some with their sails furled, some moving slowly away, for it was very calm, there was one a little apart from the others. Its sail was being hoisted at that very moment. She decided that there, in that very distant and entirely silent little boat, Mr. Ramsay was sitting with Cam and James. Now they had got the sail up; now, after a little flagging and hesitation, the sails filled, and, wrapped in deep silence, she watched the boat make its way deliberately past the other boats and out to sea.

