@@ 7
Who can list all Your praises, even those he has experienced in his own single self? What did You do then, my God, and how unsearchable is the abyss of Your judgments? For he was struggling with a fever and lay for a long time unconscious in a deathly sweat; and when his recovery was despaired of, he was baptized without knowing it. I paid little attention to this, assuming that his soul would keep what it had received from me rather than what was being done to his unconscious body. But it turned out quite otherwise, for he revived and was restored to health. At once, as soon as I could speak with him (and I could as soon as he could, since I never left his side and we depended on each other far too much), I tried to make fun of that baptism in front of him, expecting him to laugh at it with me, since he had received it when he was completely absent in mind and senses; but he had by now learned that he had received it. Yet he recoiled from me as if I were an enemy, and with a startling and sudden frankness he warned me that if I wanted to remain his friend, I must stop saying such things to him. I was stunned and shaken, and I held back all my feelings until he should get well and be strong enough in health for me to deal with him as I wished. But he was snatched away from my madness, so that he might be kept safe with You for my comfort. A few days later, while I was away, the fever returned and he died.

@@ 8
With this grief my heart was plunged into darkness, and whatever I looked at was death. My home town became a torment to me, and my father's house a strange misery; and everything I had shared with him turned, without him, into a savage torture. My eyes looked for him everywhere, and he was not given back to them. I hated every place because he was not in it, and no place could say to me any longer, "Look, he is coming," as it could when he was alive but away. I had become a great puzzle to myself, and I kept asking my soul why she was so sad and why she troubled me so deeply; but she did not know how to answer me. And if I said, Hope in God, she quite rightly did not obey me, because the dearest friend she had lost was, as a man, both more real and better than the phantom she was told to hope in. Only weeping was sweet to me, and it had taken my friend's place in my heart's delight.

@@ 9
And now, Lord, those things have passed, and time has softened my wound. May I hear from You, who are Truth, and bring the ear of my heart close to Your mouth, so that You may tell me why weeping is sweet to the wretched? Or have You, though You are present everywhere, cast our misery far away from You? You remain in Yourself, while we are tossed about in one trial after another. And yet, unless we wept into Your ears, nothing would be left of our hope. Where, then, does it come from, this sweet fruit plucked from the bitterness of life: groaning, weeping, sighing and lamenting? Is it sweet because we hope that You hear us? That is true of prayers, because in them there is a longing to reach You. But is it true of grief for something lost, and of the mourning that covered me then? For I did not hope that he would come back to life, nor did I ask for this with my tears; I simply grieved and wept. I was wretched, and I had lost my joy. Or is weeping in fact a bitter thing, which delights us because we are sick of the things we used to enjoy and now shrink from them?

@@ 10
But why am I saying these things? This is not the time for asking questions, but for confessing to You. I was wretched, and every mind is wretched that is chained by love to mortal things. It is torn apart when it loses them, and then it feels the wretchedness it was already in even before it lost them. That is how I was at that time. I wept most bitterly, and I found rest in bitterness. I was so wretched that I held that wretched life itself dearer than my friend. For although I wanted to change it, I would have been even less willing to lose it than to lose him. Indeed, I do not know whether I would have given it up even for him, as the story goes (if it is not invented) of Orestes and Pylades, who were willing to die for each other or together, since not living together was worse to them than death. But in me some feeling had arisen that was quite the opposite of this: I was heavily weary of living, and at the same time afraid of dying. I believe that the more I loved him, the more I hated and feared death, which had taken him from me, as though it were my cruelest enemy; and I thought it would suddenly devour all people, since it had been able to take him. That is exactly how I was, I remember. Look at my heart, O my God, look inside it; see, for I remember, O my Hope, You who cleanse me from the uncleanness of such feelings, directing my eyes toward You and pulling my feet out of the snare. For I was amazed that other mortals were alive, since he whom I had loved as if he would never die was dead; and I was more amazed still that I, who was his second self, could be alive when he was dead. Someone put it well when he called his friend "half of my soul." For I felt that my soul and his soul had been "one soul in two bodies," and so life was a horror to me, because I did not want to live as half a person. And that, perhaps, is why I was afraid to die: so that he whom I had loved so much would not die completely.

@@ 11
What madness, not to know how to love human beings as human beings! What a foolish man, to bear the human lot with so little restraint! That is what I was then. So I raged, sighed, wept and was thrown into turmoil, with no rest and no counsel. I was carrying around a soul cut to pieces and bleeding, a soul that could not bear being carried by me, and I could find nowhere to set it down. It found no rest in pleasant groves, not in games and songs, not in sweet-scented places, not in lavish banquets, not in the pleasures of the bedroom and the bed, and finally not in books and poetry either. Everything filled me with horror, even the light itself; whatever was not what he was seemed vile and hateful to me, except groaning and tears, for in those alone I found a little rest. But whenever my soul was drawn away from them, a huge burden of misery weighed me down. I knew it ought to have been lifted up to You, Lord, to be lightened and healed; but I neither wanted to nor was able to, all the more because, when I thought of You, You were not anything solid or firm to me. For it was not You, but an empty phantom, and my error was my God. If I tried to set my soul down there to rest, it slipped through the emptiness and came crashing down on me again, and I remained to myself an unhappy place where I could neither stay nor get away. For where could my heart flee from my heart? Where could I flee from myself? Where would I not follow myself? And yet I fled from my home town, since my eyes would look for him less in places where they were not used to seeing him. And so from the town of Thagaste I came to Carthage.

@@ 12
Time does not stand idle, nor does it roll uselessly past our senses; it works wonders in the mind. Look how the days came and went, one after another, and by coming and going they planted in me new hopes and new memories, and little by little they patched me up again with the old kinds of pleasure, before which that grief of mine gave way. And yet in its place came, not other griefs exactly, but the causes of other griefs. For why had that grief pierced me so easily and so deeply, if not because I had poured out my soul onto the sand by loving a man who would die as though he would never die? What mainly restored and revived me was the comfort of other friends, with whom I loved what I loved instead of You; and this was one enormous fable and one long lie, and by its adulterous rubbing our minds, which had itching ears, were being corrupted. But that fable did not die for me whenever one of my friends died. There were other things in them that captured my mind more: talking and laughing together, doing each other kindnesses in turn, reading sweetly written books together, joking together and being serious together, disagreeing now and then without bad feeling, as a man might with himself, and by those very rare disagreements seasoning our far more frequent agreements; teaching each other something or learning from each other; missing the absent with an ache and welcoming them back with joy. These signs and others like them, coming from the hearts of those who love and are loved in return, and showing through the face, the tongue, the eyes and a thousand delightful gestures, were like kindling that set our souls ablaze together and made one out of many.

