@@ 0
I call upon You, O my God, my mercy, who made me and did not forget me when I had forgotten You. I call You into my soul, which You are preparing to receive You through the longing that You Yourself breathed into it. Do not abandon me now that I call upon You, for You came to meet me before I ever called, and pressed on me with many repeated calls of every kind, so that I would hear You from far off, and be turned back, and call upon You who were calling me. For You, Lord, blotted out all my evil deserts, so as not to repay my hands, with which I fell away from You; and You went ahead of all my good deserts, so as to repay the work of Your own hands, with which You made me. For before I existed, You were; nor was I anything to which You could grant existence; and yet, see, I exist, out of Your goodness, which went before all that You have made me to be and all that You have made me from. For You had no need of me, nor am I any such good as could be of help to You, my Lord and my God. I do not serve You as though You might grow tired in working, or as though Your power would be less if it lacked my service. Nor do I cultivate You, as one cultivates land, as though You would lie uncultivated unless I cultivated You. Rather, I serve You and worship You so that I may receive well-being from You, from whom it comes that I have a being capable of well-being.

@@ 1
For it is out of the fullness of Your goodness that Your creation stands in being, so that a good which could in no way profit You, and which was not of Your own being (for then it would have been equal to You), might still exist, since it could be made by You. For what did heaven and earth, which You made in the Beginning, deserve from You? Let those spiritual and corporeal natures which You made in Your Wisdom tell how they deserved from You to depend on it, even in their inchoate and formless state, each in its own kind, whether spiritual or corporeal, drifting toward boundless excess and a far-off unlikeness to You. (The spiritual, even without form, was higher than the corporeal even with form; and the corporeal, even without form, was better than if it had been nothing at all.) Let them tell how they deserved to hang formless upon Your Word in this way, unless by that same Word they were called back to Your Unity, given form, and so from You, the one supreme Good, were made all very good. How did they deserve from You even to be without form, when they would not have been even this except from You?

@@ 2
How did corporeal matter deserve from You even to be invisible and without form? It would not have been even this unless You had made it; and so, since it did not yet exist, it could not deserve from You to be made. Or how could the inchoate spiritual creature deserve from You even to ebb and flow in darkness like the deep, unlike You, unless it had been turned by that same Word toward the One by whom it was created, and, enlightened by Him, had become light, not equal to that Form which is equal to You, yet conformed to it? For just as in a body to be is not the same as to be beautiful (otherwise it could not be deformed), so for a created spirit to live is not the same as to live wisely (otherwise it would be wise unchangeably). But it is good for it to cling to You always, so that the light it gained by turning toward You it may not lose by turning away from You, and slip back into a life like the dark deep. For we ourselves too, who in respect of the soul are a spiritual creature, turned away from You, our light, and in that life were once darkness; and we still labor among the remnants of our darkness, until in Your Only One we become Your righteousness, like the mountains of God. For we have been Your judgments, which are like the great deep.

@@ 3
What You said at the first creation, Let there be light, and there was light, I understand, not unfittingly, of the spiritual creature, because there was already a life of some kind which You could illuminate. But just as it had no claim on You to be a life capable of being enlightened, so, once it existed, it had no claim on You to be enlightened. For its formless state could not have pleased You unless it became light, and became light not simply by existing, but by gazing on the Light that illuminates it and clinging to that Light. So the fact that it lives at all, and that it lives happily, it owes to nothing but Your grace, having been turned, by a change for the better, toward That which can be changed neither for the worse nor for the better. That is what You alone are, because You alone simply are; for You it is not one thing to live and another to live blessedly, since You Yourself are Your own Blessedness.

@@ 4
What, then, could have been lacking to Your good, which You Yourself are, even if these things had never existed at all, or had remained without form? You made them not out of any need but out of the fullness of Your goodness, restraining them and turning them toward form, and not as though Your joy were to be made complete by them. For it is to You, who are perfect, that their imperfection is displeasing, and so they are perfected by You and please You; not as though You were imperfect and were Yourself to be perfected by their perfecting. For Your good Spirit was indeed borne over the waters, not borne up by them, as if He rested upon them. For those in whom Your good Spirit is said to rest, He causes to rest in Himself. But it was Your incorruptible and unchangeable will, all-sufficient in itself for itself, that was borne over that life which You had created. For that life, to live is not the same as to live happily, since it lives even while it ebbs and flows in its own darkness; what remains for it is to be turned toward Him by whom it was made, and to live more and more by the fountain of life, and in His light to see light, and to be perfected, and enlightened, and made blessed.
