@@ 5
See, now the Trinity appears to me in a glass darkly, the Trinity which You are, my God. For You, O Father, created heaven and earth in Him who is the Beginning of our wisdom, who is Your Wisdom, born of Yourself, equal to You and coeternal: that is, in Your Son. We have now said a great deal about the Heaven of heavens, and about the earth invisible and without form, and about the dark deep, with regard to the wandering instability of its spiritual formlessness, had it not been turned toward Him from whom it had whatever degree of life it then had, and by His enlightening become a beautiful life, and the heaven of that heaven which was afterward set between water and water. And under the name of God I now took the Father, who made these things, and under the name of Beginning, the Son, in whom He made them; and believing, as I did, that my God is the Trinity, I searched further in His holy words, and see, Your Spirit moved upon the waters. Here is the Trinity, my God: Father, and Son, and Holy Spirit, Creator of all creation.

@@ 6
But what was the reason, O Light that speaks the truth? To You I lift up my heart; do not let it teach me empty things; scatter its darkness, and tell me, I beg You, by our mother charity, tell me, I beg You, the reason why, after naming heaven, and the earth invisible and without form, and darkness upon the deep, Your Scripture only then at last names Your Spirit. Was it because it was fitting that He should be made known as being "borne above," and this could not be said unless that over which Your Spirit could be understood to be borne had been mentioned first? For He was not borne above the Father, nor above the Son, nor could He rightly be said to be borne above if He were borne above nothing. So first there had to be mention of that over which He might be borne, and then of Him, who was fittingly spoken of in no other way than as being borne above. But why was it not fitting that He should be made known in any other way than as being borne above?

@@ 7
From here, let whoever is able follow with his understanding Your Apostle, where he says, Because Your love is shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy Spirit who is given to us; and where, speaking of spiritual gifts, he teaches and shows us a more excellent way, the way of love; and where he bows his knee to You for us, that we may know the supereminent knowledge of the love of Christ. And that is why, from the beginning, He was borne supereminent above the waters. To whom shall I say this? How shall I speak of the weight of evil desires, pulling downward into the sheer abyss, and of how love lifts us up again through Your Spirit, who was borne above the waters? To whom shall I say it? How shall I say it? For it is not in places that we sink and rise again. What could be more alike, and yet what less alike? They are affections, they are loves: the uncleanness of our spirit flowing away downward with the love of cares, and the holiness of Yours lifting us upward by the love of a rest free from anxiety, so that we may lift up our hearts to You, where Your Spirit is borne above the waters, and come to that supereminent rest, when our soul has passed through the waters that are without substance.

@@ 8
Angels fell away, the soul of man fell away, and so they revealed the abyss in its dark depth that lay ready for the whole spiritual creation, had You not said from the beginning, Let there be light, and light had come to be, and every obedient intelligence of Your heavenly City had clung to You and rested in Your Spirit, who is borne unchangeably over everything changeable. Otherwise even the heaven of heavens would have been in itself a dark deep; but now it is light in the Lord. For even in the wretched restlessness of the spirits who fell away and laid bare their own darkness once they were stripped of the clothing of Your light, You show clearly enough how noble You made the rational creature, for which nothing less than You can suffice to give it a happy rest, and so not even itself. For You, O our God, will lighten our darkness; from You rises our garment of light, and then our darkness shall be as the noonday. Give Yourself to me, O my God, give Yourself back to me. See, I love; and if it is too little, let me love more strongly. I cannot measure it so as to know how much love I still lack before my life can run into Your embrace, and not turn away until it is hidden in the hidden place of Your Presence. This alone I know: that it goes badly with me apart from You, not only outside me but within myself as well; and all abundance that is not my God is emptiness to me.
