@@ 15
Or who but You, our God, made for us that firmament of authority over us in Your Divine Scripture? As it is said, For heaven shall be folded up like a scroll; and now it is stretched over us like a skin. For Your Divine Scripture carries a loftier authority now that those mortals through whom You dispensed it to us have undergone that mortality. And You know, Lord, You know, how You clothed men with skins when through sin they became mortal. So You have stretched out the firmament of Your book like a skin, that is, Your harmonious words, which through the ministry of mortal men You have spread over us. For by their very death that solid firmament of authority, in Your words set forth by them, was stretched out on high over everything beneath it, though while they lived here it had not been stretched out so high. You had not yet spread out the heaven like a skin; You had not yet spread abroad on every side the renown of their deaths.

@@ 16
Let us look, O Lord, upon the heavens, the work of Your fingers; clear from our eyes the cloud You have spread beneath them. There is Your testimony, which gives wisdom to the little ones. Perfect, O my God, Your praise out of the mouths of babes and sucklings. For we know no other books that so destroy pride, that so destroy the enemy and the defender, who resists Your reconciliation by defending his own sins. I do not know, Lord, I do not know any other words so pure, which so persuade me to confess, and make my neck bend to Your yoke, and invite me to serve You for nothing in return. Let me understand them, good Father; grant me this, since I am placed beneath them, because it is for those placed beneath them that You have established them.

@@ 17
There are other waters above this firmament, immortal, I believe, and set apart from earthly corruption. Let them praise Your Name, let them praise You, those supercelestial peoples, Your angels, who have no need to gaze up at this firmament or to come to know Your Word by reading. For they always behold Your face, and there, without any syllables of time, they read what Your eternal will wills. They read, they choose, they love. They are always reading, and what they read never passes away; for by choosing and by loving they read the very unchangeableness of Your counsel. Their book is never closed, and their scroll is never folded up, because You Yourself are this to them, and are so eternally; for You have ordained them above this firmament, which You have made firm over the weakness of the lower peoples, so that they might gaze up at it and come to know Your mercy, which proclaims in time You who made times. For Your mercy, O Lord, is in the heavens, and Your truth reaches to the clouds. The clouds pass away, but the heaven remains. The preachers of Your word pass out of this life into another; but Your Scripture is spread out over the peoples, even to the end of the world. Yet heaven and earth too shall pass away, but Your words shall not pass away. For the scroll shall be rolled up, and the grass over which it was spread shall pass away with all its beauty; but Your Word remains forever. Now it appears to us in the dark image of the clouds and through the mirror of the heavens, not as it is; because even we, though we are the well-beloved of Your Son, it has not yet appeared what we shall be. He looked through the lattice of our flesh, and spoke tenderly to us, and set us on fire, and we run after His fragrance. But when He appears, then we shall be like Him, for we shall see Him as He is. As He is, Lord: that will be our seeing, though it is not yet ours.

@@ 18
For only You know fully what You are: You who are unchangeably, and know unchangeably, and will unchangeably. Your Essence knows and wills unchangeably; Your Knowledge is and wills unchangeably; and Your Will is and knows unchangeably. Nor does it seem right in Your eyes that the Unchangeable Light should be known by what is enlightened and changeable in the way It knows Itself. That is why my soul is like a land where there is no water: for just as it cannot enlighten itself from itself, so it cannot satisfy itself from itself. For just so is the fountain of life with You, as in Your light we shall see light.

@@ 19
Who gathered the embittered together into one society? For they all have one and the same end, a temporal and earthly happiness, for the sake of which they do everything, though they toss up and down amid a countless variety of cares. Who, Lord, but You, who said, Let the waters be gathered together into one place, and let the dry land appear, the land that thirsts for You? For the sea too is Yours, and You made it, and Your hands formed the dry land. For it is not the bitterness of men's wills but the gathering together of the waters that is called sea. For You also restrain the wicked desires of men's souls and fix their bounds, how far they may be allowed to go, so that their waves may break against one another; and so You make it a sea, by the order of Your dominion over all things.
