@@ 20
But the souls that thirst for You and appear before You, set apart from the society of the sea by a different end, You water from a hidden and sweet spring, so that the earth may bring forth its fruit; and at Your command, O Lord God, our soul buds forth works of mercy according to their kind, loving our neighbor by relieving his bodily needs, having seed in itself according to its likeness, when from a sense of our own weakness we feel compassion so as to help the needy, aiding them as we would want to be aided if we were in the same need. And this not only in easy things, like the herb yielding seed, but also in the protection of our help, with all our strength, like the tree yielding fruit: that is, by doing good in rescuing the one who suffers wrong from the hand of the powerful, and giving him the shelter of protection through the mighty strength of just judgment.

@@ 21
So, Lord, so, I beg You, let it spring up, as You make it do, as You give cheerfulness and ability: let truth spring out of the earth, and righteousness look down from heaven, and let there be lights in the firmament. Let us break our bread for the hungry, and bring the homeless poor into our house. Let us clothe the naked, and not despise those of our own flesh. When these fruits have sprung from the earth, see that it is good; and let our light break forth in its season. And let us, rising from this lower fruitfulness of action to the delight of contemplation, and holding fast the Word of Life above, appear like lights in the world, clinging to the firmament of Your Scripture. For there You teach us to divide between things intellectual and things of sense, as between day and night, or between souls given to things intellectual and souls given to things of sense. So now it is not You alone, in the secret of Your judgment, who divide between the light and the darkness, as before the firmament was made; but Your spiritual children too, set and ranked in that same firmament, now that Your grace has been laid open throughout the world, may give light upon the earth, and divide between day and night, and be for signs of the times: signs that old things have passed away, and, behold, all things have become new; that our salvation is nearer than when we believed; that the night is far spent and the day is at hand; and that You will crown Your year with blessing, sending the laborers of Your goodness into Your harvest, which others labored to sow, and sending them also into another field, whose harvest will come at the end. So You grant the prayers of the one who asks, and bless the years of the just; but You are the same, and in Your years, which do not fail, You prepare a granary for our passing years. For by an eternal counsel You bestow heavenly blessings on the earth in their proper seasons. For to one is given by the Spirit the word of wisdom, as it were the greater light, for the sake of those who delight in the light of clear truth, as for the rule of the day. To another is given the word of knowledge by the same Spirit, as it were the lesser light; to another faith; to another the gift of healing; to another the working of miracles; to another prophecy; to another the discerning of spirits; to another different kinds of tongues. And all these are like stars. For all these are the work of one and the same Spirit, dividing to each person his own as He wills, and making stars appear in plain view, for the common good. But the word of knowledge, in which all the Sacraments are contained, which vary with their seasons like the moon, and those other notices of gifts which are listed after it, like stars, fall short of that brightness of wisdom in which the day just mentioned rejoices, and so they belong only to the rule of the night. For they are necessary to those whom Your most prudent servant could not speak to as spiritual but only as carnal, he who speaks wisdom among those who are perfect. But the natural man, like a babe in Christ who is fed on milk, until he is strong enough for solid food and his eye is made able to look at the Sun, should not be left in a night abandoned by all light, but should be content with the light of the moon and the stars. So You speak with us, our all-wise God, in Your Book, Your firmament, so that we may discern all things in wonderful contemplation, though still in signs and in seasons, and in days and in years.
