@@ 22
But first, wash yourselves, be clean; put away evil from your souls and from before My eyes, so that the dry land may appear. Learn to do good, judge the fatherless, plead for the widow, so that the earth may bring forth the green herb for food, and the tree bearing fruit; and come, let us reason together, says the Lord, so that there may be lights in the firmament of heaven, and they may shine upon the earth. That rich man asked the good Master what he should do to gain eternal life. Let the good Master tell him (the rich man thought Him no more than a man, but He is good because He is God), let Him tell him that if he wants to enter into life he must keep the commandments: let him put away from himself the bitterness of malice and wickedness; let him not kill, not commit adultery, not steal, not bear false witness; so that the dry land may appear and bring forth honor for father and mother and love for our neighbor. All these, he says, I have kept. Then where do so many thorns come from, if the earth is fruitful? Go, root out the spreading thickets of covetousness; sell what you have, and be filled with fruit by giving to the poor, and you will have treasure in heaven; and follow the Lord if you want to be perfect, joined with those among whom He speaks wisdom, He who knows what to assign to the day and what to the night, so that you too may know it, and so that for you too there may be lights in the firmament of heaven. That will not happen unless your heart is there; and that in turn will not happen unless your treasure is there, as you have heard from the good Master. But that barren earth was grieved, and the thorns choked the word.

@@ 23
But you, chosen generation, you weak things of the world, who have left everything to follow the Lord: go after Him, and put the mighty to shame; go after Him, you beautiful feet, and shine in the firmament, so that the heavens may declare His glory, dividing between the light of the perfect, though they are not yet as the angels, and the darkness of the little ones, though they are not despaired of. Shine over all the earth; and let the day, bright with the sun, utter to day the speech of wisdom, and let the night, shining with the moon, show to night the word of knowledge. The moon and the stars shine for the night, yet the night does not darken them, since they give it light in its measure. For see, it is as if God were saying, Let there be lights in the firmament of heaven: suddenly there came a sound from heaven, as of a rushing mighty wind, and there appeared divided tongues as of fire, and it sat upon each of them. And lights were made in the firmament of heaven, holding the word of life. Run everywhere, you holy fires, you beautiful fires; for you are the light of the world, and you are not put under a bushel. He to whom you cling is exalted, and He has exalted you. Run everywhere, and make yourselves known to all nations.

@@ 24
May the sea, too, conceive your works and give birth to them, and may the waters bring forth the moving creature that has life. For in setting apart what is precious from what is worthless you have become God's mouth, and through you He says, Let the waters bring forth: not the living creature that the earth produces, but the moving creature that has life, and the birds that fly above the earth. For Your Sacraments, O God, have made their way through the work of Your holy ones, moving in the midst of the world's waves of temptation, to steep the Gentiles in Your Name, in Your Baptism. And meanwhile great and wonderful works were done, like great whales; and the voices of Your messengers went flying above the earth, along the open firmament of Your Book, which stood over them as the authority beneath which they were to fly, wherever they might go. For there is no speech nor language where their voice is not heard, since their sound has gone out through all the earth, and their words to the end of the world, because You, Lord, multiplied these things by Your blessing.

@@ 25
Am I speaking falsely, or am I mixing and confusing things, and failing to distinguish between the clear knowledge of these things in the firmament of heaven and the material works in the billowing sea and under the firmament of heaven? For there are things whose knowledge is solid and defined, without any increase by generation, like lights of wisdom and knowledge; yet of those very things the material operations are many and various, and as one thing grows out of another they are multiplied by Your blessing, O God, who have refreshed the jaded senses of mortals, so that one thing grasped in the understanding of our mind may be set forth and expressed in many ways through the motions of the body. These Sacraments the waters have brought forth, but in Your word. The needs of peoples estranged from the eternity of Your truth have brought them forth, but in Your Gospel; because the waters themselves cast them forth, and it was their diseased bitterness that caused these things to be sent forth in Your Word.
