@@ 26
All the things You have made are beautiful; but look, You who made them all are more beautiful beyond all telling. If Adam had not fallen away from You, the salt brine of the sea would never have poured out of him — that is, the human race, so deeply curious, so stormily swelling, so restlessly tossing to and fro. And then there would have been no need for Your stewards to work mysterious deeds and utter mysterious words in many waters, in a bodily and sensible way. For this is what those moving and flying creatures now seem to me to mean: that people instructed and initiated through bodily Sacraments would make no further progress unless their soul came alive with a spiritual life, and unless, after the word of admission, it looked ahead toward perfection.

@@ 27
And so, in Your Word, it is not the depth of the sea but the earth, separated from the bitterness of the waters, that brings forth — not the moving creature that has life, but the living soul. For now it no longer needs baptism, as the heathen need it, and as it needed it itself when it was covered with the waters (for there is no other way into the kingdom of heaven, since You have appointed that this should be the way in). Nor does it look for wondrous miracles to produce belief; for it is not the kind that will not believe unless it sees signs and wonders, now that the faithful earth has been separated from the waters that were bitter with unbelief, and tongues are a sign not for those who believe but for those who do not believe. So that earth which You founded upon the waters has no need of the flying kind either, which the waters brought forth at Your word. Send Your word into it through Your messengers: for we tell of their works, yet it is You who work in them, so that they may work out a living soul in it. The earth brings it forth, because the earth is the cause of their doing this in the soul, just as the sea was the cause of their working upon the moving creatures that have life and the birds that fly under the firmament of heaven. The earth has no need of these now, although it feeds on that Fish which was lifted out of the deep, at that table which You have prepared in the presence of those who believe. For this is why He was lifted out of the deep: to feed the dry land. And the birds, though bred in the sea, still multiply upon the earth. For human unbelief was the cause of the first preaching of the Evangelists; yet the faithful too are exhorted and blessed by them in many ways, day after day. But the living soul takes its beginning from the earth: for it profits only those already among the Faithful to hold themselves back from love of this world, so that their soul may live to You — the soul that was dead while it lived in pleasures, in pleasures that bring death, Lord; for You, Lord, are the life-giving delight of the pure heart.

@@ 28
So now let Your ministers work upon the earth — not as they did upon the waters of unbelief, by preaching and speaking through miracles and Sacraments and mystic words, where ignorance, the mother of wonder, might be held fixed on them out of awe toward those hidden signs. For that is the way into the Faith for the sons of Adam who have forgotten You, while they hide themselves from Your face and become a dark deep. But let Your ministers work now as on the dry land, separated from the whirlpools of the great deep; and let them be a pattern to the Faithful by living before them and stirring them to imitation. For in this way people hear not only in order to hear, but in order to do as well. Seek the Lord, and your soul shall live, so that the earth may bring forth the living soul. Do not be conformed to the world. Hold yourselves back from it: the soul lives by shunning what it dies by craving. Hold yourselves back from the savage wildness of pride, the sluggish sensuality of luxury, and the false name of knowledge, so that the wild beasts may be tamed, the cattle broken to the yoke, and the serpents made harmless. For in allegory these are the motions of our mind: that is, the haughtiness of pride, the delight of lust and the poison of curiosity are the motions of a dead soul. For the soul does not die in such a way as to lose all motion; it dies by forsaking the fountain of life, and so it is taken up by this passing world and conformed to it.

@@ 29
But Your word, O God, is the fountain of eternal life, and it does not pass away. That is why this departure of the soul is held in check by Your word, when it is said to us, Do not be conformed to this world, so that the earth, in the fountain of life, may bring forth a living soul: that is, a soul made continent in Your Word by Your Evangelists, through following those who follow Your Christ. For this is after its kind, because a man tends to imitate his friend. Be as I am (he says), for I also am as you are. So in this living soul there will be good beasts, in gentleness of action (for You have commanded, Go on with your business in meekness, and you will be loved by all men); and good cattle, which neither have too much if they eat nor go in want if they do not eat; and good serpents, not dangerous so as to do harm, but wise so as to take care, and searching into this temporal nature only as far as is enough for eternity to be clearly seen, being understood through the things that are made. For these creatures obey reason when, held back from their deadly advance upon us, they live, and are good.

@@ 30
For look, O Lord our God, our Creator: when our affections have been held back from love of the world, by which we were dying through living badly, and have begun to be a living soul through living well; and when Your word, which You spoke through Your apostle, has been fulfilled in us, Do not be conformed to this world; then there follows also what You added at once, saying, But be transformed by the renewing of your mind. This is no longer after your kind, as though you were following the neighbour who went ahead of you, or living by the example of some better man (for You did not say, "Let man be made after his kind," but, Let us make man after our own image and likeness), so that we may prove what Your will is. For this was the aim of that steward of Yours, who fathered children through the Gospel: he did not want to keep them babies forever, to be fed with milk and nursed as by a nurse, and so he says, Be transformed by the renewing of your mind, that you may prove what is that good and acceptable and perfect will of God. That is why You do not say, "Let man be made," but Let us make man. Nor did You say, "according to his kind," but, after our image and likeness. For a man renewed in his mind, who sees and understands Your truth, does not need another man to direct him so that he follows his own kind; with You directing him, he himself proves what is that good, that acceptable and perfect will of Yours. Indeed, You teach him, now that he is capable of it, to see the Trinity of the Unity and the Unity of the Trinity. That is why, after the plural Let us make man, the singular follows, And God made man; and after the plural After our likeness, the singular follows, After the image of God. So man is renewed in the knowledge of God, after the image of Him who created him; and once he has been made spiritual, he judges all things (all things, that is, which are to be judged), yet he himself is judged by no one.

@@ 31
But his judging all things corresponds to his having dominion over the fish of the sea, and over the birds of the air, and over all cattle and wild beasts, and over all the earth, and over every creeping thing that creeps upon the earth. For he does this by the understanding of his mind, through which he perceives the things of the Spirit of God; whereas otherwise man, set in honour, had no understanding, and is compared to the brute beasts, and has become like them. In Your Church, therefore, O our God, according to Your grace which You have bestowed on it (for we are Your workmanship, created for good works), not only those who are spiritually set over others, but also those who are spiritually subject to those set over them — for in this way You made man male and female in Your spiritual grace, where, according to the sex of the body, there is neither male nor female, because there is neither Jew nor Greek, neither slave nor free — spiritual people, then, whether those who are set over others or those who obey, judge spiritually. They do not judge of that spiritual knowledge which shines in the firmament (for it is not right to pass judgment on so supreme an authority); nor may they judge of Your Book itself, even if something in it does not shine clearly; for we submit our understanding to it, and hold as certain that even what is closed to our sight is rightly and truly spoken. For in this way man, though now spiritual and renewed in the knowledge of God after the image of Him who created him, ought to be a doer of the law, not its judge. Nor does he judge of that distinction between spiritual and carnal people, who are known to Your eyes, O our God, and have not yet shown themselves to us by their works, so that by their fruits we might know them; but You, Lord, already know them, and have divided and called them in secret, before ever the firmament was made. Nor does the spiritual man judge the restless peoples of this world; for what business has he judging those who are outside, when he does not know which of them will one day come into the sweetness of Your grace, and which will remain in the everlasting bitterness of ungodliness?

