@@ 32
Man, then, whom You have made after Your own image, did not receive dominion over the lights of heaven, nor over that hidden heaven itself, nor over the day and the night, which You called before the foundation of the heaven, nor over the gathering together of the waters, which is the sea; but he received dominion over the fish of the sea, and the birds of the air, and over all cattle, and over all the earth, and over all creeping things that creep upon the earth. For he judges and approves what he finds right, and rejects what he finds wrong, whether in the celebration of those Sacraments by which those whom Your mercy searches out in many waters are initiated; or in the one in which that Fish is set forth which, lifted out of the deep, the devout earth feeds upon; or in the expressions and signs of words, subject to the authority of Your Book — signs that come out of the mouth and sound forth, flying as it were under the firmament, in interpreting, expounding, discoursing, disputing, blessing, or praying to You, so that the people may answer, Amen. The reason all these words have to be pronounced aloud is the deep of this world and the blindness of the flesh, which cannot see thoughts, so that it is necessary to speak loudly into the ears. So, although the flying birds multiply upon the earth, they still take their origin from the waters. The spiritual man also judges, approving what is right and rejecting what he finds wrong, in the works and lives of the faithful: their almsgiving, which is like the earth bearing fruit; and the living soul, which lives by the taming of its affections, in chastity, in fasting, in holy meditations on those things which are perceived by the senses of the body. For it is these things that he is now said to judge, the things over which he also has the power of correction.

@@ 33
But what is this, and what sort of mystery is it? Look, You bless mankind, O Lord, so that they may increase and multiply and fill the earth; are You not giving us a hint by this, so that we may understand something? Why did You not bless in the same way the light, which You called day, or the firmament of heaven, or the lights, or the stars, or the earth, or the sea? I might say, O God, You who created us after Your Image, I might say that it had been Your good pleasure to bestow this blessing on man alone, if You had not blessed the fishes and the whales in the same way, that they should increase and multiply and fill the waters of the sea, and that the birds should multiply upon the earth. I might likewise say that this blessing belonged properly to those creatures that reproduce from their own kind, if I had found it given to the fruit trees and plants and the beasts of the earth. But as it is, Increase and multiply is not said to the herbs or the trees, or to the beasts or the serpents, even though all these, as well as fishes, birds and men, increase by generation and preserve their kind.

@@ 34
What then shall I say, O Truth, my Light? "That it was said idly, and with no meaning?" Not at all, O Father of piety; far be it from a minister of Your word to say that. And if I do not understand what You mean by that phrase, let my betters — that is, those with more understanding than I have — make better use of it, according as You, my God, have given each one to understand. But let my confession also be pleasing in Your sight, in which I confess to You that I believe, O Lord, that You did not speak like this in vain; nor will I keep silent about what this reading suggests to me. For it is true, and I do not see what should prevent me from understanding the figurative sayings of Your Bible in this way. For I know that a thing understood in one way by the mind may be signified in many ways by bodily expressions, and that a thing signified in one way by bodily expression may be understood in many ways by the mind. Look at the single love of God and of our neighbor: by how many sacraments, in how countless languages, and in each language in how countless ways of speaking, it is expressed in bodily form! This is how the offspring of the waters increase and multiply. Notice again, whoever you are who read this: look, what Scripture presents and the voice pronounces in only one way, In the Beginning God created heaven and earth — is it not understood in many ways, not through any deceit of error, but through various kinds of true understanding? This is how the offspring of men increase and multiply.

@@ 35
If, then, we think about the natures of the things themselves, not allegorically but literally, the phrase increase and multiply applies to all things that come from seed. But if we treat these words as spoken figuratively (which I rather think is what Scripture intended, since it surely does not assign this blessing only to the offspring of water creatures and of man for no reason), then we do find "multitude" among creatures spiritual and bodily, as in heaven and earth; among the righteous and the unrighteous, as in light and darkness; among the holy authors through whom the Law was ministered to us, as in the firmament set firm between the waters and the waters; in the society of peoples still in the bitterness of unbelief, as in the sea; in the zeal of holy souls, as in the dry land; in works of mercy belonging to this present life, as in the herbs bearing seed and the trees bearing fruit; in spiritual gifts displayed for edification, as in the lights of heaven; and in affections formed to temperance, as in the living soul. In all these we meet with multitudes, abundance and increase. But something that increases and multiplies in such a way that one thing is expressed in many ways, and one expression is understood in many ways, we find only in signs expressed in bodily form and in things conceived by the mind. By signs uttered in bodily form we understand the generations of the waters, which are made necessary by the depth of the flesh; by things conceived by the mind, human generations, because of the fruitfulness of reason. And this is why we believe that You, Lord, said to both these kinds, Increase and multiply. For in this blessing I take it that You have granted us the faculty and power both to express in many ways what we understand in only one, and to understand in many ways what we read as set down obscurely in only one. This is how the waters of the sea are filled, which are not moved except by various meanings; and this is how the earth too is filled with human offspring — the earth whose dryness shows itself in its longing, and over which reason rules.

@@ 36
I would also like to say, O Lord my God, what the next part of Your Scripture reminds me of; indeed, I will say it, and I will not be afraid. For I will say what is true, as You inspire me with what You wanted me to draw from those words. For I do not believe that I speak truth by any inspiration other than Yours, since You are the Truth, and every man a liar. So he who speaks a lie speaks of his own; and therefore, so that I may speak truth, I will speak of what is Yours. Look, You have given us for food every herb bearing seed which is upon all the earth, and every tree in which is the fruit of a tree yielding seed. And not to us alone, but also to all the birds of the air, and to the beasts of the earth, and to all creeping things; but to the fishes and the great whales You have not given them. Now we said that these fruits of the earth signify, and figure in allegory, the works of mercy which are provided out of the fruitful earth for the needs of this life. Such an earth was the devout Onesiphorus, to whose house You gave mercy, because he often refreshed Your Paul and was not ashamed of his chain. The brethren did this too, and bore such fruit, when they supplied from Macedonia what he lacked. But how he grieves over certain trees that did not give him the fruit owed to him, when he says, At my first defense no one stood by me, but all forsook me: I pray God that it may not be laid to their charge. For these fruits are owed to those who minister spiritual doctrine to us out of their understanding of the divine mysteries; and they are owed to them as men; and owed to them also as the living soul, since they offer themselves as an example in all continence; and owed to them also as flying creatures, because of their blessings which are multiplied upon the earth, since their sound has gone out into all lands.

