@@ 37
But the ones who are fed by these fruits are those who delight in them; and those whose god is their belly do not delight in them. For even in those who give them, the fruit is not the things they give, but the spirit in which they give them. So I see clearly why he rejoiced, the man who served God and not his own belly; I see it, and I rejoice with him. For he had received from the Philippians what they had sent him by Epaphroditus; and yet I see why he rejoiced. For what he rejoiced at is what he fed on; for, speaking in truth, he says, I rejoiced greatly in the Lord, that now at last your care for me has flourished again; you were indeed caring, but it had become wearisome to you. These Philippians, then, had dried up through long weariness and withered, as it were, in bearing this fruit of a good work; and he rejoices for them, because they flourished again, not for himself, because they relieved his wants. That is why he goes on, Not that I speak in respect of want, for I have learned to be content in whatever state I am. I know both how to be brought low and how to abound; everywhere and in all things I have been taught both to be full and to be hungry, both to abound and to suffer need. I can do all things through Him who strengthens me.

@@ 38
What then do you rejoice at, great Paul? What do you rejoice at? What do you feed on, O man renewed in the knowledge of God after the image of Him who created you, you living soul of such great continence, you tongue like the flying birds, speaking mysteries? (For it is to such creatures that this food is owed.) What is it that feeds you? Joy. Let us hear what follows: Nevertheless, you have done well in sharing my affliction. This is what he rejoices at, this is what he feeds on: that they had done well, not that his hardship had been eased — he who says to You, You have enlarged me when I was in distress; for he knew how both to abound and to suffer want in You, who strengthen him. For you Philippians also know (he says) that in the beginning of the Gospel, when I left Macedonia, no Church shared with me in the matter of giving and receiving but you only. For even in Thessalonica you sent once and again for my need. He now rejoices that they have returned to these good works, and is glad that they have flourished again, as when a fruitful field grows green once more.

@@ 39
Was it for his own needs, since he said, You sent for my need? Is that why he rejoices? Certainly not. But how do we know this? Because he himself says immediately afterward, Not because I desire a gift, but I desire fruit. I have learned from You, my God, to distinguish between a gift and fruit. A gift is the thing itself that is given by the one who shares these necessities with us, such as money, food, drink, clothing, shelter, help. But the fruit is the good and right will of the giver. For the Good Master did not say only, He who receives a prophet, but added, in the name of a prophet; nor did He say only, He who receives a righteous man, but added, in the name of a righteous man. So indeed the one will receive a prophet's reward, and the other a righteous man's reward. Nor does He say only, He who gives one of my little ones a cup of cold water to drink, but added, in the name of a disciple; and so He concludes, Truly I say to you, he shall not lose his reward. The gift is to receive a prophet, to receive a righteous man, to give a cup of cold water to a disciple; but the fruit is to do this in the name of a prophet, in the name of a righteous man, in the name of a disciple. Elijah was fed with fruit by the widow who knew that she was feeding a man of God, and fed him for that very reason; but by the raven he was fed with a gift. And it was not the inner Elijah who was fed in that way, but only the outer, who might also have perished for lack of that food.

@@ 40
So I will say what is true in Your sight, O Lord. When carnal people and unbelievers (for whose winning and initiation the initiatory Sacraments and the mighty works of miracles are necessary, which we take to be signified by the name of fishes and whales) undertake to refresh Your servants bodily, or to help them in some other way with something useful for this present life, then, since they do not know why this ought to be done or what end it serves, neither do they feed these servants, nor are the servants fed by them; for the givers do not act from a holy and right intention, and the others do not rejoice at their gifts, in which they do not yet see any fruit. For the mind is fed on whatever makes it glad. And that is why the fishes and whales do not feed on such food as the earth brings forth only after it has been separated and divided from the bitterness of the sea's waves.

