@@ 41
And You, O God, saw everything that You had made, and, behold, it was very good. Yes, we too see the same, and look, all things are very good. In each separate kind of Your works, when You had said "let them be," and they were, You saw of each that it was good. Seven times I have counted it written that You saw that what You made was good; and this is the eighth, that You saw everything that You had made, and, behold, it was not only good but also very good, as being now all together. For taken one by one they were only good; but all together they were both good and very good. All beautiful bodies declare the same thing; for a body made up of members that are all beautiful is far more beautiful than those same members are on their own, by whose well-ordered blending the whole is completed, even though the members are also beautiful one by one.

@@ 42
And I looked closely to find whether You saw seven or eight times that Your works were good, when they pleased You; but in Your seeing I found no times by which I might understand that You saw what You made so many times. And I said, "Lord, is not this Scripture of Yours true, since You are true and, being Truth, have set it forth? Why then do You tell me 'that in Your seeing there are no times,' while this Scripture of Yours tells me that what You made each day, You saw that it was good; and when I counted them, I found how many times?" To this You answer me, for You are my God, and with a strong voice You speak to Your servant in his inner ear, breaking through my deafness and crying out, "O man, what My Scripture says, I say; and yet it speaks in time, whereas time has no bearing on My Word, because My Word exists in equal eternity with Myself. So the things you see through My Spirit, I see, just as what you speak through My Spirit, I speak. And so, while you see those things in time, I do not see them in time; just as, while you speak in time, I do not speak them in time."

@@ 43
And I heard, O Lord my God, and drank up a drop of sweetness from Your truth, and I understood that there are certain people who dislike Your works, and who say that You made many of them under compulsion of necessity, such as the fabric of the heavens and the harmony of the stars; and that You did not make them from what was Yours, but that they had already been created elsewhere and from other sources, for You to bring together and fit and join into one, when You built up the walls of the universe out of Your conquered enemies, so that, bound down by that structure, they could not rebel against You again. Other things, they say, You neither made nor even put together, such as all flesh and all the tiniest creatures, and whatever holds to the earth by its roots; but a mind hostile to You, and another nature not created by You and contrary to You, begot and shaped these things in the lower regions of the world. Those who say this are out of their minds, because they do not see Your works through Your Spirit, nor recognize You in them.

@@ 44
But those who see these things through Your Spirit — it is You who see in them. So when they see that these things are good, You see that they are good; and whatever things please for Your sake, it is You who please in them; and the things that please us through Your Spirit please You in us. For what man knows the things of a man, except the spirit of man which is in him? Even so no one knows the things of God except the Spirit of God. Now we (he says) have received not the spirit of this world, but the Spirit which is from God, that we might know the things that are freely given to us by God. And I am prompted to say, "Surely no one knows the things of God except the Spirit of God: how then do we too know the things that are given us by God?" The answer comes to me: "Because the things we know by His Spirit, even these no one knows except the Spirit of God. For just as it was rightly said to those who were to speak by the Spirit of God, it is not you who speak, so it is rightly said to those who know through the Spirit of God, 'It is not you who know.' And no less rightly, then, is it said to those who see through the Spirit of God, 'It is not you who see'; so whatever they see through the Spirit of God to be good, it is not they but God who sees that it is good." It is one thing, then, for someone to think that what is good is evil, as those just mentioned do; another for a person to see that what is good is good (as Your creatures please many people because they are good, and yet You do not please them in those creatures, since they would rather enjoy the creatures than You); and another again for God, when a person sees that something is good, to see in him that it is good — so, that is, that He may be loved in what He made, He who cannot be loved except through the Holy Spirit whom He has given. For the love of God is shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy Spirit, who is given to us: through whom we see that whatever exists in any degree is good. For it comes from Him who does not exist merely in some degree, but what He Is, Is.

