@@ 45
Thanks be to You, O Lord. We see heaven and earth, whether the bodily part, higher and lower, or the spiritual and the bodily creation; and in the adorning of these parts, of which the whole mass of the world, or rather the whole of creation, consists, we see light made and divided from the darkness. We see the firmament of heaven, whether that primary body of the world between the spiritual upper waters and the lower bodily waters, or (since this too is called heaven) this space of air through which the birds of heaven wander, between those waters which are carried above it as vapour and on clear nights fall as dew, and those heavier waters which flow along the earth. We see the face of the waters gathered together in the fields of the sea; and the dry land, both bare and then formed so as to be visible and ordered, and the matter of herbs and trees as well. We see the lights shining from above, the sun to suffice for the day, the moon and the stars to comfort the night, and all these marking and signifying times. We see on every side a moist element, made fruitful with fishes, beasts and birds, because the density of the air, which bears up the flight of birds, thickens through the exhalation of the waters. We see the face of the earth adorned with earthly creatures, and man, created after Your image and likeness, set over all irrational creatures by that very image and likeness of Yours, that is, by the power of reason and understanding. And just as in his soul there is one power which rules by directing and another made subject so that it may obey, so for the man a woman was made, in bodily form as well, who in her mind, with its rational understanding, would have an equal nature, but in the sex of her body would be subject to the male sex in the same way as the drive to act is made subject so as to conceive, from the reason of the mind, the skill of acting rightly. These things we see, and each of them is good, and all together they are very good.

@@ 46
Your works praise You, so that we may love You; and we love You, so that Your works may praise You. They have from time a beginning and an end, a rising and a setting, growth and decay, form and privation. So they have their succession of morning and evening, partly hidden, partly plain; for they were made from nothing by You, not from You; not from any matter that was not Yours or that existed beforehand, but from concreated matter, that is, matter created by You at the same time, because You gave form to its formlessness without any interval of time. For since the matter of heaven and earth is one thing and their form another, You made the matter from absolutely nothing, but the form of the world out of the formless matter; yet You made both together, so that the form followed the matter with no pause of delay between them.

@@ 47
We have also looked into what You wished to be foreshadowed, whether by the creation of things in such an order or by the account of them in such an order. And we have seen that things one by one are good, and together very good, in Your Word, in Your Only-Begotten — both heaven and earth, the Head and the body of the Church — in Your predestination before all times, without morning and evening. But when You began to carry out in time what You had predestined, so that You might reveal hidden things and set our disorder in order (for our sins hung over us, and we had sunk into the dark deep, and Your good Spirit was borne over us to help us in due season), You justified the ungodly and divided them from the wicked; and You made the firmament of the authority of Your Book between those placed above, who were to be teachable toward You, and those below, who were to be subject to them. And You gathered the society of unbelievers together into one conspiracy, so that the zeal of the faithful might appear, and they might bring forth works of mercy, even distributing their earthly riches to the poor in order to gain heavenly ones. After this You kindled certain lights in the firmament, Your Holy ones, who have the word of life and shine with an eminent authority raised on high through spiritual gifts. After that again, to initiate the unbelieving Gentiles, You produced out of bodily matter the Sacraments and visible miracles and forms of words according to the firmament of Your Book, by which the faithful too should be blessed and multiplied. Next You formed the living soul of the faithful through affections set in order by the vigour of continence; and after that You renewed after Your image and likeness the mind that is subject to You alone and needs to imitate no human authority; and You made its rational action subject to the excellence of the understanding, as the woman to the man. And You willed that, for all the Offices of Your Ministry needed for perfecting the faithful in this life, good things for their temporal uses should be given by those same faithful, things that will bear fruit for themselves in time to come. All these we see, and they are very good, because You see them in us, You who have given us Your Spirit, by which we might see them and in them love You.

@@ 48
O Lord God, give us peace (for You have given us all things): the peace of rest, the peace of the Sabbath, which has no evening. For all this most beautiful array of things that are very good will pass away once their courses are complete; for in them there was morning and evening.

@@ 49
But the seventh day has no evening and no setting, because You have sanctified it to last for ever; so that the voice of Your Book may announce to us beforehand, through what You did when You rested on the seventh day after Your works which were very good — although You made them while remaining at rest — that we too, after our works (which are very good because You have given them to us), shall rest in You in the Sabbath of eternal life.

@@ 50
For then You will rest in us, just as now You work in us; and so that rest will be Yours through us, just as these works are Yours through us. But You, Lord, are always working and always at rest. You do not see in time, nor are You moved in time, nor do You rest in time; and yet You make the things that are seen in time, and the times themselves, and the rest which results from time.

@@ 51
So we see these things that You made because they are; but they are because You see them. And we see outwardly that they are, and inwardly that they are good; but You saw them made there where You saw them yet to be made. And at a later time we were moved to do good, after our heart had conceived from Your Spirit; but in the former time we were moved to do evil, forsaking You. But You, the One, the Good God, have never ceased to do good. And we also have some good works, by Your gift, but they are not eternal; after them we hope to rest in Your great hallowing. But You, being the Good that needs no good, are always at rest, because Your rest is You Yourself. And what man can teach another man to understand this? Or what Angel can teach an Angel? Or what Angel a man? Let it be asked of You, sought in You, knocked for at Your door; so, so shall it be received, so shall it be found, so shall it be opened. Amen.

@@ 52
GRATIAS TIBI DOMINE

