@@ 0
My heart, Lord, struck by the words of Your Holy Scripture, is kept very busy in this poverty of my life. And that is why the poverty of human understanding is usually so rich in words: because searching has more to say than finding, asking takes longer than obtaining, and the hand that knocks has more work to do than the hand that receives. We hold the promise; who will make it void? If God is for us, who can be against us? Ask, and you shall receive; seek, and you shall find; knock, and it shall be opened to you. For everyone who asks receives; and whoever seeks finds; and to the one who knocks it shall be opened. These are Your own promises; and who need fear being deceived when it is the Truth that promises?

@@ 1
The lowliness of my tongue confesses to Your Highness that You made heaven and earth: this heaven that I see, and this earth that I walk on, from which comes this earth that I carry about with me. You made it. But where, Lord, is that heaven of heaven which we hear of in the words of the Psalm: The heaven of heaven is the Lord's, but the earth He has given to the children of men? Where is that heaven which we do not see, compared with which all this that we see is earth? For this whole bodily universe, which is not whole everywhere, has received its share of beauty even in these lower parts, the lowest of which is this earth of ours; yet compared with that heaven of heaven, even the heaven of our earth is only earth. Indeed, both of these great bodies may without absurdity be called earth when set beside that unknown heaven which belongs to the Lord and not to the sons of men.

@@ 2
And certainly this earth was invisible and unformed, and there was some depth of abyss, I do not know what, over which there was no light, because it had no shape. That is why You commanded it to be written that darkness was upon the face of the deep. What is that but the absence of light? For if there had been light, where would it have been except above everything, rising over it and lighting it up? So where there was not yet light, what did the presence of darkness mean except the absence of light? Darkness, then, was upon it, because light was not upon it, just as where there is no sound there is silence. And what does it mean to have silence there, except to have no sound there? Have You not, Lord, taught this soul which confesses to You? Have You not taught me, Lord, that before You formed and differentiated this formless matter, there was nothing: no color, no figure, no body, no spirit? And yet it was not absolutely nothing; there was a certain formlessness, without any beauty.

@@ 3
How, then, was it to be named, so that it might somehow be conveyed even to slower minds, except by some ordinary word? And among all the parts of the world, what can be found closer to complete formlessness than earth and the deep? For since they stand on the lowest level, they are less beautiful than the other, higher parts, which are all transparent and shining. Why, then, should I not take the formlessness of matter, which You had created without beauty in order to make this beautiful world from it, to be fittingly suggested to human beings by the name of earth invisible and unformed?

@@ 4
So when thought looks for what the senses might grasp in this, and says to itself, "It is not an intelligible form, like life or justice, because it is the matter of bodies; nor is it something perceived by the senses, because in what is invisible and unformed there was nothing to be seen or sensed" — while human thought says this to itself, it may try either to know it by not knowing it, or not to know it by knowing it.

