@@ 22
For they say, "Even though these things are true, Moses did not have those two in mind when, by revelation of the Spirit, he said, In the beginning God made heaven and earth. By the word heaven he did not mean that spiritual or intellectual creature which always beholds the face of God, nor by the word earth that formless matter." "What, then?" "That man of God," they say, "meant what we say; this is what he declared by those words." "And what is that?" "By the words heaven and earth," they say, "he wanted first to signify, in a general and summary way, this whole visible world, so that afterward, by listing the days one by one, he could set out in detail and, as it were, piece by piece, all the things that it pleased the Holy Spirit to express in this way. For the people he was speaking to were so unlearned and carnal that he judged them fit to be entrusted only with those works of God that are visible." They do agree, however, that the earth invisible and unformed and that dark deep (out of which, as is shown afterward, all these visible things that everyone knows were made and set in order during those "days") may, not unfittingly, be understood as this formless first matter.

@@ 23
What if someone else were to say that "this same formlessness and confusion of matter was first conveyed under the name of heaven and earth because out of it this visible world was created and completed, with all the natures that appear most plainly in it, a world often called by the name of heaven and earth"? What, again, if another were to say that "invisible and visible nature is indeed not unfittingly called heaven and earth, and so the whole creation, which God made in His Wisdom, that is, in the Beginning, was included under those two words? Yet since all things were made not from the substance of God but out of nothing (because they are not the same as what God is, and there is a changeable nature in them all, whether they abide, as the eternal house of God does, or are changed, as the soul and body of man are), therefore the common matter of all things visible and invisible (still unformed, though capable of form), out of which both heaven and earth were to be created (that is, the invisible and the visible creation once formed), was called by the same names that were given to the earth invisible and unformed and to the darkness upon the deep; but with this distinction, that by the earth invisible and unformed is understood corporeal matter before it was given the quality of any form, and by the darkness upon the deep, spiritual matter before its boundless, as it were fluid, restlessness was held in check, and before it received any light from Wisdom"?

@@ 24
It still remains for someone else to say, if he wishes, that "the natures already completed and formed, visible and invisible, are not what is meant by the name of heaven and earth when we read, In the beginning God made heaven and earth; but that the still unformed beginning of things, the material capable of receiving form and of being made, was called by these names, because in it were contained in confusion, not yet distinguished by their qualities and forms, all those things which, now arranged in their order, are called heaven and earth, the one the spiritual, the other the corporeal, creation."

