@@ 25
Having heard and weighed all these things, I will not quarrel over words, for that is useful for nothing except the ruin of those who listen. But the law is good for building up, if a man uses it lawfully, because its end is charity, out of a pure heart and a good conscience and sincere faith. And our Master knew well on which two commandments He hung the whole Law and the Prophets. So as I confess these things with zeal, O my God, light of my eyes in secret, what harm does it do me, since different things can be understood from these words and yet all of them are true — what harm, I say, does it do me if I think differently from the way someone else thinks the writer thought? All of us who read are indeed trying to track down and grasp what the author we are reading meant; and since we believe he speaks truly, we do not dare suppose that he said anything which we ourselves either know or think to be false. So while each person tries to understand in the Holy Scriptures what the writer understood there, what harm is there if someone understands what You, the light of all truthful minds, show him to be true, even if the author he is reading did not understand this, since he too understood something true, though not this truth?

@@ 26
For it is true, O Lord, that You made heaven and earth. It is also true that the Beginning is Your Wisdom, in which You create all things. It is true again that this visible world has heaven and earth as its great parts, which in brief sum up all the natures that have been made and created. It is true, too, that everything mutable suggests to our understanding a certain formlessness, by which it takes on a form, or is changed and turned. It is true that nothing is subject to times which cleaves so closely to the unchangeable Form that, though it is changeable, it is never changed. It is true that the formlessness which is almost nothing cannot undergo the alternations of times. It is true that the thing from which something is made can, by a certain way of speaking, be called by the name of the thing made from it; and so the formlessness from which heaven and earth were made could be called heaven and earth. It is true that of all things having form, none is nearer to formlessness than the earth and the deep. It is true that You, from whom are all things, made not only everything created and formed, but also whatever is capable of being created and formed. It is true that whatever is formed out of what had no form was formless before it was formed.

@@ 27
From all these truths — which are not doubted by those whose inner eye You have enabled to see such things, and who firmly believe that Your servant Moses spoke in the Spirit of truth — from all of these, then, one person takes one when he says, In the Beginning God made the heaven and the earth; that is, "in His Word, coeternal with Himself, God made the intelligible and the sensible creation, or the spiritual and the corporeal." Another takes another when he says, In the Beginning God made heaven and earth; that is, "in His Word, coeternal with Himself, God made the whole mass of this corporeal world, together with all the evident and familiar natures it contains." Another takes another when he says, In the Beginning God made heaven and earth; that is, "in His Word, coeternal with Himself, God made the formless matter of the spiritual and the corporeal creation." Another takes another when he says, In the Beginning God created heaven and earth; that is, "in His Word, coeternal with Himself, God created the formless matter of the corporeal creation, in which heaven and earth still lay mixed together; and these, now distinguished and formed, we see today in the mass of this world." Another takes another when he says, In the Beginning God made heaven and earth; that is, "at the very start of His creating and working, God made formless matter which held heaven and earth within it in a confused state; out of it, once they were formed, they now stand out and appear, with everything that is in them."

@@ 28
And as for understanding the words that follow, out of all those truths one person chooses one for himself when he says, But the earth was invisible and unformed, and darkness was upon the deep; that is, "that corporeal thing which God made was still a formless matter of corporeal things, without order and without light." Another does so when he says, The earth was invisible and unformed, and darkness was upon the deep; that is, "this whole, which is called heaven and earth, was still a formless and dark matter, from which the corporeal heaven and the corporeal earth were to be made, with everything in them that is known to our bodily senses." Another does so when he says, The earth was invisible and unformed, and darkness was upon the deep; that is, "this whole, which is called heaven and earth, was still a formless and dark matter, from which were to be made both that intelligible heaven which elsewhere is called the heaven of heaven, and the earth, meaning the whole corporeal nature, under which name this corporeal heaven is also included; in short, the matter from which every visible and invisible creature was to be created." Another does so when he says, The earth was invisible and unformed, and darkness was upon the deep: "Scripture did not call that formlessness by the name of heaven and earth; rather, he says, that formlessness already existed, and it was this that Scripture called the invisible and unformed earth and the darkness upon the deep; and of this it had said before that God made heaven and earth from it, meaning the spiritual and the corporeal creation." Another does so when he says, The earth was invisible and unformed, and darkness was upon the deep; that is, "there was already a certain formless matter, from which, as Scripture said before, God made heaven and earth, meaning the whole corporeal mass of the world, divided into two great parts, upper and lower, with all the common and familiar creatures that are in them."

@@ 29
For suppose someone tries to argue against these last two opinions in this way: "If you will not grant that this formlessness of matter appears to be called by the name of heaven and earth, then there was something God had not made, out of which He was to make heaven and earth. For Scripture has not told us that God made this matter, unless we take it to be signified by the name of heaven and earth, or of earth alone, when it says, In the Beginning God made heaven and earth. In that way, in the words that follow, and the earth was invisible and unformed (even though it pleased Him to call the formless matter by that name), we are to understand no other matter than the one God made, of which it is written above, God made heaven and earth." Those who hold either of these two last opinions will hear this and answer: "We do not deny that this formless matter was indeed created by God, that God from whom are all things, very good. For just as we say that what is created and formed is a greater good, so we admit that what is made capable of being created and formed is a lesser good, but still a good. We do say, however, that Scripture has not recorded that God made this formlessness, just as it has not recorded many other things, such as the Cherubim and the Seraphim, and those which the Apostle names distinctly: Thrones, Dominions, Principalities, Powers. Yet it is perfectly plain that God made all of these. Or if everything is included in the words He made heaven and earth, what shall we say about the waters over which the Spirit of God moved? For if they are included in the word earth, how can formless matter be meant by the name earth, when we see the waters so beautiful? Or if it is taken that way, why is it written that out of the same formlessness the firmament was made and called heaven, while it is not written that the waters were made? For the waters do not remain formless and invisible, since we see them flowing in so lovely a form. But if they received that beauty when God said, Let the waters under the firmament be gathered together, so that the gathering together was itself their forming, what will be said about the waters that are above the firmament? For if they had been formless they would not have deserved so honorable a place, and it is not written by what word they were formed. So if Genesis is silent about God's making something which, all the same, neither sound faith nor well-grounded understanding doubts that God made; and if, again, no sober teaching will dare to say that these waters are coeternal with God on the ground that we hear them mentioned in the book of Genesis but do not find when they were created — why should we not also understand, since truth teaches us so, that the formless matter which this Scripture calls the invisible and unformed earth and the dark deep was created by God out of nothing, and therefore is not coeternal with Him, even though this narrative has left out saying when it was created?"

