@@ 30
Having heard and examined these things, as far as my weak capacity allows (which I confess to You, O Lord, who know it), I see that two kinds of disagreement can arise when truthful messengers report something in words: one concerns the truth of the things, the other concerns the meaning of the one who reports them. For we ask in one way what is true about the making of the creation, and in another way what Moses, that excellent minister of Your faith, wanted his reader and hearer to understand by those words. As for the first kind, let all those depart from me who imagine that they know as true what is false; and as for the second, let all those depart from me too who imagine that Moses wrote things that are false. But let me be united in You, O Lord, with those who feed on Your truth in the breadth of love, and let me delight in You with them; and let us approach the words of Your book together, and seek in them Your meaning through the meaning of Your servant, by whose pen You have dispensed them.

@@ 31
But which of us, among the many truths that meet those who search in those words as they are understood in different ways, can so find that one meaning as to say, "This is what Moses thought," and "This is what he wanted understood in that narrative," with the same confidence with which he would say, "This is true," whether Moses thought this or something else? For look, O my God: I, Your servant, who in this book have vowed to You a sacrifice of confession, and who pray that by Your mercy I may pay my vows to You — can I, with the same confidence with which I affirm that in Your unchangeable Word You created all things visible and invisible, also affirm that Moses meant nothing other than this when he wrote, In the beginning God made heaven and earth? No. For I do not see in his mind that he was thinking of this when he wrote these things, as I see it to be certain in Your truth. He might have been thinking of the very start of God's creating when he said In the beginning; and by heaven and earth in this place he might have meant no nature already formed and perfected, whether spiritual or corporeal, but both of them only begun and still formless. For I see that whichever of the two had been said, it could have been said truly; but which of the two he had in mind in these words, I do not see in the same way. And yet, whether it was one of these, or some other sense I have not mentioned here, that so great a man saw in his mind when he uttered these words, I have no doubt that he saw it truly and expressed it fittingly.

@@ 32
So let no one trouble me any more by saying, Moses did not think what you say, but what I say. For if he asked me, "How do you know that Moses thought what you draw out of his words?" I ought to take it calmly, and I would answer perhaps as I answered above, or at somewhat greater length if he were stubborn. But when he says, "Moses did not mean what you say, but what I say," and yet does not deny that what each of us says may both be true, then, O my God, life of the poor, in whose bosom there is no contradiction, rain a softening dew into my heart, so that I may bear patiently with those who say this to me. They say it not because they are divinely inspired and have seen what they say in the heart of Your servant, but because they are proud. They do not know Moses' opinion; they love their own, not because it is true but because it is theirs. Otherwise they would love another true opinion just as much, as I love what they say when they say what is true — not because it is theirs but because it is true, and for that very reason it is no longer theirs, since it is true. But if they love it because it is true, then it is both theirs and mine, since it is common property of all lovers of truth. But their insistence that Moses did not mean what I say but what they say — this I do not like, I do not love. For even if it were so, that rashness of theirs comes not from knowledge but from audacity; it was born not of insight but of vanity. And therefore, O Lord, Your judgments are to be feared, since Your truth is neither mine, nor his, nor anyone else's, but belongs to all of us, whom You call openly to share in it, warning us terribly not to treat it as our private possession, lest we be deprived of it. For whoever claims as his own what You set before all to enjoy, and wants to have for himself what belongs to all, is driven from what is common to what is his own — that is, from truth to a lie. For he who speaks a lie speaks of his own.

@@ 33
Listen, O God, best of judges, Truth itself: listen to what I will say to this opponent, listen. For I speak before You, and before my brothers, who use Your law lawfully, to the end of charity. Listen, and see, if it pleases You, what I will say to him. This is the brotherly and peaceful word I give him in reply: "If we both see that what you say is true, and we both see that what I say is true, where, I ask you, do we see it? Certainly I do not see it in you, nor you in me; we both see it in the unchangeable Truth itself, which is above our souls." Since, then, we do not quarrel about the very light of the Lord our God, why do we quarrel about the thoughts of our neighbor, which we cannot see in the way the unchangeable Truth is seen? For even if Moses himself had appeared to us and said, "This is what I meant," we would not see it even then; we would believe it. So let us not be puffed up, one against another, beyond what is written. Let us love the Lord our God with all our heart, with all our soul, and with all our mind, and our neighbor as ourselves. Unless we believe that whatever Moses meant in those books, he meant with a view to these two precepts of charity, we shall make God a liar, by holding an opinion of our fellow servant's mind different from what He has taught us. See now how foolish it is, amid such an abundance of most true meanings as can be drawn out of those words, rashly to assert which of them Moses chiefly meant, and by harmful disputes to offend charity itself, for whose sake he said everything, he whose words we are trying to explain.

@@ 34
And yet, O my God, You who lift up my lowliness and are the rest of my labor, who hear my confessions and forgive my sins: since You command me to love my neighbor as myself, I cannot believe that You gave Moses, Your faithful servant, a lesser gift than I would wish and desire You to have given me, had I been born in the time he was, and had You set me in that office, so that through the service of my heart and tongue those books might be dispensed which were to benefit all nations for so long afterward, and throughout the whole world, from such a height of authority, were to overcome the words of all false and proud teachings. For I would certainly have wished, had I then been Moses (for we all come from the same lump, and what is man, except that You are mindful of him?) — I would have wished, then, had I been what he was, and had You charged me with writing the book of Genesis, to be given such a power of expression and such a way of weaving my words that those who cannot yet understand how God creates would not reject what was said as beyond their capacity; and that those who had already reached that understanding would find, not passed over in those few words of Your servant, whatever true opinion they had arrived at by thinking; and that if another person had discovered another by the light of truth, that too would not fail to be found in the same words.

