@@ 35
For just as a spring in a small space is more abundant, and supplies its flow to more streams over wider areas than any one of the streams that is drawn from that same spring and carried a long way off, so the account given by Your dispenser, which was to benefit many who would discourse on it, pours out of a small measure of language streams of clear truth, from which each person may draw for himself whatever truth he can on these matters, one this truth, another that, through longer windings of discussion. For some, when they read or hear these words, imagine that God, like a man or like some mass endowed with boundless power, made heaven and earth by some new and sudden decision, outside itself, as if at a distance: two great bodies, above and below, in which all things were to be contained. And when they hear, God said, Let it be made, and it was made, they imagine words that began and ended, sounding in time and passing away, and that after they had passed, the thing that was commanded to come into being came into being; and whatever else of that sort their familiarity with the material world suggests to them. In these, who are still little ones and carnal, while their weakness is carried along by this humble kind of speech as if in a mother's arms, faith is built up in a healthy way, by which they hold as certain that God made all the natures that their eyes see around them in wonderful variety. But if any of them despises these words as too plain, and in proud weakness stretches himself out beyond the nest that shelters him, alas, he will fall miserably. Have pity, O Lord God, so that those who pass along the way do not trample on the unfledged chick, and send Your angel to put it back in the nest, so that it may live until it can fly.

@@ 36
But others, for whom these words are no longer a nest but shady orchards, see the fruit hidden in them, fly about joyfully, and with glad chirping search it out and pluck it. For when they read or hear these words, they see that all times past and to come are surpassed by Your eternal and stable abiding; and yet that there is no creature formed in time which You did not make. They see that by Your will, which is the same as what You are, You made all things, not through any change of will, nor by a will that did not exist before; and that You made these things not out of Yourself, in Your own likeness, which is the form of all things, but out of nothing, a formless unlikeness, which was to be formed by Your likeness (turning back to Your unity according to their appointed capacity, as far as is given to each thing in its kind), so that all things might be made very good, whether they abide close around You, or, removed by degrees in time and place, make or undergo the beautiful changes of the universe. These things they see, and they rejoice in the light of Your truth, in the small measure they can here.

@@ 37
One of them fixes his mind on the words In the beginning God made heaven and earth, and sees in them Wisdom, the Beginning, because It also speaks to us. Another likewise fixes his mind on the same words, and by beginning understands the start of created things, taking In the beginning He made as if it said, At first He made. And among those who understand In the Beginning to mean "In Your Wisdom You created heaven and earth," one believes that the matter from which heaven and earth were to be created is there called heaven and earth; another, natures already formed and distinguished; another, one formed nature, and that a spiritual one, under the name Heaven, and the other, formless corporeal matter, under the name Earth. Those, again, who understand by the names heaven and earth a matter still formless, from which heaven and earth were to be formed, do not all understand it in one way either: one takes it as the matter from which both the intelligible and the sensible creation were to be completed; another, only the matter from which this sensible corporeal mass was to be made, holding in its vast bosom these visible and familiar natures. Nor do those who believe that creatures already ordered and arranged are called heaven and earth in this place understand it in the same way: one takes it as both the invisible and the visible, the other as the visible only, in which we see this bright heaven and dark earth, with the things they contain.

@@ 38
But the one who understands In the beginning He made only as if it said At first He made has no way of truly understanding heaven and earth except as the matter of heaven and earth, that is, of the whole creation, intelligible and corporeal. For if he wants to understand by it the universe as already formed, he could rightly be asked, "If God made this first, what did He make afterward?" After the universe he will find nothing, and so, against his will, he will have to hear another question: "How did God make this first, if nothing came after?" But when he says that God made matter first formless and then formed, there is nothing absurd in that, provided he is able to distinguish what comes before by eternity, what by time, what by choice, and what by origin. By eternity, as God is before all things; by time, as the flower is before the fruit; by choice, as the fruit is before the flower; by origin, as the sound is before the tune. Of these four, the first and the last I have mentioned are understood with the greatest difficulty, the two in the middle very easily. For it is a rare and exceedingly lofty vision to behold Your eternity, O Lord, unchangeably making changeable things, and in that way being before them. And again, who has so sharp an understanding as to be able to discern without great effort how the sound is before the tune? It is so because a tune is formed sound; and something unformed can certainly exist, but what does not exist cannot be formed. In this way the matter is before the thing made from it: not before because it makes it, since it is rather itself made; nor before by an interval of time. For we do not first, at an earlier time, utter formless sounds without singing, and then later fit or fashion them into the form of a tune, as is done with wood, from which a chest is made, or silver, from which a vessel is fashioned. Such materials do precede in time as well the forms of the things made from them; but with singing it is not so. For when a tune is sung, its sound is heard; there is not first a formless sound which is afterward formed into a tune. For each sound passes away as soon as it is made, and you could find nothing of it to call back and put together by art. So the tune has its being in its sound, and that sound is its matter. This sound is formed so that it may be a tune; and therefore, as I said, the matter of the sound is before the form of the tune. It is not before through any power of making it a tune, for a sound is in no way the craftsman of the tune; rather, it is something bodily, placed under the soul that sings, for it to make a tune from. Nor is it first in time, for it is given out together with the tune. Nor is it first by choice, for a sound is not better than a tune, since a tune is not only a sound but a beautiful sound. But it is first in origin, because a tune does not receive form in order to become a sound; a sound receives form in order to become a tune. By this example, let whoever can understand how the matter of things was made first and was called heaven and earth, because heaven and earth were made from it. Yet it was not made first in time, because it is the forms of things that give rise to time; but that matter was without form, and now it is perceived in time together with its form. And yet nothing can be said about that matter except as if it were prior in time, whereas in value it ranks last (because formed things are better than formless ones), and it is preceded by the eternity of the Creator, so that there might be, out of nothing, something from which something could be made.

