@@ 39
In this diversity of true opinions, let Truth itself bring forth concord. And may our God have mercy on us, so that we may use the law lawfully, for the end of the commandment, pure charity. And so, if anyone asks me, "Which of these was the meaning of Your servant Moses?" these would not be the words of my Confessions if I did not confess to You, "I do not know." And yet I know that those meanings are true, except the carnal ones, about which I have said what seemed necessary. And even those little ones of good hope who think that way have this benefit: the words of Your Book do not frighten them, since they convey lofty things humbly, and a rich meaning in few words. And all of us who, I confess, see and speak the truth conveyed in those words, let us love one another, and together love You, our God, the fountain of truth, if it is truth we thirst for and not vanities. Yes, let us so honor this servant of Yours, the dispenser of this Scripture, full of Your Spirit, as to believe that when he wrote these things by Your revelation, he intended the meaning among them that most excels both in the light of truth and in fruitfulness of profit.

@@ 40
So when one person says, "Moses meant what I mean," and another, "No, he meant what I mean," I think it more reverent to say, "Why not rather both, if both are true?" And if there is a third meaning, or a fourth, and indeed if anyone sees any other truth in those words, why should he not be believed to have seen all of them, he through whom the one God tempered the holy Scriptures to the understanding of many, who were to see in them things true but different? For my part — and I say this fearlessly, from my heart — if I were writing anything meant to carry supreme authority, I would rather write in such a way that whatever truth anyone could grasp on these matters would be conveyed in my words, than set down my own meaning so plainly as to exclude the rest, which, not being false, could not offend me. So I will not be so rash, O my God, as to refuse to believe that You granted as much to that great man. Without doubt, when he wrote those words, he perceived and thought of whatever truth we have been able to find in them, and whatever we have not been able to find, and cannot yet find, but which can still be found in them.

@@ 41
Finally, O Lord, You who are God and not flesh and blood: even if a man saw less, could anything be hidden from Your good Spirit, who will lead me into the land of uprightness, anything that You Yourself were going to reveal through those words to readers in times to come, even though the man through whom they were spoken perhaps had in mind only one among many true meanings? If that is so, then let the meaning he had in mind be the highest of all. But to us, O Lord, reveal either that same meaning or any other true one that pleases You, so that whether You disclose to us the same thing You disclosed to that servant of Yours, or something else on the occasion of those words, it may still be You who feed us, and not error that deceives us. See, O Lord my God, how much we have written about a few words, how much, I beg You! What strength of ours, what ages, would be enough for all Your books at this rate? Allow me, then, to confess to You more briefly in them, and to choose some one true, certain and good meaning that You inspire in me, even if many should occur to me, where many can occur. Let this be the rule of my confession: if I say what Your minister intended, that is right and best, for that is what I ought to strive for; and if I do not attain it, I shall still say what Your Truth willed to tell me through his words, the Truth which also told him what It willed.

