@@ 6
But how did You make heaven and earth? What machinery did You use for so vast a work? It was not the way a human craftsman does it, shaping one body out of another at the discretion of his mind, which has some power to impose on a material the form it sees within itself with its inner eye. And where would the mind get that power, unless You had made it? The craftsman imposes a form on something that already exists and has being, such as clay or stone or wood or gold or the like. And where would these come from, if You had not established them? You made the craftsman's body; You made the mind that commands his limbs; You made the material out of which he makes anything; You made the understanding by which he grasps his art and sees inwardly what he is making outwardly; You made the bodily sense through which, as through an interpreter, he carries what he is making over from mind to material, and reports back to his mind what has been done, so that the mind within may consult the truth that presides over it and ask whether the work is well done. All these things praise You, the Creator of all. But how do You make them? How, O God, did You make heaven and earth? Certainly You did not make heaven and earth in heaven or on earth; nor in the air or the waters, since these too belong to heaven and earth; nor did You make the whole world within the whole world, because there was no place in which to make it before it was made, so that it might exist. Nor were You holding anything in Your hand out of which to make heaven and earth. Where would You have got anything You had not made, in order to make something out of it? For what exists at all, except because You exist? So You spoke, and they were made, and in Your Word You made them.

@@ 7
But how did You speak? Was it in the way the voice came out of the cloud, saying, "This is my beloved Son"? That voice sounded and was over; it began and it ended. Its syllables rang out and passed, the second after the first, the third after the second, and so on in order, until the last came after all the rest, and silence after the last. From this it is perfectly clear and plain that it was the motion of a creature that expressed it, a motion itself temporal, serving Your eternal will. These words of Yours, made for a passing moment, were carried by the outer ear to the understanding soul, whose inner ear was turned toward Your eternal Word. And the soul compared these words sounding in time with Your eternal Word in its silence, and said, "It is different, utterly different. These words are far below me; in fact they do not truly exist, because they flee and pass away. But the Word of my God abides above me forever." If, then, You said in words that sounded and passed away that heaven and earth should be made, and made heaven and earth in that way, there must already have been a bodily creature before heaven and earth, through whose movements in time that voice could run its course in time. But there was nothing bodily before heaven and earth; or if there was, You had certainly made it without any passing voice, so as to make from it the passing voice by which to say, "Let the heaven and the earth be made." For whatever it was from which such a voice could be made, it would not exist at all unless You had made it. So, in order that a body might be made from which these words could then be made, by what Word did You speak?

@@ 8
So You call us to understand the Word, God who is with You, God, the Word spoken eternally, in whom all things are spoken eternally. For what is spoken there is not spoken in sequence, one thing brought to an end so that the next can be said, but all things at once and eternally. Otherwise we would already have time and change, and neither true eternity nor true immortality. This I know, my God, and I give thanks. I know it, I confess it to You, O Lord, and everyone who is not ungrateful to sure Truth knows it with me and blesses You. We know, Lord, we know: to the extent that anything no longer is what it was, and now is what it was not, to that extent it dies and comes to be. So nothing in Your Word gives way or takes another's place, because Your Word is truly immortal and eternal. And therefore, by the Word who is coeternal with You, You say all that You say at once and eternally, and whatever You say should be made is made. You make nothing except by saying; and yet not all the things You make by saying come to be at once, or last forever.

@@ 9
Why is that, I beg You, O Lord my God? I see it after a fashion, but I do not know how to put it into words, unless it is this: whatever begins to exist and ceases to exist begins and ceases at the point when, in Your eternal Reason, it is known that it ought to begin or cease; and in that Reason nothing begins or ceases. That Reason is Your Word, which is also "the Beginning, because it also speaks to us." So in the Gospel He speaks through the flesh, and this sounded outwardly in human ears, so that He might be believed and sought inwardly and found in the eternal Truth, where the good and only Master teaches all His disciples. There, Lord, I hear Your voice speaking to me, because the one who speaks to us is the one who teaches us; whoever does not teach us, even if he speaks, is not speaking to us. And who teaches us now, except the unchanging Truth? Even when we are prompted through some changeable creature, we are only being led to the unchanging Truth, where we learn truly, as we stand and listen to Him and rejoice greatly at the Bridegroom's voice, which gives us back to the One from whom we are. That is why He is the Beginning: if He did not remain when we wandered off, there would be nowhere for us to return to. But when we come back from error, it is by knowing that we come back; and so that we may know, He teaches us, because He is the Beginning and He speaks to us.

@@ 10
In this Beginning, O God, You made heaven and earth: in Your Word, in Your Son, in Your Power, in Your Wisdom, in Your Truth, speaking in a wonderful way and making in a wonderful way. Who will grasp it? Who will tell of it? What is this that shines through to me and strikes my heart without wounding it, so that I shudder and I burn? I shudder insofar as I am unlike it; I burn insofar as I am like it. It is Wisdom, Wisdom itself, that shines through to me, tearing apart my cloud; and yet the cloud wraps around me again as I sink back from that light, under the darkness that piles up on me as my punishment. For my strength has been so weakened by want that I cannot bear even my own blessings, until You, Lord, who have been merciful to all my iniquities, heal all my infirmities as well. For You will also redeem my life from corruption, and crown me with loving-kindness and tender mercies, and satisfy my desire with good things, because my youth will be renewed like the eagle's. For in hope we are saved, and so we wait with patience for Your promises. Let whoever is able hear You speaking inwardly; for my part, I will cry out boldly from Your own oracle, "How wonderful are Your works, O Lord; in Wisdom You have made them all!" And that Wisdom is the Beginning, and in that Beginning You made heaven and earth.
