@@ 28
I once heard a learned man say that the movements of the sun, moon and stars are themselves time, and I did not agree. Why should the movements of all bodies not be times instead? Suppose the lights of heaven stopped and a potter's wheel went on turning: would there be no time by which we could measure its revolutions and say that it turned at equal intervals, or, if it sometimes went slower and sometimes faster, that some turns were longer and others shorter? And while we were saying this, would we not also be speaking in time? Would some syllables in our words be long and others short, except because the long ones sounded for a longer time and the short ones for a shorter? God, grant human beings to see in a small thing the notions common to things both small and great. The stars and lights of heaven are for signs, and for seasons, and for years, and for days. So they are; but I would not say that the turning of that little wooden wheel was a day, and neither could that learned man say that it was therefore not time.

@@ 29
I want to know the power and nature of time, by which we measure the movements of bodies and say, for instance, that this movement lasts twice as long as that one. Here is my question. The word "day" means not only the time the sun is above the earth (in which sense day is one thing and night another), but also its whole circuit from east back to east, in which sense we say, "So many days have passed," counting the nights in when we say "so many days" and not reckoning them separately. Since, then, a day is completed by the sun's movement and its circuit from east back to east, I ask whether the day is the movement itself, or the length of time in which that movement is completed, or both. If it is the first, then there would be a day even if the sun completed its course in a span of time as short as an hour. If it is the second, then it would not be a day if the interval from one sunrise to the next were as short as an hour; the sun would have to go round twenty-four times to complete one day. If it is both, then it could not be called a day if the sun ran its whole round in the space of an hour, nor could it if the sun stood still while as much time went by as the sun usually takes to make its whole round from morning to morning. So I will not ask now what it is that is called a day, but what time is: the time by which, measuring the sun's circuit, we would say that it had been completed in half the time it usually takes, if it had been completed in a span as short as twelve hours; and by which, comparing the two times, we would call the one single and the other double, even if the sun sometimes ran its round from east to east in the single time and sometimes in the double. So let no one tell me that the movements of the heavenly bodies are times. When the sun stood still at one man's prayer, so that he could fight his battle through to victory, the sun stood still, but time went on. That battle was fought and finished in its own span of time, as much as it needed. I see, then, that time is a kind of distension. But do I see it, or do I only seem to see it? You, Light and Truth, will show me.

@@ 30
Do You tell me to agree if someone defines time as "the movement of a body"? You do not. I hear that no body moves except in time: You say so. But I do not hear that the movement of a body is time: You do not say that. For when a body moves, it is by time that I measure how long it moves, from the moment it starts moving until it stops. And if I did not see where it started, and it keeps moving so that I do not see when it stops, I cannot measure it, except perhaps from the moment I begin watching until I stop. And if I watch for a long while, I can report only that it is a long time, not how long, because when we say "how long," we are making a comparison, as in "this is as long as that," or "this is twice as long as that," or something of the kind. But if we can mark the distance between the places a moving body, or its parts if it turns as on a lathe, comes from and goes to, then we can say precisely how much time the movement of that body, or of its part, took from this place to that. Since, then, the movement of a body is one thing, and the means by which we measure how long it lasts is another, who cannot see which of the two should rather be called time? For if a body sometimes moves and sometimes stands still, we measure by time not only its movement but also its standing still, and we say, "It stood still as long as it moved," or "It stood still twice or three times as long as it moved," or give any other span our measuring has either determined exactly or estimated, "more or less," as we usually say. Time, then, is not the movement of a body.
