@@ 31
And I confess to You, O Lord, that I still do not know what time is. And again I confess to You, O Lord, that I know I am saying this in time, and that I have now been speaking about time for a long while, and that this very "long while" is long only because of a stretch of time. How, then, do I know this, when I do not know what time is? Or is it perhaps that I do not know how to put into words what I do know? Poor me, who do not even know what it is that I do not know! See, my God, before You I am not lying: as I speak, so is my heart. You will light my lamp; You, O Lord my God, will light up my darkness.

@@ 32
Does my soul not confess to You, and truly, that I do measure times? Is it so, then, my God, that I measure and do not know what I am measuring? I measure the movement of a body by time; and do I not measure time itself? Could I really measure the movement of a body, how long it lasts and how long it takes to get from here to there, without measuring the time in which it moves? How, then, do I measure this time itself? Do we measure a longer time by a shorter one, the way we measure the length of a beam by the length of a cubit? That, after all, is how we seem to measure the length of a long syllable by the length of a short one, and to say that it is double. In the same way we measure the length of stanzas by the length of lines, the length of lines by the length of feet, the length of feet by the length of syllables, and the length of long syllables by the length of short ones. We do not do this on the page, for that way we would be measuring spaces, not times; we do it as the words pass by while we pronounce them, and we say, "It is a long stanza, because it is made up of so many lines; the lines are long, because they consist of so many feet; the feet are long, because they stretch over so many syllables; the syllable is long, because it is double a short one." But not even this way do we arrive at any fixed measure of time, since it can happen that a shorter line, if drawn out in the speaking, takes up more time than a longer one hurried through. The same goes for a stanza, a foot, a syllable. So it seemed to me that time is nothing other than a distension; but a distension of what, I do not know, and I would be surprised if it were not of the mind itself. For what am I measuring, I beg You, my God, when I say either loosely, "This time is longer than that," or precisely, "This is double that"? I know that I am measuring time. But I am not measuring future time, because it does not exist yet; nor present time, because it is not stretched over any extent; nor past time, because it no longer exists. What, then, am I measuring? Times as they pass, not times that have passed? For that is what I said.

@@ 33
Keep at it, my mind, and press on with all your strength. God is our helper; He made us, and not we ourselves. Press on to where the truth begins to dawn. Suppose, now, that a bodily voice begins to sound, and sounds, and goes on sounding, and then, look, it stops. Now there is silence, and that voice is past and is no longer a voice. Before it sounded, it was future and could not be measured, because it did not exist yet; and now it cannot be measured, because it no longer exists. So it could be measured while it was sounding, because then there was something that could be measured. But even then it was not standing still; it was moving on and passing away. Could it be measured all the better for that? For as it passed, it was being stretched over some span of time in which it could be measured, since the present has no extent. If, then, it could be measured at that point, look: suppose another voice has begun to sound and is still sounding, in one continuous tone without any break. Let us measure it while it is sounding, since once it has stopped it will be past, and there will be nothing left to measure. Let us measure it, then, and say how long it is. But it is still sounding, and it cannot be measured except from the moment it began to the point where it stops. For what we measure is precisely the interval from some beginning to some end. So a voice that has not yet ended cannot be measured, so as to say how long or short it is, nor can it be called equal to another, or single or double in relation to another, or anything of that kind. But once it has ended, it no longer exists. How, then, can it be measured? And yet we do measure times: not those that do not exist yet, nor those that no longer exist, nor those that are not stretched out by any duration, nor those that have no limits. So we measure neither future times, nor past, nor present, nor passing ones; and yet we do measure times.

@@ 34
"Deus Creator omnium": this line of eight syllables alternates short and long syllables. So the four short ones, the first, third, fifth and seventh, are single in relation to the four long ones, the second, fourth, sixth and eighth. Each long one takes double the time of each short one. I pronounce them, I report on them, and I find that it is so, as far as plain perception can tell. As far as plain perception goes, I measure a long syllable by a short one and perceive that it has twice as much. But when one sounds after the other, if the first is short and the second long, how am I to hold on to the short one, and how, in measuring, am I to lay it against the long one to find that the long one has twice as much, since the long one does not begin to sound until the short one has stopped? And do I measure the long one itself as present, when I do not measure it until it has ended? Its ending is its passing away. What, then, is it that I measure? Where is the short syllable I measure with? Where is the long one I am measuring? Both have sounded, flown off, passed away; they no longer exist. And yet I measure, and I answer with confidence, as far as a trained ear can be trusted, that in span of time this one is single and that one double. And I could not do this unless they had already passed and ended. So it is not the syllables themselves that I measure, since they no longer exist, but something in my memory that stays fixed there.

@@ 35
It is in you, my mind, that I measure times. Do not interrupt me; that is, do not interrupt yourself with the crowding tumult of your impressions. In you, I say, I measure times. The impression that things make on you as they pass remains after they have gone, and it is this impression I measure, as something present, not the things that passed by to produce it. That is what I measure when I measure times. So either this is what times are, or I do not measure times at all. What about when we measure silences, and say that this silence lasted as long as that voice did? Do we not stretch our thought out to the length of a voice, as if it were sounding, so that we can report something about the intervals of silence in a span of time? For even when voice and tongue are still, we go through poems and lines and any kind of speech in our thought, or the measures of any movements, and we report on spans of time, how long this is compared with that, just as if we were saying them aloud. Suppose someone wants to utter a rather long sound, and has decided beforehand how long it is to be. He has already gone through that span of time in silence, and, committing it to memory, he begins to utter the sound, which goes on until it is brought to the end he set for it. Or rather, it has sounded and it will sound: the part of it already completed has sounded, and the rest will sound. And so it goes on, while the present intent of the mind carries the future over into the past, the past growing as the future shrinks, until the future is used up and the whole is past.
