@@ 36
But how can the future, which does not exist yet, shrink or be used up? And how can the past, which no longer exists, grow? Only because in the mind that does this there are three things at work. It expects, it attends, it remembers, so that what it expects passes, through what it attends to, into what it remembers. Who, then, denies that future things do not exist yet? And yet there is already in the mind an expectation of future things. And who denies that past things no longer exist? And yet there is still in the mind a memory of past things. And who denies that present time has no extent, since it passes in an instant? And yet attention lasts, and through it what is about to be present moves on toward being absent. So it is not future time that is long, since it does not exist; a long future is "a long expectation of the future." Nor is it past time that is long, since it no longer exists; a long past is "a long memory of the past."

@@ 37
I am about to recite a Psalm I know. Before I begin, my expectation stretches over the whole of it; but once I have begun, however much of it I have plucked off into the past stretches over my memory as well. So the life of this action of mine is stretched out two ways: into my memory, for what I have recited, and into my expectation, for what I am about to recite. Yet my attention is present, and through it what was future is carried across to become past. The further this goes on, the shorter the expectation grows and the longer the memory, until the whole expectation is used up, when the whole action is finished and has passed into memory. And what happens in the whole Psalm happens in each part of it and in each syllable; it happens in the longer action of which this Psalm may be a part; it happens in the whole life of a human being, of which all that person's actions are parts; it happens in the whole age of the sons of men, of which all human lives are parts.

@@ 38
But because Your loving-kindness is better than all lives, see: my life is nothing but distension, and Your right hand has held me up in my Lord, the Son of Man, the Mediator between You, the One, and us, the many, who are many also in our many distractions among many things. So through Him I may lay hold of Him in whom I have been laid hold of, and be gathered back from my old way of life to follow the One, forgetting what lies behind; not distended but extended, not toward the things that will come and pass away but toward the things that are ahead, not distractedly but intently, I press on toward the prize of my heavenly calling, where I may hear the voice of Your praise and contemplate Your delights, which neither come nor pass away. But now my years are spent in mourning, and You, O Lord, are my comfort, my Father everlasting. I, though, have been scattered among times whose order I do not know, and my thoughts, the innermost depths of my soul, are torn to pieces by tumultuous changes, until I flow together into You, purified and melted by the fire of Your love.

@@ 39
And I will stand, and be made firm in You, in my mold, Your truth. I will not put up with the questions of people who, through a disease that is its own punishment, thirst for more than they can hold, and ask, "What was God doing before He made heaven and earth?" or "How did it come into His mind to make anything, when He had never made anything before?" Grant them, O Lord, to think carefully about what they are saying, and to discover that "never" cannot be said where there is no time. So when He is said "never to have made" anything, what else is that but saying that there was "no time" at which He made it? Let them see, then, that there can be no time without created being, and let them stop talking such empty nonsense. Let them also stretch forward to the things that are ahead, and understand that You are before all times, the eternal Creator of all times, and that no times are coeternal with You, nor is any creature, even if there is some creature above all times.

@@ 40
O Lord my God, how deep is that hidden recess of Your mysteries, and how far the consequences of my sins have thrown me from it! Heal my eyes, so that I may share the joy of Your light. Certainly, if there is a mind endowed with such vast knowledge and foreknowledge that it knows all things past and future as well as I know one very familiar Psalm, that mind is exceedingly wonderful and astonishing enough to make one tremble. Nothing past and nothing still to come in the ages ahead is hidden from it, any more than, when I sing that Psalm, it is hidden from me what and how much of it has gone by since the beginning, and what and how much is left before the end. But far be it from You, Creator of the universe, Creator of souls and bodies, far be it from You to know all things past and future in that way. You know them far, far more wonderfully and far more mysteriously. For when someone sings a song he knows, or hears a familiar song, his feelings vary with his expectation of the words to come and his memory of those that are past, and his senses are stretched apart; but nothing of the kind happens to You, who are unchangeably eternal, that is, truly eternal, the Creator of minds. So just as in the Beginning You knew heaven and earth without any variation in Your knowledge, so in the Beginning You made heaven and earth without any distension in Your action. Let whoever understands this confess to You, and let whoever does not understand it confess to You. Oh, how high You are, and yet the humble in heart are Your dwelling place! For You raise up those who are bowed down, and those whose height You are do not fall.
