•-■■*■• 


£xj£ibris 

PROFESSOR  J.  S.WILL 


^'PIDES 


THE    TRAGEDIES   OF   EURIPIDES. 


THE 


TRAGEDIES  OF  EURIPIDES 


IN    ENGLISH    VERSE. 


BY 

ARTHUR   S.  WAY,    M.A. 

Author  of  "  The  Iliad  of  Homer  done  into  English  Verse,"  and 
"  The  Odyssey  of  Homer  done  into  English  Verse." 


IN   THREE   VOLUMES 
VOL.    I. 


Uontoon: 

MACMILLAN    AND    CO. 

AND     NEW     YORK. 
1894 


B  R 


I-  OF  tOjg 


2ii58 


EURIPIDES. 

SEARCHER   OF    HUMAN    HEARTS,    TO   THEE   WAS    GIVEN 

TO   UNSEAL   THE    FOUNTAINS    OF   THE    SOUL  THAT   WELL 
PITY   AND    LOVE,    IN    SYMPATHY   TO    DWELL 

WITH    ALL   THAT    IN    LIFE'S   AGONIES    HAVE    STRIVEN  : 

FETTERS    BY    MAGIC   OF   THY    MUSIC    RIVEN 

FROM    CAPTIVES    DROPPED  IN    THAT   SICILIAN    HELL  : 
THY    DEAD    LIPS    ON   THE    SPARTAN    BREATHED   A    SPELL 

WHENCE  BLESSING-INCENSE  SOARED  TO   THAT    HIGH    HEAVEN 

WHERE    HE,    WHO    SANG   OF   TRIUMPH-CRIMSONED    SEAS, 

AND   THOU,   THROUGH    WHOM   THINGS    COMMON    TOUCHED   THE 
SPHERES, 
TWIN-THRONED,  WHILE    HAND  TO    HAND   OF    BROTHER    CLAVE, 

SMILED    SCORN    OF   GODS   ON    ARISTOPHANES, — 

A    SATYR    MOCKING   ORPHANED   ATHENS'    TEARS, — 

SAW   FROM   THE    STARS    FROGS   CROAKING   O'ER   A    GRAVE. 


ALCESTIS. 

SHE    STANDS    BETWEEN   THE    LIVING   AND   THE    DEAD. 
THE    SMILE    HATH    SOMEWHAT   AWFUL   IN   THE    EYES 
WHICH    HAVE   NOT   YET   FORGOTTEN    MYSTERIES 
WHOSE    NAMES    MAY   NEVER   BY  THE    LIPS    BE    SAID 
WHERE    LOVE    SITS    DUMB    BESIDE    HIS    SEALED   WELL-HEAD 
THREE    DAYS,   FAR-GAZING   O'ER   HIS    PARADISE, 
WAITING   THE   TOKEN    THAT   SHALL   BID    HIM    RISE 
AND   ENTER   IN,   TO   FIND   THE    BLISS   THAT   FLED 
THREEFOLD    REGIVEN,    BECAUSE   THAT   FURTIVE   THORN 
OUT   OF    HER   HEART   IS    PLUCKED  :     HER   LOSS    IS   GAIN, 

WHOSE   LORD  DIED  WITH    HER,  AND   NOW  STRETCHETH   HANDS 
WORTHY   TO  TOUCH    HER,    BY   WHOSE    LOVE    REBORN 
IN    RESURRECTION    FROM    HIS    OLD   SELF   SLAIN, 

BETWEEN    THE    LIVING   AND   THE    DEAD    HE    STANDS. 


CORRIGENDA. 

Alcesiis,  p.  45,  last  line  but  one  ;  read  "  bear,"  for  "  bear  ?  " 

Medea,  1.  1082,  read  "  empyreal  "  for  "empyrean." 

Hippolytus,  1.  879,  read  "  What  incantation  of  curses  is  this  I  have 

read." 
Hecuba,  1.  534,  read"  Then  spake  he  '  Son  of  Peleus,  father  mine.'  ' 
Ion,  note  to  line  653,  read  "  received  "for  "  receiveth." 
Suppliants,  1.  739,  read  "  proffered  "for  "  proferred." 


PREFACE. 

"  It  is,"  remarks  the  author  of  The  Ancient  Classical  Drama, 
referring  to  Euripides,  "  to  the  disgrace  of  English  scholar- 
ship that  we  have  no  verse  translation  of  this  all-important 
poet  produced  in  our  own  day."  Though  some  might  per- 
adventure  challenge  the  inference,  on  the  plea  that  our 
scholars  have  been  more  profitably  employed,  the  fact  is 
indisputable.  The  comparative  neglect  of  Euripides  by 
translators  for  more  than  a  century  past  is,  indeed,  one  of 
the  enigmas  of  English  scholarship.  If  this  were  accom- 
panied by  a  corresponding  paucity  of  editions  of  his  works, 
or  by  an  increasing  tendency  to  underrate  his  merits,  the 
marvel  would  have  at  least  the  quality  of  consistency.  But, 
on  the  one  hand,  Euripides  has  of  late  years  received  from 
commentators  his  full  share  of  attention,  and,  on  the  other, 
nothing  is  more  certain  than  that  the  old  fashion  of  dis- 
paraging his  genius  (in  which  Schlegel  led  the  way,  giving  all 
the  weight  of  his  authority  to  a  sentence  which  others  were 
too  uncritical  or  too  timorous  to  revise),  is  now  utterly  dis- 
credited, and  that  we  have  ceased  to  regard  the  generations 
of  Greeks  and  Romans  who  loved  and  reverenced  him,  as 
degenerate  fools  and  blind,  and  are  at  last  making  some 
humble  efforts  to  understand  them  and  to  recover  their  point 
of  view.  In  fact,  the  revived  interest  in  Euripides  has  taken 
every  form  but  that  of  doing  for  him  what  has  been  so  freely 
done  for  Homer,  Pindar,  Aeschylus,  and  Sophocles.  True, 
many  translators  have  nibbled  at  him  during  the  present  cen- 
tury.    The  Alcestis  has  been  translated  by   Banks  (1849), 


viii  PREFACE. 


N      .  370),  Williams  (1871),  Browning  (1871),  and  H.  B. 

L.  (1884);  the  Medea  by  Lee  (1867),  Cartwright  (1868),  Mrs. 
Webster  (1868),  and  Williams  (187 1)  ;  the  Hippolytus  by  Fitz- 
gerald (1S67),  Williams  (1871),  Miss  Robinson  (1881),  and  H. 
B.  L.  (1894) ;  the  Hecuba  by  Beesley  (1875)  ;  the  Ion  by  H. 
B.  L.  (1S89),  and  Verrall  (1890)  ;  the  Hercules  Furens  by 
Browning  (1875);  the  Iphigeneia  in  Aulis  and  the  Iphigeneia 
in  Tauris  by  Cartwright  (1868)  ;  the  Baccha  by  M.  Glouton 
(1845),  Milman  (1865),  and  Rogers  (1872).  On  analysing  this 
li.-t.  we  find.  (1)  that  only  three  plays  have  been  translated  in 
verse  within  the  last  dozen  years;  (2)  that  out  of  the  eighteen 
tragedies  two  translators  only  have  attempted  so  many  as 
three  ;  (3)  that  half  of  the  plays  have  remained  untouched 
since  the  complete  verse  translations  by  Wodhull  (1782),  and 
Potter  1 1781-83).  These  two  versions,  fairly  faithful  and  in 
many  respects  meritorious  as  they  are,  are  wholly  lacking  in 
two  features  which  the  present-day  reader  will  hardly  consent 
to  forego  : — in  variety  in  the  choral  metres,  and  in  distinction 
of  the  lyric  portions  of  the  dialogue  from  the  prevailing  blank- 
verse.  The  measured  tread  of  the  iambus  or  trochee,  reap- 
pearing in  stanzas  of  the  same  structure,  and  in  lines  of  the 
same  average  length,  through  chorus  after  chorus  of  eighteen 
plays,  produces  an  impression  of  monotony  and  heaviness 
which  is  in  striking  contrast  with  the  swift  and  ever-varying 
movement  of  the  metres  of  the  original ;  and  the  quivering 
passion  that  thrills  through  the  stormy  lyric  outbursts, 
which,  like  cataract  and  rapid,  so  often  break  the  even  flow 
of  the  senarii,  is  sorely  missed  when  merged  in  the  tranquil 
stream  of  blank-verse  dialogue.  To  this  metrical  monotony 
may  be  largely  due  the  fact  that  the  choruses,  instead  of 
being,  as  they  doubtless  were  to  an  Athenian  audience,  the 
most  attractive  portions  of  the  plays,  are  to  the  modern 
reader  of  translations  often  the  least  attractive,  the  heaviest 
reading,  and  the  most  certain  to  share  the  general  fate  of 


PREFACE.  ix 


"  moral  reflections."  It  does  seem  strange  that  the  singers 
who  during  the  present  century  have  enriched  English 
poetry  with  wealth  of  metrical  variety  lavish  beyond  all 
precedent,  should  have  lived  in  vain  for  the  translator  of 
the  Greek  drama,  especially  since  those  magnificent  notes  of 
chorus-music  were  struck  by  the  author  of  A  talanta  in  Calydon 
and  Erechtheus,  after  which  the  good  old  Pindaric-ode 
pattern,  with  its  guilelessly  capricious  alternations  of  longs 
and  shorts,  seems  curiously  out  of  date. 

In  spite  of  the  examples  of  Shelley  and  Swinburne,  the 
employment  of    rhyme   in   choral   lyrics   appears   in   some 
quarters  to  be  still  regarded  as  an  open  question,  certain 
translators   going    so   far    as   to   pronounce   the   unrhymed 
structure   intrinsically   superior.      It   is   perhaps   unsafe   to 
dogmatize  :  solvitur  ambulando.     The  form  of  verse  in  which 
a  translator  finds  that  he  can — not,  perform  his  task  most 
quickly,  but — do  his  best  work,  the  mould  into  which,  for 
him,  the  great  thoughts  of  the  ancient  master  most  felicitously 
run,  so  that  his  task  becomes  a  labour  of  love,  that  is  for  him 
the  best,  and  he  will  not  wisely  let  preconceived  theories  bar 
his  choice,  or  the  authority  of  imposing  names  turn  him  out 
of  his  own  path.     I  incline  to  think  that  the  translator  who, 
not  from  his  experience  in  the  management  of  it,  but  in  com- 
pliance with  a  theory,  rejects  rhyme  in  lyrical  passages,  is  in 
danger  of  making  the  task  of  worthily  presenting  his  author 
more  rather  than  less  arduous.     He  is  apt  to  think  that  he 
thereby   secures   closer   correspondence   with   the  original ; 
yet  I  am  not  sure  that  this  is  not  more  apparent  than  real : 
rhymed  and  unrhymed  choruses  by  the  same  hand  (as  in 
Plumptre's  and  Campbell's  Sophocles)  differ  little,  if  at  all,  in 
fidelity  (properly  understood)  to  the  original.     On  the  other 
hand,  he  who,  for  the  sake  of  faithfulness,  discards  rhyme, 
may  find  himself  drifting  into  a  new  danger,  that  of  making 
a  fetish  of  this  faithfulness,  the  result  of  which  will  be  to 


PREFACE. 


deprive  his  work  of  that  air  of  spontaneity  and  freedom 
without  which  it  is  not  a  reproduction,  but  a  caricature. 
Anything  of  the  nature  of  bondage  to  the  letter,  anything 
that  thrusts  on  the  reader  the  reflection,  "  This  is  a  trans- 
lation ;  for  our  writers  don't  set  forth  their  own  thoughts  in 
this  style,"  is  so  far  a  departure  from  a  true  presentment  of 
an  author  whose  countrymen  never  found  in  his  diction  any- 
thing cramped  or  foreign.  And,  per  contra,  whatever  con- 
tributes to  produce  in  the  reader  the  illusion  that  he  has 
before  him  an  original  work,  is  so  far  a  step  in  the  direction 
of  justice  to  his  author.  Now  rhyme  possesses  a  great  initial 
advantage,  in  that  rhymeless  lyrical  measures  excite  in  the 
English  reader  a  sense  of  the  unusual  and  the  disappointing, 
as  though  the  writer  were  niggard  of  the  wealth  of  his  own 
language,  were  content  to  forego  half  of  the  magic  of  sound — 
that  echo-music  which  charmed  the  ears  of  the  people  when 
scholars  looked  askance  at  it,  and  which  scholars  have  long 
since  forgotten  to  call  barbarous.  But  the  Greek  no  more 
suspected  a  great  dramatist  of  neglecting  any  means  whereby 
he  might  satisfy  his  hearers"  demand,  not  only  for  noble 
thought,  but  for  musical  expression,  than  of  begrudging  them 
aught  of  his  treasures  of  experience  and  imagination.  In 
both  directions  he  felt  that  the  poet  had  taxed  to  the  utter- 
most all  the  resources  of  melody,  as  of  thought,  at  his  com- 
mand ;  and,  without  a  similar  impression,  the  modern  reader 
will  hardly  enjoy  a  similar  satisfaction.  Moreover,  there  is 
in  the  structural  basis  of  the  group  of  languages  to  which 
English  belongs  something  comparatively  harsh  and  un- 
musical, rendering  them  far  inferior  in  rhythmical  possibilities 
to  Greek  ;  hence,  no  conceivable  perfection  of  metrical  exe- 
cution could  give  that  satisfaction  to  the  ear  which  was  given 
by  the  Greek  measures :  the  instinct,  therefore,  of  northern 
poets  led  them  long  ago  to  provide  a  compensating  satis- 
faction in  the  accessory  of  rhyme,  like  the  rustic  host  who 


PREFACE.  xi 


trusts  that  his  wine  may  recommend  his  coarser  fare  to 
palates  accustomed  to  delicate  viands.  Hence  it  becomes  a 
serious  question  for  the  conscientious  translator,  whether, 
by  discarding  one  element  of  the  charm  of  English  lyrical 
poetry,  he  has  not  imposed  upon  himself  the  obligation  of 
filling  the  void  with  the  inadequate  materials  left  to  him,  of 
achieving  a  consummate  excellence  of  workmanship,  the 
difficulty  of  which  is  indicated  by  the  rarity  in  English 
literature  even  of  attempts  in  this  direction. 

There  are  three  classes  of  readers  whom  a  translator  may 
have  in  view — the  general  reader,  for  whom  the  perfect 
translation  is  that  which  does  not  suggest  an  original,  and 
whom  it  is  therefore  hard  to  satisfy ; — the  scholar,  to  whom 
the  original  is  a  joy,  and  (when  improved  by  his  own  emen- 
dations) a  pride,  and  whom  it  is  impossible  to  satisfy  ; — hear 
his  lasciate  ogni  speranza,  "  no  one  has  ever  translated  a  Greek 
chorus,  and  no  one  ever  will !  "1 — and  the  young  student,  to 
whom  the  original  is  part  of  the  riddle  of  the  painful  earth, 
and  who  is  thankful  for  small  mercies. 

I  must  confess  to  having  had  the  last  of  these  most  present 
to  my  mind  in  the  preparation  of  this  version,  perhaps  because 
experience  has  taught  me  to  sympathize  with  him,  with  his 
difficulties  in  elucidation,  with  his  despairing  contemplation 
of  the  outcome  of  his  travail,  with  his  bewildered  scepticism 
as  to  the  merits  of  the  ancients  who  seem  to  yield  to  him  so 
little  gold  in  return  for  so  much  quarrying,  with  his  gratitude 
for  whatever  brightens  his  toil  and  helps  him  to  understand 
how  the  men  of  old  found  beauty  where  he  finds  baldness, 
and  grace  where  he  finds  stiffness.  I  am  not  sure  that  my 
predecessors  have  consciously  laboured  to  smooth  his  path  : 
even  the  prose  versions  from  which  he  snatches  a  dubious 

i.  Prof.  Goldwin  Smith  (Specimens  of  Greek  Tragedy,  p.  xvi.)  goes 
even  farther,  almost  placing  the  Greek  Choruses  upon  the  same  footing 
with  "  Gratiano's  reasons." 


xii  PREFACE. 


and  furtive  joy  embarrass  his  reference  to  the  original  by 
neglecting  the  obvious  device  of  numbering  the  lines,  of  which 
omission,  indeed,  most  verse  translators  are  also  unaccount- 
ably guilty.  It  is  in  his  interest  that  I  have  preserved,  in 
the  version  here  presented,  a  line-for-line  correspondence 
with  the  original  in  the  blank-verse  dialogue,  and,  for  the 
most  part,  in  the  choruses  also,1  which  latter  will  in  many 
cases,  I  think,  be  found  by  the  scholar  who  compares  them 
minutely  with  the  original  to  be  more  nearly  literal "  construes  " 
than  perhaps  they  look. 

I  have  regarded  it  as  a  fortunate  coincidence  that  the 
edition  of  the  plays  most  extensively  used  by  young  students 
is  also  that  which  has  on  general  grounds  most  commended 
itself  to  my  judgment.  Paley's  insight  into  the  spirit  of 
Euripides,  his  sobriety  and  "  level-headedness"  as  a  com- 
mentator, his  recognition  of  the  limits  of  his  sphere  as  an 
interpreter,  have  impressed  me  more  and  more  as  I  have 
proceeded  with  my  task.  Above  all,  with  his  conservatism  in 
regard  to  the  text  I  am  thoroughly  in  accord  ;  indeed,  I  am 
inclined  occasionally  to  go  even  further  than  he,  in  retaining 
MS.  readings  where  he  inclines  to  admit  emendations.  In 
certain  instances,  of  course,  a  strong  presumptive  case  may 
be  made  out  against  the  MS.  text  on  prosodical  or  philological 
grounds ;  and  here  I  am  thankful  for  the  guidance  of  those 
who  are  far  better  equipped  specialists  than  I  can  ever  hope 
to  be.  But  the  most  numerous  and  most  serious  alterations 
proposed,  nay,  adopted  with  light-hearted  confidence,  by 
some  recent  editors,  are  not  of  this  nature.  They  are  the 
offspring  of  subjective  criticism  ;  and  a  commentator  is  never 
on  more  perilous  ground  than  when  he  makes  his  own  com- 
prehension or  appreciation  of  a  passage  the  criterion  of  its 

i.  The  main  exceptions  are  due,  not  to  diffuseness  in  rendering, 
but  to  tbe  employment  of  lines  differing  considerably  in  length  from 
those  in  the  text,  e.g.,  Ion,  881-91 1. 


PREFACE.  xiii 


genuineness.  In  examining  these  destructive-constructive 
assaults  on  the  text,  it  has  more  than  once  seemed  to  me 
that  the  impatience  of  a  too-clever  scholar  has  rejected  a 
deep  thought  instinct  with  poetic  feeling,  in  favour  of  an 
obvious  and  commonplace  sentiment.  The  heavy-shotted 
dogmatism  of  such  emendators,  the  contempt  which  they 
pour  upon  the  old  reading,  might  well  make  the  conservative 
translator  feel  as  if  the  confession  of  his  faith  were  an 
admission  of  imbecility.  Yet  no  sympathetic  reader  will 
tamely  suffer  his  private  judgment  to  be  taken  by  storm, 
and  the  more  I  study  Euripides,  and  try  to  realize,  with 
respect  to  each  reading  thus  arraigned  and  condemned,  the 
mental  attitude  of  the  poet  and  his  audience,  the  less  am  I 
satisfied  that  modern  scholarship  is  doing  itself  credit  by  this 
eagerness  to  reject  MS.  readings  on  purely  aesthetic  grounds. 
The  point  of  view  of  the  critic  is  too  often  one  which  (to  put 
it  mildly)  was  not  demonstrably  that  of  the  Athenian  audience, 
while  as  for  that  of  the  poet — only  from  a  Shakespeare  could 
we  feel  justified  in  accepting  ex  cathedra  judgments  on 
questions  of  poetic  taste  or  dramatic  instinct  in  Euripides. 

While  following  in  the  main  Paley  as  an  interpreter,  I  have 
to  acknowledge  very  considerable  obligations  to  the  editions 
of  the  other  scholars  who  have  done  so  much  to  assist  students 
to  appreciate  Euripides.  When  I  have  ventured  to  differ 
from  one  or  other  of  them,  it  has  been  because  I  believed 
myself  to  be  supported  by  very  high,  or  at  least  respectable, 
authority. 

Notes  are  no  part  of  a  translator's  duty  :  a  translation  is  in 
itself  a  commentary,  and  a  translator  who  claims  to  have 
found  a  clear  and  relevant  meaning  for  a  reading  challenged 
on  the  score  of  unintelligibility  has  thereby  furnished,  in 
Conington's  phrase,  "a  piece  of  embodied  criticism,"  which 
has  at  any  rate  the  merit  of  brevity.  I  have  therefore  limited 
my  notes  almost  exclusively  to  the  defence  of  readings  which 


xiv  PREFACE. 


have  been  condemned  on  aesthetic  grounds  by  scholars  whose 
censures  are  of  too  much  weight  in  the  student-world  to  be 
passed  by  in  silence,  to  the  briefest  possible  explanation  of 
some  of  the  less  obvious  allusions,  and  to  the  quotation  of  a 
few  parallel  passages  which,  not  being  noted  by  others,  seemed 
to  me  peculiarly  apposite,  or  which  justified  unfamiliar  usages 
of  words,  or  which  appeared  to  me  to  lend  the  countenance 
of  authority  beyond  all  challenge  to  expressions  to  which 
editors  have  taken  exception  as  being  unnatural,  undignified, 
or  inappropriate. 

I  have,  like  other  translators,  occasionally  worked  in, 
without  special  acknowledgment,  a  phrase  from  the  Bible, 
from  Shakspeare,  Milton,  or  some  other  immortal,  which 
has  now  entered  into  the  warp  and  woof  of  cultured  speech, 
and  which  affects  the  reader  with  a  pleasant  thrill  of  recog- 
nition, helping  him  to  realize  how  the  Muses  have  sometimes 
touched  to  the  same  fine  issues  great  souls  dwelling  far  apart. 

In  a  few  instances  I  have  found,  on  subsequent  comparison, 
that  my  literal  rendering  of  the  whole  or  a  portion  of  a  line 
has  precisely  coincided  with  that  of  some  previous  translator. 
In  such  cases  the  identity,  being  purely  accidental,  is  in- 
teresting rather  than  irritating,  and  I  have  made  no  alter- 
ation :  indeed,  the  wonder  rather  is  that  versions  which  in 
the  blank-verse  dialogue  are  so  frequently  word-for-word 
renderings,  should  so  seldom  slip  into  these  verbal  coinci- 
dences. 

In  the  lyrical  parts  of  the  plays  I  have  marked  the  distinc- 
tion of  Strophe  and  Antistrophe,  and  observed  the  metrical 
correspondences  therein  involved,  not  as  from  a  pedantic 
subservience  to  a  detail  which  some  might  imagine  to  have 
little  interest  for  the  English  reader,  nor  yet  as  a  tour  deforce 
of  metrical  and  rhyming  ingenuity,  but  for  a  reason  which, 
though  perfectly  familiar  to  the  scholar,  may  require  a  little 
explanation  for  the  non-classical  reader.     We  should  have  a 


PREFACE.  xv 


very  inadequate  conception  of  a  Greek  play  if  we  thought  of 
it  simply  as  a  series  of  stately  dialogues  maintained  between 
two  or  three  actors,  with  chorus-chants  intervening.  It  was, 
in  point  of  fact,  much  more  of  the  nature  of  a  grand 
spectacular  opera.  The  theatre,  large  enough  to  contain 
an  audience  variously  estimated  at  from  15,000  to  30,000, 
became  for  the  occasion  a  temple  of  Dionysus  (Bacchus), 
having  his  altar  at  its  centre.  The  drama  was  the  heart 
of  an  annual  solemn  religious  festival,  and  the  stage  (200 
to  300  feet  long)  was,  when  the  action  of  the  piece  justified 
their  introduction,  the  scene  of  the  grouping  and  move- 
ment of  splendid  pageants  and  processions,  in  which 
armies  of  supernumeraries  formed  a  magnificent  setting 
for  the  tragic  interest  of  dialogue  and  ode.  The  Chorus, 
occupying  the  orchestra,  or  dancing-area,  in  front  of  the 
stage,  grouped  themselves,  or  executed  their  evolutions, 
round  the  altar.  While  chanting  Strophe  1,  they  danced, 
"  with  woven  paces  and  with  waving  hands,"  from 
the  altar  towards  the  right,  returning,  with  precisely 
similar  music  and  movements,  in  A ntistrophe  i,the  rhythmical 
structure  of  which  must  accordingly  correspond.  In  Strophe 
2  they  danced  to  the  left,  with  (generally)  a  change  of 
music  and  movement,  returning  as  before  in  A  ntistrophe  2  ; 
and  so  on  through  the  series  of  pairs  of  stanzas.  The 
occasional  odd  stanza  (Epode,  if  at  the  end,  Mesode,  if  in 
the  middle)  was  executed  round  the  altar.  Now,  it  must 
be  remembered  that  all  these  movements  of  gliding  limb 
and  swaying  form  were  not  only  rhythmical  accompani- 
ments to  the  words  and  music,  but  were  in  themselves 
significant,  nay,  eloquent,  among  a  race  who  (like  some 
peoples  of  southern  Europe  in  our  own  day)  carried  panto- 
mimic gesture  to  such  perfection  that  a  conversation  might 
be  carried  on,  or  a  public  address  delivered,  without  the 
utterance  of  a  single  articulate  word.     Hence,  the  preserva- 


xvi  I  •KEF  ACE. 


tion  of  the  distinction  of  Strophe  and  Antistropht  helps  the 
reader  to  realize  the  scene — the  utter  absence  of  monotony, 
the  continual  variations  as  melody  melted  into  melody,  the 
ever-changing  grace  of  posture  and  harmony  of  movement, 
interpreting  each  thought,  and  accordant  to  the  ringing 
voices,  which  held  the  audience  spell-bound,  with  ears  en- 
tranced and  faces  that,  "  forgetting  themselves  to  marble," 
gazed  and  yearned  to  where  "  the  white  vests  of  the  chorus 
seemed  to  wave  up  a  live  air."  The  sweetest  voices,  the  most 
exquisite  dancing,  in  all  Hellas,  the  most  perfect  delivery  of 
the  noblest  poetry,  tableaux  vivants  of  gorgeous  pageantry — 
we  can  understand  how  an  audience  would  sit  out  play  after 
play  unwearied,  and  can  conceive  that  there  may  have  been 
some  foundation  for  the  complaint  of  an  economical  senate, 
that  the  "  staging  "  of  the  plays  (perhaps  a  dozen)  at  a  single 
dramatic  festival  was  as  costly  as  a  campaign. 

As  to  the  reproduction  in  English  of  the  actual  metres  of 
the  original  (attempted  by  some,  and  thought  desirable  by 
others),  the  prosodical  structure  of  the  two  languages  is  so 
fundamentally  different  (to  say  nothing  of  the  fact  that  no 
living  man  knows  certainly  how  Euripides'  contemporaries 
pronounced  the  simplest  Greek  sentence),  that  the  attempt 
could  not,  even  as  an  essay  in  technique,  be  successful,  nor, 
if  it  could,  would  the  utterly  unfamiliar  measures  have  any 
charm  for  English  ears. 

The  "Arguments"  prefixed  to  the  plays  are  designed 
rather  to  serve  as  introductions  than  as  epitomes  of  con- 
tents. To  give  the  non-classical  reader  just  so  much  inform- 
ation as  might  enable  him  to  commence  intelligently  the 
perusal  of  the  play,  seemed  better  than  the  somewhat 
ungracious  practice  of  anticipating  the  poet  in  his  story,  and 
taking  the  edge  off  the  interest  beforehand.  In  the  same 
client's  interest  it  may  here  be  mentioned  that  the  chorus, 
represented  by  its  leader,  frequently  takes  part  with  the  actors 


PREFACE.  xvii 


in  the  dialogue,  and  that  a  secondary  function  of  the  choral 
odes  was  to  carry  the  audience  over  the  interval  supposed  to 
elapse  between  the  acts,  and  which  might  vary  from  a  few 
minutes,  as  in  the  Alcestis  (568-605),  to  several  days,  or  even 
weeks,  as  in  the  Suppliants  (598-633).  The  convention  was 
understood,  and  the  illusion  was  no  more  impaired  by  the 
continued  presence  of  the  same  chorus  in  the  orchestra,  than 
it  is  in  a  modern  theatre  by  our  consciousness  that  the  same 
actors  are  waiting  behind  the  scenes  ;  and  certainly  men's 
minds  were  not  jarred  by  a  sense  of  discord,  and  brought 
down  from  heaven  to  earth,  as  with  us,  when  the  descent  of 
the  curtain  on  a  scene  which  has  thrilled  the  house  with 
high-wrought  emotion  is  followed  by  a  babble  of  gossip  and 
by  the  shrill  importunities  of  waiters. 

Certain  obvious  lacuna  in  the  text  (e.g.,  Alcestis,  468, 
Suppliants,  263  and  764),  I  have  supplied,  either  adopting  the 
conjecture  of  some  editor,  or  by  inserting  a  relevant  con- 
nection of  my  own  devising. 

The  spelling  of  Greek  proper  names  is  still  in  the  transition 
stage,  and  I  have  therefore  taken  the  questionable  benefit  of 
the  license  yet  allowed.  Old  forms,  familiar  and  firmly 
rooted,  like  Hecuba,  I  have  not  disturbed ;  new  forms  well 
established,  like  Odysseus,  I  have  adopted ;  in  well-known 
names,  like  Kassandra,  in  which  the  pronunciation  is  un- 
affected by  the  change  of  a  letter,  I  have  preferred  the 
nearer  approach  to  the  Greek  ;  for  unfamiliar  names,  trans- 
literation seemed  advisable.  I  have  retained,  however,  the 
Latin  termination  -us,  because  of  the  apparently  invincible 
tendency  of  the  English  reader  to  place  a  secondary  accent 
on  -os,  the  resulting  -oss  producing  a  rhythmical  discord  ; 
and  I  regard  u  and  y  respectively  as  closer  equivalents 
than  ou  and  u  for  the  sound  of  ov  and  v. 

In  the  numbering  of  the  lines,  and  in  the  arrangement  of 
the  choruses  (the  reader  who  refers  to  the  Greek  text  will 


xviii  PREFACE. 


understand  why,  simply  for  appearance'  sake,  the  latter  are 
counted  by  tens),  I  have  followed  Paley.i  with,  I  believe,  but 
one  deviation  in  this  volume,  viz.,  where,  in  the  Hippolytus, 
1.  817  sqq.,  I  have  adopted  Mahaffy  and  Bury's  strophic 
arrangement. 

I  have  taken  the  plays  in  the  commonly  received  chrono- 
logical order.  This  gives  to  the  reader  the  interest  of 
tracing  the  development  of  the  poet's  genius  (so  far  as  can 
be  judged  from  eighteen  plays  remaining  out  of  about 
eighty),  and  seems  preferable  to  the  plan,  adopted  by  earlier 
translators,  of  grouping  the  plays  according  to  subjects 
(Trojan  War,  House  of  Thebes,  etc.),  since  the  interest  of  a 
continuous  story  thus  obtained  is  marred  by  the  fact  that 
certain  plays  of  the  same  group  {e.g.,  Hecuba,  Troades, 
Helena)  are  inconsistent  with  each  other,  involving  situations 
mutually  exclusive,  the  poet  not  having  followed  the  same 
legend  throughout  the  series.  Subjoined  is  a  list  of  the  plays 
in  chronological  order  (conjectural),  dates  being  given  where 
regarded  as  fairly  certain  : — 

480     Euripides  born.     Year  of  Thermopylae  and  Salamis. 

455     First  representation  of  a  play  by  Euripides. 

439     Alcestis. 

431     Medea.     Peloponnesian  War  begins,  lasting  till  after 
Euripides'  death. 

429     Hippolytus. 
Hecuba. 
Ion. 

420     Suppliants.      Athens  allied  with  Argos,  and  at  war 
with  Thebes. 
Andromache. 
Heracleida.     Athens  at  war  with  Argos. 


l  The   school  editions  of  separate  plays,  where  these  give  a  later 
opinion  than  his  larger  work. 


PREFACE.  xix 


415     Troades. 
Electra. 
413     Helena. 

Hercules  Furens. 

In  413  occurred  the  destruction  of  an  Athenian 
armament  in  Sicily,  survivors  from  which  are  said 
by  Plutarch  to  have  been  indebted  to  their 
acquaintance  with  Euripides'  works  for  merciful 
treatment  from  their  conquerors. 
411  Phcenissce. 
408     Orestes. 

406     Euripides  dies.     Sophocles,  with  all  Athens,  put  on 
mourning  for  him.     The  Iphigeneia  in  Aulis,  per- 
haps the   Iphigeneia   in   Tauris,  and   the   Bacchce 
were  represented  shortly  after  his  death.      The 
Rhesus,  if  written  by  Euripides,  which  is  disputed, 
was  probably  the  earliest  of  his  extant  plays. 
405     Aristophanes'    comedy   of    the   Frogs    represented, 
having   for   its  object    to   exalt    the    memory   of 
Aeschylus,  by  belittling  that  of  Euripides. 
404     Athens  taken    by   the   Spartan   general,  Lysander. 
Plutarch  records  that  the  emotions  stirred  in  the 
hearts  of  the  victors  by  the  recitation  of  a  passage 
from  the  Electra  turned  them  from  their  purpose 
of  destroying  the  city. 
The  life  of  Euripides,  his  relation  to  contemporary  thought, 
the  discussion  of  various  interesting  problems,  such  as  the 
poet's  attitude  towards   women   and   towards  religion,   his 
dramatic  innovations,  his  use  of  the  deus  ex  machind,  and  so 
forth,  I  must  postpone  to  succeeding  volumes.     One  literary 
question,  however,  on  which  the  right  understanding  of  the 
Alcestis  depends,  could  not  well  be  postponed  :  I  have  there- 
fore treated  it  in  the  appendix  to  this  volume. 


CONTENTS. 


PREFACE 

ALCESTIS       . 

MEDEA 

HIPPOLYTUS 

HECUBA 

ION 

SUPPLIANTS 

APPENDIX    A    (ON    THE    CHARACTER    OF    ADMETUS) 

APPENDIX    B    (NOTE    ON    SUPPLIANTS)      . 


PAGE 

vii 
i 

61 
125 
*95 
259 

357 
421 

424 


ALCESTIS 


ARGUMENT. 

Apollo,  being  banished  for  a  season  front  Olympus, 
and  condemned  to  do  service  to  a  mortal,  became  herd- 
man  of  Admetus,  King  of  PJicrce  in  Thessaly.  Yet  he 
loathed  not  his  earthly  taskmaster,  but  loved  him,  for 
that  he  was  a  just  ma;:,  and  hospitable  exceedingly. 
Wherefore  he  obtained  from  the  Fates  this  boon  for 
Admetus,  that,  when  his  hour  of  death  should  come,  they 
should  accept  in  ransom  for  his  life  the  life  of  whosoever 
should  have  before  consented  to  die  in  his  stead.  Now 
when  tliis  zaas  made  known,  none  of  them  which  were 
nearest  by  blood  to  the  king  would  promise  to  be  his 
ransom  in  that  day.  Then  Alcestis  his  wife,  the  daugh- 
ter of  Pelias  King  of  Iolkos,  pledged  her  to  die  for  him. 
Of  her  love  she  did  it,  and  for  the  honour  of  wifehood. 
And  the  years  passed  by,  and  the  tale  was  told  in  many 
lands  ;  and  all  men  praised  Alcestis,  but  Admetus  bore 
a  burden  of  sorrow,  for  day  by  day  she  became  dearer  to 
him,  a  wife  wholly  true,  a  mother  most  loving,  and  a 
lady  to  her  thralls  gentle  exceedingly.  But  when  it  was 
known  by  tokens  that  the  day  was  come,  Admetus  repen- 
ted him  sorely,  but  it  availed  not,  for  no  mortal  may 
recall  a  pledge  once  given  to  the  Gods.  And  on  that  day 
there  came  to  the  palace  Apollo  to  plead  with  Death  for 
Alcestis  sake ;  and  a  company  of  Elders  of  Pheraz,  to 
ask  of  her  state  and  to  make  mourning  for  her.  And 
when  site  was  dead,  ere  she  was  borne  forth  to  burial, 
came  Herakles,  son  of  Zeus,  in  his  journeying,  seeking  the 
guest's  right  of  meat  and  lodging,  but  not  knowing 
aught  of  that  which  had  come  to  pass.  Of  him  was  a 
great  deliverance  wrought,  which  is  told  herein. 


DRAMATIS  PERSONS. 

Apollo 
Death 

Chorus,  composed  of  Elders  of  Pherce 

Handmaid 

Alcestis,  daughter  of  Pelias,  and  wife  of  Admetus 

Admetus,  King  of  Pherce 

Eumelus,  son  of  Admetus  and  Alcestis 

Herakles 

Pukres,  father  of  Admetus 

Servant,  steward  of  the  palace 

Guards,  attendants,  handmaids,  and  mourners 

The  scene  throughout  is  in  front  of  the  palace  of  Admetus 
at  Phers. 


ALCESTIS. 


Enter  Apollo. 

Apollo. 

Halls  of  Admetus,  where  I  stooped  my  pride 

To  brook  the  fare  of  serfs,  yea  I,  a  God  ; — 

The  fault  was  fault  of  Zeus  :  he  slew  my  son 

Asklepius — hurled  the  levin  through  his  heart. 

Wroth  for  the  dead,  his  smiths  of  heavenly  fire  5 

I  slew,  the  Cyclopes  ;  and,  for  blood-atonement, 

Serf  to  a  mortal  man  my  father  made  me. 

To  this  land  came  I,  tended  mine  host's  kine, 

And  warded  still  his  house  unto  this  day. 

Righteous  myself,  I  lighted  on  the  righteous,  10 

The  son  of  Pheres  :  him  I  snatched  from  death, 

Cozening  the  Fates  :  to  me  the  Sisters  pledged  them 

That  imminent  death  Admetus  should  escape 

If  he  for  ransom  gave  another  life. 

To  all  he  went — all  near  and  dear, — and  asked  15 

Grey  sire,  the  mother  that  had  given  him  life  ; 

But,  save  his  wife,  found  none  that  would  consent 

For  him  to  die  and  never  more  see  light. 

Now  in  his  arms  upborne  within  yon  home 

She  gaspeth  forth  her  life  :  for  on  this  day  20 


EURIPIDES. 


Her  weird  it  is  to  die  and  part  from  life. 

1,  lest  pollution  taint  me  in  their  house, 

Go  forth  of  yonder  hall's  beloved  roof.       [Enter  Death. 

Lo,  yonder  Death  ! — 1  see  him  nigh  at  hand, 

Priest  of  the  dead,  who  comes  to  hale  her  down  25 

To  Hades'  halls — well  hath  he  kept  his  time, 

Watching  this  day,  whereon  she  needs  must  die. 

Death. 

Ha,  thou  at  the  palace  ! — Wilt  not  make  room, 
Phoebus  ? — thou  wrestest  the  right  yet  again. 
Thou  removest  the  landmarks  of  Gods  of  Gloom.  30 

And  thou  makest  their  honours  vain. 
Did  this  not  suffice  thee,  to  thwart  that  doom 

Of  Admetus,  when,  all  by  thy  cunning  beguiled 

Were  the  Fates,  that  thou  now  must  be  warding  the 

wife  [35 

With  thine  hand  made  ready  the  bowstring  to  strain, 

Though  she  pledged  her  from  death  to  redeem  with 

her  life 

Her  lord, — she,  Pelias'  child  ? 

Apollo. 
Fear  not :  fair  words  and  justice  are  with  me. 

Death. 
Justice  with  thee  ! — what  needeth  then  the  bow  ? 

Apollo. 
This  ? — 'tis  my  wont  to  bear  it  evermore.  40 

Death. 
Yea,  and  to  aid  yon  house  in  lawless  wise. 


ALCESTIS. 


Apollo. 
Mine  heart  is  heavy  for  my  friend's  mischance. 

Death. 
What,  wilt  thou  wrest  from  me  this  second  corpse  ? 

Apollo. 
Nay,  not  that  other  did  I  take  by  force. 

Death. 
Not  ? — why  on  earth  then  ? — why  not  underground  ?  45 

Apollo. 
She  was  his  ransom,  she  for  whom  thou  comest. 

Death. 
Yea,  and  will  hale  her  deep  beneath  the  earth. 

Apollo. 
Take  her  and  go  :  1  trow  I  shall  not  bend  thee — 

Death. 
To  slay  the  victim  due  ? — mine  office  this. 

Apollo. 
Nay,  but  to  smite  with  death  the  ripe  for  death.         50 

Death. 
Ay,  I  discern  thy  plea, — thy  zeal,  good  sooth  ! 

Apollo. 
And  may  Alcestis  never  see  old  age  ? 

B  2 


EURIPIDES. 


Death. 
Never  : — should  I  not  love  mine  honours  too  ? 

Apollo. 
Tis  soon  or  late,— thou  canst  but  take  one  life. 

Death. 
Yet  mine  the  goodlier  prize  when  die  the  young.         55 

Apollo. 
Think — royal  obsequies  if  old  she  die  ! 

Death. 
Lo,  Phcebus  making  laws  to  shield  the  rich  ! 

Apollo. 
How  say'st  thou  ? — thou  a  sophist  unawares  ! 

Death. 
Would  wealth  not  buy  the  boon  of  dying  old  ? 

Apollo. 
So  then  thou  wilt  not  grant  this  grace  to  me  ?  60 

Death. 
Nay  surely — dost  not  know  my  wonted  way  ? 

Apollo. 
Hateful  to  mortals  this,  and  loathed  of  Gods. 

Death. 
All  things  beyond  thy  rights  thou  canst  not  have. 


ALCESTIS. 


Apollo. 


Surely  thou  shalt  forbear,  though  ruthless  thou, 

So  mighty  a  man  to  Pheres'  halls  shall  come,  65 

Sent  of  Eurystheus  forth,  the  courser-car 

From  winter-dreary  lands  of  Thrace  to  bring. 

Guest-welcomed  in  Admetus'  palace  here, 

By  force  yon  woman  shall  he  wrest  from  thee. 

Yea,  thou  of  me  shalt  have  no  thank  for  this,  70 

And  yet  shalt  do  it,  and  shalt  have  mine  hate. 

[Exit  Apollo. 
Death. 

Talk  on,  talk  on  :  no  profit  shalt  thou  win. 

This  woman  down  to  Hades'  halls  shall  pass. 

For  her  I  go  :  my  sword  shall  seal  her  ours  : 

For  sacred  to  the  Nether  Gods  is  he,  75 

He  from  whose  head  this  sword  hath  shorn  the  hair. 

[Exit  Death. 

Enter  Chorus,  dividing  to  right  and  left,  so  that  the  sec- 
tions answer  one  another  till  they  unite  at  I.  112. 

Half-Chorus  i. 

What  meaneth  this  hush  afront  of  the  hall  ? 
The  home  of  Admetus,  why  voiceless  all  ? 

Half-Chorus  2. 

No  friend  of  the  house  who  should  speak  of  its  plight 
Is  nigh,  who  should  bid  that  we  raise  the  keen        80 

For  the  dead,  or  should  tell  us  that  yet  on  the  light 
Alcestis  looketh,  and  liveth  the  Queen, 
The  daughter  of  Pelias,  the  noblest,  I  ween, 

Yea,  in  all  men's  sight 
The  noblest  of  women  on  earth  that  have  been.      85 


EURIPIDES. 


Half-Chorus  i. 

(Str.  i) 

Or  nearest  thou  mourning  or  sighing 

Or  beating  of  hands, 

Or  the  wail  of  bereaved  ones  outcrying  ? 

No  handmaid  stands 

At  the  palace-gate.  90 

O  Healer,  appear  for  the  dying,  appear  as  a  bright 

bird  flying 

'Twixt  the  surges  of  fate  ! 

Half-Chorus  2. 

All,  they  would   not  be  hushed,  had  the  life  of  her 
flown  ! 

Half-Chorus  i. 

Not  forth  of  the  doors  is  the  death-train  gone. 

Half-Chorus  2. 

Whence  cometh  thine  hope,  which  I  boast  not  mine 
own  ?  95 

Half-Chorus  i. 

Would   the    King  without   pomp  of  procession  have 
yielded  the  Grave  the  possession 

Of  so  dear,  of  so  faithful  an  one  ? 

Half-Chorus  2. 

(Ant.  1) 

Nor  the  cup  in  the  gateway  appeareth, 
From  the  spring  that  they  bear 

To  the  gate  that  pollution  feareth,  100 

Nor  the  severed  hair 

In  the  porch  for  the  dead, 


ALCESTIS. 


Which    the   mourner   in    bitterness   sheareth,   neither 
beating  of  hands  one  heareth 
On  maiden's  head. 

Half-Chorus  i. 


Yet  surely  is  this  the  appointed  day —  105 

Half-Chorus  2. 
Ah  !  what  wilt  thou  say  ? 

Half-Chorus  i. 
Whereon  of  her  doom  she  must  pass  to  the  tomb. 

Half-Chorus  2. 
With  a  keen  pang's  smart  hast  thou  stabbed  mine  heart. 

Half-Chorus  i. 

It  is  meet,  when  the  good  are  as  flowers  plucked  away, 

That  in  sorrow's  gloom 
Should  the  breast  of  the  old  tried  friend  have  part. 

Chorus. 

(Str.  2) 

Though  ye  voyage  all  seas, 

Ye  shall  light  on  no  lands, 
Nor  on  Lycia's  leas, 

Nor  Ammonian  sands,  115 

Whence  redemption  shall  come  for  the  wretched,  or 
loosing  of  Death's  dread  bands. 

Doom's  imminent  slope 

Is  a  precipice-steep. 
In  no  God  is  there  hope,  120 


8  EURIPIDES. 


Though  his  altars  should  weep 
With    the   crimson    atonement,    should   veil  them    in 
clouds  of  the  hecatomb-sheep. 

(Ant.  2) 
Ah,  once  there  was  one  ! — 

Were  life's  light  in  the  eyes 
Of  Phcebus's  son, 

Then  our  darling  might  rise  125 

From   the  mansions  of  darkness,   through  portals  of 
Hades  return  to  our  skies  ; 

For  he  raised  up  the  dead, 

Ere  flashed  from  the  heaven, 
From  Zeus'  hand  sped, 
That  bolt  of  the  levin. 
But  now  what  remaineth  to  wait  for  ? — what  hope  of 
her  life  is  given  ?  130 

No  sacrifice  more 

Unrendered  remaineth  : 
No  God,  but  the  gore 

From  his  altars  down-raineth  : 
Yet  healing  is  none  for  our  ills,  neither  balm  that  the 
spirit  sustaineth.  135 

[Enter  Handmaid. 
But  hither  cometh  of  the  handmaids  one, 
Weeping  the  while.     What  tidings  shall  I  hear  ? 
To  grieve  at  all  mischance  unto  thy  lords 
May  be  forgiven  ;  but  if  thy  lady  lives 
Or  even  now  hath  passed,  fain  would  we  know.    140 

Handmaid. 
She  liveth,  and  is  dead  :  both  may'st  thou  say. 


ALCESTIS.  g 

Chorus. 
Ay  so  ? — how  should  the  same  be  dead  and  live  ? 

Handmaid. 
Even  now  she  droopeth,  gasping  out  her  life. 

Chorus. 
Noble  and  stricken — how  noble  she  thou  losest 

Handmaid. 
His  depth  of  loss  he  knows  not  ere  it  come.  145 

Chorus. 
And  hope — is  no  hope  left  her  life  to  save  ? 

Handmaid. 
None — for  the  day  foredoomed  constraineth  her. 

Chorus. 
Are  all  things  meet,  then,  being  done  for  her  ? 

Handmaid. 
Yea,  ready  is  her  burial-attire. 

Chorus. 

Let  her  be  sure  that  glorious  she  dies  150 

And  noblest  woman  'neath  the  sun's  wide  way. 

Handmaid. 

Noblest  ? — how  not  ? — what  tongue  will  dare  gainsay  ? 

What  must  the  woman  be  who  passeth  her  ? 

How  could  a  wife  give  honour  to  her  lord 

More  than  by  yielding  her  to  die  for  him  ?  155 


io  EURIPIDES. 


And  this — yea,  all  the  city  knoweth  this. 

But  -what  within  she  did,  hear  thou,  and  marvel. 

For  when  she  knew  that  the  appointed  day 

Was  come,  in  river-water  her  white  skin 

She  bathed,  and  from  the  cedar-chests  took  forth     160 

Vesture  and  jewels,  and  decked  her  gloriously, 

And  stood  before  the  hearth,  and  prayed,  and  said  : 

"  Queen,  for  I  pass  beneath  the  earth,  I  fall 

Before  thee  now,  and  nevermore,  and  pray : — 

Be  mother  to  my  orphans  :  mate  with  him  165 

A  loving  wife,  with  her  a  noble  husband. 

Nor,  as  their  mother  dieth,  so  may  they, 

My  children,  die  untimely,  but  with  weal 

In  the  home-land  fill  up  a  life  of  bliss." 

To  all  the  altars  through  Admetus'  halls  170 

She  went,  with  wreaths  she  hung  them,  and  she  prayed, 

Plucking  the  while  the  tresses  of  the  myrtle, 

Tearless,  unsighing,  and  the  imminent  fate 

Changed  not  the  lovely  rose-tint  of  her  cheek. 

Then  to  her  bower  she  rushed,  fell  on  the  bed ;         175 

And  there,  O  there  she  wept,  and  thus  she  speaks  : 

"  O  couch,  whereon  I  loosed  the  maiden  zone 
For  this  man,  for  whose  sake  I  die  to-day, 
Farewell :  I  hate  thee  not.     Me  hast  thou  lost, 
Me  only  :  loth  to  fail  thee  and  my  lord  180 

I  die  :  but  thee  another  bride  shall  own, 
Not  more  true-hearted  ;  happier  perchance." 
Then  falls  thereon,  and  kisses  :  all  the  bed 
Is  watered  with  the  flood  of  melting  eyes. 
But  having  wept  her  fill  of  many  tears,  185 

Drooping  she  goeth,  reeling  from  the  couch  ; 
Yet  oft,  as  forth  the  bower  she  passed,  returned, 
And  flung  herself  again  upon  the  couch. 


ALCESTIS.  ii 

And  the  babes,  clinging  to  their  mother's  robes, 
Were  weeping  :  and  she  clasped  them  in  her  arms,    190 
Fondling  now  this,  now  that,  as  one  death-doomed. 
And  all  the  servants  'neath  the  roof  were  weeping, 
Pitying  their  lady.     But  to  each  she  stretched 
Her  right  hand  forth  ;  and  none  there  was  so  mean 
To  whom  she  spake  not  and  received  reply.  195 

Such  are  the  ills  Admetus'  home  within. 
Now,  had  he  died,  he  had  ended  :  but,  in  'scaping, 
He  bears  a  pain  that  he  shall  ne'er  forget. 

Chorus. 

Doth  not  Admetus  groan  for  this  affliction 

Of  such  a  noble  wife  to  be  bereft  ?  200 

Handmaid. 

Ay,  weeps,  and  clasps  his  dear  one  in  his  arms, 

And  prays,  "  Forsake  me  not !  " — asking  the  while 

The  impossible,  for  still  she  wanes  and  wastes, 

Drooping  her  hand,  a  misery-burdened  weight. 

But  yet,  albeit  hardly  breathing  now,  205 

To  the  sun's  rays  fain  would  she  lift  her  eyes, 

As  nevermore,  but  for  the  last  time  then 

Destined  to  see  the  sun's  beam  and  his  orb. 

But  I  will  go  and  make  thy  presence  known  : 

For  'tis  not  all  that  love  so  well  their  kings  210 

As  to  stand  by  them,  in  afflictions  loyal. 

But  from  of  old  my  lords  were  loved  of  thee.       \_Exit. 

\_Nine  members  of  the  Chorus  chant  successively  : — 

Chorus  i. 
O  Zeus,  for  our  lords  is  there  nought  but  despair  ? 
No  path  through  the  tangle   of   evils,   no  loosing  of 
chains  that  have  bound  them  ? 


12  EURIPIDES. 


Chorus  2. 

No  tidings  ? — remaineth  but  rending  of  hair, 
And  the  stricken  ones  turned  to  the  tomb  with  the 
garments  of  sorrow  around  them  ? 

Chorus  3. 

Even  so — even  so !  yet  uplift  we  in  prayer 
Our  hands  to  the  Gods,  for  that  power  from  the  days 
everlasting  hath  crowned  them. 

Chorus  4. 

O  Healer-king,  220 

Find  thou   for  Admetus  the  balm   of    relief,    for   the 
captive  deliverance  ! 

Chorus  5. 

Vouchsafe  it,  vouchsafe  it,  for  heretofore 
Hast  thou  found  out  a  way  ;  even  now  once  more 
Pluck  back  our  beloved  from  Hades'  door, 
Strike  down  Death's  hand  red-reeking  with  gore  ! 

Chorus  6. 

Woe's  me  !  woe's  me  ! — let  the  woe-dirge  ring ! 
Ah,  scion  of  Pheres,  alas  for  thy  lot,  for  love's  long 
severance ! 

Chorus  7. 

For  such  things  on  his  sword  might  a  man  not  fall, 

Or  knit  up  his  throat  in  the  noose  'twixt  the  heaven 

and  the  earth  that  quivereth  ?  230 


ALCESTIS.  13 


Chorus  8. 

For  his  dear  one — nay,  but  his  dearest  of  all 
Shall  he  see  on  this  day  lying  dead,  while  her  spirit  by 
Lethe  shivereth. 

Chorus  9. 

0  look ! — look  yonder,  where  forth  of  the  hall 
She  cometh,  and  he  at  her  side  whose  life  by  her  life 

she  delivereth. 

Chorus,  united. 

Cry,  Land  Pheraian,  shrill  the  keen  ! 

Lift  up  thy  voice  to  wail  thy  best 

There  dying,  and  thy  queenliest 
Slow  wasting  to  the  Gates  Unseen  ! 

Tell  me  not  this,  that  wedlock  brings 
To  them  that  wed  more  bliss  than  woe. 
I  look  back  to  the  long-ago  ;  240 

1  muse  on  these  unhappiest  things. 

Lo,  here  a  king — he  forfeiteth 

The  truest  heart,  the  noblest  wife : 
And  what  shall  be  henceforth  his  life  ? 

A  darkened  day,  a  living  death. 

Enter  Female  Attendants  bearing  Alcestis,  accompanied 
by  Admetus  and  Children. 

Alcestis. 

O  Sun,  and  the  day's  dear  light, 
And  )'e  clouds  through  the  wheeling  heaven   in   the 
race  everlasting  flying  ! 


i4  EURIPIDES. 


Admetus. 

He  seeth  thee  and  me,  two  stricken  ones, 
Which  wrought  the  Gods  no  wrong,  that  thou  shouldst 
die. 

Alcestis. 

O  Land,  O  stately  height 
Of  mine  halls,  and  my  bridal  couch  in  Iolkos  my  father- 
land lying  ! 

Admetus. 

Uplift  thee,  hapless  love,  forsake  me  not,  250 

And  pray  the  mighty  Gods  in  ruth  to  turn. 

Alcestis. 

I  see  the  Boat  with  the  oars  twin-sweeping, 

And,  his  hand  on  the  pole  as  in  haste  aye  keeping, 
Charon  the  Ferryman  calleth,  "  What  ho,  wilt  thou 

linger  and  linger  ? 
Hasten, — 'tis   thou   dost  delay  me !  "    he  crieth   with 

beckoning  finger. 

Admetus. 

Ah  me  !  a  bitter  ferrying  this  thou  namest ! 
O  evil-starred,  what  woes  endure  we  now  ! 

Alcestis. 

One  haleth  me — haleth  me  hence  to  the  mansion 
Of  the  dead  ! — dost  thou  mark  not  the  darkling 
expansion 
Of  the  pinions  of  Hades,  the  blaze  of  his  eyes  'neath 
their  caverns  out-glaring  ?  260 


ALCESTIS.  15 


What  wouldst  thou  ? — Unhand  me  ! — In  anguish  and 
pain  by  what  path  am  I  faring ! 

Admetus. 

Woeful  to  them  that  love  thee :  most  to  me 
And  to  thy  babes,  sad  sharers  in  this  grief. 

Alcestis. 

Let  be — let  me  sink  back  to  rest  me : 
There  is  no  strength  left  in  my  feet. 
Hades  is  near,  and  the  night 
Is  darkening  down  on  my  sight. 
Darlings,  farewell :  on  the  light  270 

Long  may  ye  look  : — I  have  blessed  ye 
Ere  your  mother  to  nothingness  fleet. 

Admetus. 

Ah  me  !  for  thy  word  rusheth  bitterness  o'er  me, 
Bitterness  passing  the  anguish  of  death  ! 

Forsake  me  not  now,  by  the  Gods  I  implore  thee, 
By  the  babes  thou  wilt  orphan,   O   yield  not  thy 
breath  ! 

Look  up,  be  of  cheer  :  if  thou  diest,  before  me 
Is  nothingness.     Living,  we  aye  live  thine, 
And  we  die  unto  thee ;  for  our  hearts  are  a  shrine 

Wherein  for  thy  love  passing  word  we  adore  thee  ! 

Alcestis. 

Admetus, — for  thou  seest  all  my  plight, —  280 

Fain  would  I  speak  mine  heart's  wish  ere  I  die. 
I,  honouring  thee,  and  setting  thee  in  place 
Before  mine  own  soul  still  to  see  this  light, 
Am  dying,  unconstrained  to  die  for  thee. 


16  EURIPIDES. 


I  might  have  wed  what  man  Thessalian  285 

I  would,  have  dwelt  wealth-crowned  in  princely  halls ; 

Yet  would  not  live  on,  torn  away  from  thee, 

With  orphaned  children  :  wherefore  spared  I  not 

The  gifts  of  youth  still  mine,  wherein  I  joyed. 

Yet  she  that  bare,  he  that  begat,  forsook  thee,  290 

Though  fair  for  death  their  time  of  life  was  come, 

Yea,  fair,  to  save  their  son  and  die  renowned. 

Their  only  one  wert  thou  :  no  hope  there  was 

To  get  them  sons  thereafter,  hadst  thou  died. 

So  had  I  lived,  and  thou,  to  after  days :  295 

Thou  wert  not  groaning,  of  thy  wife  bereaved, 

Thy  children  motherless.     Howbeit  this 

Some  God  hath  brought  to  pass :  it  was  to  be. 

Let  be  : — remember  thou  what  thank  is  due 

For  this  :   I  never  can  ask  full  requital ;—  300 

For  nought  there  is  more  precious  than  the  life  ; — 

Yet  justly  due  :  for  these  thy  babes  thou  lovest 

No  less  than  I,  if  that  thine  heart  be  right. 

Suffer  that  they  have  lordship  in  mine  home  : 

Wed  not  a  stepdame  to  supplant  our  babes,  305 

Whose  heart  shall  tell  her  she  is  no  Alcestis, 

Whose  jealous  hand  shall  smite  them,  thine  and  mine. 

Do  not,  ah,  do  not  this — 1  pray  thee,  I. 

For  the  new  stepdame  hateth  still  the  babes 

Of  her  that's  gone  with  more  than  viper-venom.       310 

The  boy — his  father  is  his  tower  of  strength 

To  whom  to  speak,  of  whom  to  win  reply  : 

But,  O  my  child,  what  girlhood  will  be  thine  ? 

To  thee  what  would  she  be,  thy  father's  yoke-mate  ? 

Yv'hat  if  with  ill  report  she  smirched  thy  name,        315 

And  in  thy  youth's  flower  marred  thy  marriage-hopes  ? 

For  thee  thy  mother  ne'er  shall  deck  for  bridal, 


ALCESTIS.  17 


Nor  hearten  thee  in  travail,  O  my  child, 
There,  where  nought  gentler  than  the  mother  is. 
For  I  must  die,  nor  shall  it  be  tomorn,  320 

Nor  on  the  third  day  comes  on  me  this  bane  : 
Straightway  of  them  that  are  not  shall  I  be. 
Farewell,  be  happy.     Now  for  thee,  my  lord, 
Abides  the  boast  to  have  won  the  noblest  wife, 
For   you,    my   babes,    to   have   sprung    from    noblest 
mother.  325 

Chorus. 

Fear  not  ;  for  I  am  bold  to  speak  for  him 
This  will  he  do,  an  if  he  be  not  mad. 

Admetus. 

It  shall,  it  shall  be,  dread  not  thou  :  for  thee 

Living  I  had ;  and  dead,  mine  only  wife 

Shalt  thou  be  called  :  nor  ever  in  thy  stead  330 

Shall  bride  Thessalian  hail  me  as  her  lord. 

None  is  there  of  a  father  so  high-born, 

None  so  for  beauty  peerless  among  women. 

Children  enough  have  I :   I  pray  the  Gods 

For  joy  in  these — our  joy  in  thee  is  nought.  335 

Not  for  a  year's  space  will  1  mourn  for  thee, 

But  long  as  this  my  life  shall  last,  dear  wife, 

Loathing  my  mother,  hating  mine  own  sire, 

For  in  word  only,  not  in  deed,  they  loved  me. 

Thou  gav'st  in  ransom  for  my  life  thine  all  340 

Of  precious,  and  didst  save.     Do  I  not  well 

To  groan,  who  lose  such  yokefellow  in  thee  ? 

Revels  shall  cease,  and  gatherings  at  the  wine, 

Garlands,  and  song,  which  wont  to  fill  mine  house. 

For  never  more  mine  hand  shall  touch  the  lyre  :       345 


is  EURIPIDES. 


Nor  will  1  lift  up  heart  to  sing  to  flute 

Of  Libya  :  thou  hast  robbed  my  life  of  mirth. 

And,  wrought  by  craftsmen's  cunning  hands,  thy  form 

Imaged,  upon  a  couch  outstretched  shall  lie, 

Falling  whereon,  and  clasping  with  mine  hands,       350 

Calling  thy  name,  in  fancy  shall  mine  arms 

Hold  my  beloved,  though  I  hold  her  not  : — 

A  chill  delight,  1  wot  :  yet  shall  I  lift 

The  burden  from  my  soul.     In  dreams  shalt  thou 

1  [aunt  me  and  gladden  :  sweet  to  see  the  loved,      355 

Though  but  a  fleeting  presence  night-revealed. 

But,  were  the  tongue  and  strain  of  Orpheus  mine, 

To  witch  Demeter's  Daughter  and  her  lord, 

And  out  of  Hades  by  my  song  to  win  thee, 

I  had  fared  down  :  nor  Pluto's  Hound  had  stayed  me, 

Nor  Spirit- wafter  Charon  at  the  oar,  [360 

Or  ever  I  restored  thy  life  to  light. 

Yet  there  look  thou  for  me,  whenso  1  die ; 

Prepare  a  home,  as  who  shall  dwell  with  me. 

For  in  the  selfsame  cedar  chest,  wherein  365 

Thou  liest,  will  I  bid  them  lay  my  bones 

Outstretched  beside  thee :  ne'er  may  I  be  severed, 

No,  not  in  death,  from  thee,  my  one  true  friend. 

Chorus. 

Yea,  I  withal  will  mourn,  as  friend  with  friend, 

With  thee  for  this  thy  wife,  for  she  is  worthy.  370 

Alcestis. 

My  children,  ye  yourselves  have  heard  all  this, 
Have  heard  your  father  pledge  him  ne'er  to  wed 
For  your  oppression  and  for  my  dishonour. 


ALCESTIS.  19 


Admetus. 
Yea,  now  I  say  it,  and  I  will  perform. 

Alcestis. 
On  these  terms  take  the  children  from  mine  hand.  375 

Admetus. 
I  take  them — precious  gift  from  precious  hand. 

Alcestis. 
Be  to  these  babes  a  mother  in  my  stead. 

Admetus. 
Sore  is  their  need,  who  are  bereft  of  thee. 

Alcestis. 
Darlings,  I  should  have  lived  ;  and  lo,  I  die. 

Admetus. 
Ah  me  ! — what  shall  I  do,  forlorn  of  thee  ?  380 

Alcestis. 
Time  shall  bring  healing : — but  the  dead  is  nought. 

Admetus. 
Take  me,  ah  take  me  with  thee  to  the  grave ! 

Alcestis. 
Suffice  it  that  one  dies — she  dies  for  thee. 

Admetus. 
O  Death,  of  what  a  wife  dost  thou  bereave  me  ! 

c  3 


20  EURIPIDES. 


Alcestis. 
Dark — dark — mine  eyes  are  drooping,  heavy-laden.  385 

Admetus. 

Oh,  I  am  lost  if  thou  wilt  leave  me,  wife  ! 

Alcestis. 
Xo  more — I  am  no  more:  as  nought  account  me. 

Admetus. 
Uplift  thy  face  :  forsake  not  thine  own  children  ! 

Alcestis. 
Sore  loth  do  I— yet  O  farewell,  my  babes ! 

Admetus. 
Look  unto  them — O  look  ! 

Alcestis. 

I  am  no  more.  390 

Admetus. 
Ah,  leav'st  thou  us  ? 

Alcestis. 

Farewell.  [Dies. 

Admetus. 

O  wretch  undone  ! 

Chorus. 
Gone, — gone  ! — No  more  is  this  Admetus'  wife ! 


ALCESTIS.  21 


EUMELUS. 

Woe  for  my  lot ! — to  the  tomb  hath  my  mother  des- 
cended, descended ! 
Never  again,  O  my  father,  she  seeth  the  light  of  the 
sun  ! 
In  anguish  she  leaves  us  forsaken  :  the  story  is  ended, 
is  ended, 
Of  her  sheltering  love,  and  the  tale  of  the  motherless 
life  is  begun. 
Look — look  on  her  eyelids,  her  hands  drooping  nerve- 
less !     O  hear  me,  O  hear  me  !  400 
It  is   I— I    beseech  thee,   my  mother ! — thine  own 
little,  own  little  bird  ! 
It  is  I — O,  I  cast  me  upon  thee — thy  lips  are  so  near 
me,  so  near  me, 
Unto  mine  am  I  pressing  them,  mother  ! — I  plead 
for  a  word — but  a  word  ! 

Admetus. 

With  her  who  heareth  not,  nor  seeth  :  ye 

And  I  are  stricken  with  a  heavy  doom.  405 

Eumelus. 

And  I  am  but  a  little  one,  father — so  young,  and  for- 
saken, forsaken, 
Forlorn  of  my   mother — O    hapless  !  a  weariful  lot 
shall  be  mine  ! 
And  thou,  little  maiden,  my  sister,  the  burden   hast 
taken,  hast  taken, 
Which  thy  brother  may  bear  not  alone,  and  a  weari- 
ful lot  shall  be  thine.  410 


22  EURIPIDES. 


0  father,  of  long-living   love  was   thy   marriage   un- 

cherished,  uncherished  : 
Thou  hast  won  not  the  goal  of  old  age  with  the  love 
of  thy  youth  at  thy  side  ; 
For,  or  ever  she  won  to  the  fulness  of  days,  she  hath 
perished,  hath  perished  ; 
And  the  home  is  a  wreck  and  a  ruin,  for  thou,  O  my 
mother,  hast  died  ! 

Chorus. 

Admetus,  this  mischance  thou  needs  must  bear. 
Not  first  of  mortals  thou,  nor  shalt  be  last 
To  lose  a  noble  wife  ;  and,  be  thou  sure, 
From  us,  from  all,  this  debt  is  due — to  die. 

Admetus. 

1  know  it  :  nowise  unforeseen  this  ill  420 
Hath  swooped  upon  me  :  long  I  grieved  to  know  it. 
But — for  to  burial  must  I  bear  my  dead — 

Stay  ye,  and,  tarrying,  echo  back  my  wail 

To  that  dark  God  whom  no  drink-offerings  move. 

And  all  Thessalians  over  whom  I  rule  425 

I  bid  take  part  in  mourning  for  this  woman, 

With  shaven  head  and  sable-shrouding  robe. 

And  ye  which  yoke  the  cars  four-horsed,  or  steeds 

Of  single  frontlet,  shear  with  steel  their  manes. 

Music  of  flutes  the  city  through,  or  lyres,  430 

Be  none,  while  twelve  moons  round  their  circles  out : 

For  dearer  dead,  nor  kinder  unto  me 

I  shall  not  bury  :  worthy  of  mine  honour 

Is  she,  for  she  alone  hath  died  for  me.  [Exit. 


ALCESTIS.  23 


Chorus. 

(Sty.  1) 

O  Pelias'  daughter,  I  hail  thee : 

I  waft  thee  eternal  farewell 
To  thine  home  where  the  darkness  must  veil  thee, 

Where  in  Hades  unsunned  thou  shalt  dwell. 
Know,  Dark-haired,  thy  grey  Spirit-wafter 

Hath  sped  not  with  twy-plashing  oar  440 

Woman  nobler,  nor  shall  speed  hereafter 
To  Acheron's  shore. 


For  the  seven-stringed  shell,  or  for  paean 
Unharped,  shall  thy  fame  be  a  song, 

When  o'er  Sparta  the  moon  Karnean 
High  rideth  the  whole  night  long. 

And  in  Athens  the  wealthy  and  splendid 
Shall  thy  name  on  her  bards'  lips  ring, 

Such  a  theme  hast  thou  left  to  be  blended 
W7ith  the  lays  that  they  sing. 


(Ant.  1) 


(Str.  2) 


O  that  the  power  were  but  in  me, 

From  the  chambers  of  Hades,  to  light, 

And  from  streams  of  Cocytus,  to  win  thee 
With  the  oar  of  the  River  of  Night  ! 

0  dear  among  women,  strong-hearted  460 
From  Hades  to  ransom  thy  lord  ! 

Never  spirit  in  such  wise  departed. 

Light  lie  on  thee,  Lady,  the  sward  ! 
And,  if  ever  thine  husband  shall  mate  him 

Again  with  a  bride  in  thy  stead, 

1  will  loathe  him,  his  children  shall  hate  him, 

The  babes  of  the  dead. 


-4  EURIPIDES. 


(Ant.  2) 
Y\  hen  his  mother  would  not  be  contented 

To  hide  her  for  him  in  the  tomb. 
Nor  his  grey-haired  father  consented, 

Unholpen  he  looked  on  his  doom. 
Whom   they  bare — the   hard-hearted  ! — they  cared 
not, 
Though  hoary  their  locks  were,  to  save  !  470 

Thou  art  gone,  for  thy  great  love  spared  not 

Thy  blossom  of  youth  from  the  grave. 
Ah,  may  it  be  mine,  such  communion 

Of  hearts  ! — 'tis  vouchsafed  unto  few  : — 
Then  ours  should  be  sorrowless  union 
Our  life-days  through. 
Enter  Herakles. 

Herakles. 

Strangers,  who  dwell  in  this  Pheraian  land, 
Say,  do  I  find  Admetus  in  his  home  ? 

Chorus. 

Herakles,  in  his  home  is  Pheres'  son. 

Yet  say,  what  brings  thee  to  Thessalian  land, 

That  thou  shouldst  come  to  this  Pheraian  town  ?     480 

Herakles. 
A  toil  for  King  Eurystheus,  lord  of  Tiryns. 

Chorus. 
And  whither  journeyest  ?     To  what  wanderings  yoked  ? 

Herakles. 
For  Thracian  Diomedes'  four-horsed  chariot. 


ALCESTIS.  25 


Chorus. 
How  canst  thou  ?     Sure  he  is  unknown  to  thee ! 

Herakles. 
Unknown  :  to  land  Bistonian  fared  I  never.  485 

Chorus. 
Not  save  by  battle  may  those  steeds  be  won. 

Herakles. 
Yet  flinch  I  may  not  from  the  appointed  toils. 

Chorus. 
Thy  life  or  his — a  triumph  or  a  grave. 

Herakles. 
Not  this  the  first  time  I  have  run  such  course. 

Chorus. 
What  profit  is  it  if  thou  slay  their  lord  ?  490 

Herakles. 
Those  steeds  shall  I  drive  back  to  Tiryns'  king. 

Chorus. 
Hard  task,  to  set  the  bit  betwixt  their  jaws. 

Herakles. 
That  shall  I,  if  their  nostrils  breathe  not  fire. 

Chorus. 
Yea,  but  with  ravening  jaws  do  they  rend  men. 


26  EURIPIDES. 


Herakles. 
Go  to — thus  banquet  mountain-beasts,  not  horses.  495 

Chorus. 
Nay,  thou  shalt  see  their  cribs  with  gore  bespattered. 

Herakles. 
Whom  boasteth  he  for  father,  he  that  reared  them  ? 

Chorus. 
Ares,  the  king  of  Thracia's  golden  shield. 

Herakles. 

Thou  say'st  :  such  toil  my  fate  imposeth  still, 

Harsh  evermore,  uphillward  straining  aye,  500 

If  I  must  still  in  battle  close  with  sons 

Gotten  of  Ares  ;  with  Lykaon  first, 

And  Kyknus  then  :  and  lo,  I  come  to  grapple — 

The  third  strife  this — with  yon  steeds  and  their  lord. 

But  never  man  shall  see  Alkmene's  child  505 

Quailing  before  the  hand  of  any  foe. 

Chorus. 

Lo,  there  himself,  the  ruler  of  the  land, 
Admetus,  cometh  forth  his  palace-hall. 

Enter  Admetus. 

Admetus. 

Hail,  O  thou  sprung  from  Zeus'  and  Perseus'  blood  ! 

Herakles. 
Admetus,  hail  thou  too,  Thessalia's  king.  510 


ALCESTIS.  27 


Admetus. 
Hale  ? — Would  I  were !  Yet  thy  good  heart  I  know. 

Herakles. 
Wherefore  for  mourning  shaven  show'st  thou  thus  ? 

Admetus. 
This  day  must  I  commit  to  earth  a  corpse. 

Herakles. 
Now  heaven  forefend  thou  mourn'st  for  children  dead  ! 

Admetus. 
In  mine  home  live  the  babes  whom  I  begat.  515 

Herakles. 
Sooth,  death-ripe  were  thy  sire,  if  he  be  gone. 

Admetus. 

He  liveth,  and  my  mother,  Herakles. 

Herakles. 
Surely,  O  surely,  not  thy  wife,  Admetus  ? 

Admetus. 
Twofold  must  be  mine  answer  touching  her. 

Herakles. 
Or  hath  she  died,  say'st  thou,  or  liveth  yet  ?  520 

Admetus. 
She  is,  and  she  is  not :  here  lies  my  sorrow. 


28  EURIPIDES. 


Herakles. 
Nothing  the  more  I  know:  dark  sayings  thine. 

Admetus. 
Know'st  not  the  doom  whereon  she  needs  must  light  ? 

Herakles. 
I  know  she  pledged  herself  to  die  for  thee. 

Admetus. 
How  lives  she  then,  if  she  to  this  consented  ?  525 

Herakles. 
Mourn  not  thy  wife  ere  dead  :  abide  the  hour. 

Admetus. 
Dead  is  the  doomed,  and  no  more  is  the  dead. 

Herakles. 
Diverse  are  these — to  be  and  not  to  be. 

Admetus. 
This,  Herakles,  thy  sentence  :  that  is  mine. 

Herakles. 

But  now,  why  weep'st  thou  ?      What  dear  friend  is 
dead  ?  530 

Admetus. 
A  woman — hers  the  memory  we  mourn. 

Herakles. 
Some  stranger  born,  or  nigh  of  kin  to  thee  ? 


ALCESTIS.  29 


Admetus. 
A  stranger  born  ;  yet  near  and  dear  to  us. 

Herakles. 
How  died  a  stranger  then  in  house  of  thine  ? 

Admetus. 
An  orphan  here  she  dwelt,  her  father  dead.  535 

Herakles. 
Would  we  had  found  thee  mourning  not,  Admetus. 

Admetus. 
Ay  so  ? — what  purpose  lurketh  'neath  thy  word  ? 

Herakles. 
On  will  I  to  another  host's  hearth-welcome. 

Admetus. 
It  cannot  be  :  may  no  such  evil  come ! 

Herakles. 
A  burden  unto  mourners  comes  the  guest.  540 

Admetus. 
Dead  are  the  dead  : — but  enter  thou  mine  house. 

Herakles. 
'Twere  shame  to  banquet  in  the  house  of  weeping. 

Admetus. 
Aloof  the  guest-bowers  are  where  we  will  lodge  thee. 


30  EURIPIDES. 


Herakles. 
Let  me  pass  on,  and  have  my  thanks  unmeasured. 

Admetus. 

Unto  another's  hearth  thou  canst  not  go.  545 

[To  an  attendant]    Ho  thou,  lead  on  :   open  the  guest- 
bowers  looking 
Away  from  these  our  chambers.     Tell  my  stewards 
To  set  on  meat  in  plenty.     Shut  withal 
The  mid-court  doors  :  it  fits  not  that  the  guests, 
The  while  they  feast,  hear  wailings,  and  be  vexed.   550 

[Exit  Herakles. 
Chorus. 

What  dost  thou  ? — such  affliction  at  the  door, 
And  guests  for  thee,  Admetus  ?     Art  thou  mad  ? 

Admetus. 

But  had  I  driven  him  from  my  home  and  city 

Who  came  my  guest,  then  hadst  thou  praised  me  more  ? 

Nay,  sooth  ;  for  mine  affliction  so  had  grown  555 

No  less,  and  more  inhospitable  I  ; 

And  to  mine  ills  were  added  this  beside, 

That  this  my  home  were  called  "  Guest-hating  Hall." 

Yea,  and  myself  have  proved  him  kindliest  host 

Whene'er  to  Argos'  thirsty  plain  I  fared.  560 

Chorus. 

Why  hide  then  the  dread  Presence  in  the  house, 
When  came  a  friend  ? — Thyself  hast  named  him  friend. 

Admetus. 

Never  had  he  been  won  to  pass  my  doors, 
Had  he  one  whit  of  mine  afflictions  known. 


ALCESTIS.  31 


To  some,  I  wot,  not  wise  herein  I  seem,  565 

Nor  wilt  thou  praise  :  but  mine  halls  have  not  learnt 
To  thrust  away  nor  to  dishonour  guests. 

Chorus. 

(Str.  1) 

Halls  thronged  of  the  guests  ever  welcome,  O  dwelling 

Of  a  hero,  for  ever  the  home  of  the  free, 
The  Lord  of  the  lyre-strings  sweet  beyond  telling,  570 

Apollo,  hath  deigned  to  sojourn  in  thee. 
Amid  thine  habitations,  a  shepherd  of  sheep, 
The  flocks  of  Admetus  he  scorned  not  to  keep, 
While  the  shepherds'  bridal-strains,  soft-swelling 
From  his  pipe,  pealed  over  the  slant-sloped  lea. 

(Ant.  1) 

And  the  spotted  lynxes  for  joy  of  thy  singing 

Mixed  with  thy  flocks  ;  and  from  Othrys'  dell       580 
Trooped  tawny  lions  :  the  witchery-winging 

Notes  brought  dancing  around  thy  shell, 
Phoebus,  the  dappled  fawn  from  the  shadow 
Of  the  tall-tressed  pines  tripping  forth  to  the  meadow, 
Beating  time  to  the  chime  of  the  rapture-ringing 
Music,  with  light  feet  tranced  by  its  spell. 

(Str.  2) 

Wherefore  the  flocks  of  my  lord  unnumbered 

By  the  Bcebian  mere  fair-rippling  stray  :  590 

Where  the  steeds  of  the  sun  halt,  darkness-cumbered, 
By  Molossian  marches,  far  away 

The  borders  lie  of  his  golden  grain, 

And  his  rolling  stretches  of  pasture-plain  ; 

And  the  havenless  beach  Aegean  hath  slumbered 
Under  Pelion  long  'neath  the  peace  of  his  sway. 


32  EURIPIDES. 


(Ant.  2) 
And  now,  with  the  tears  from  his  eyes  fast-raining, 

Thrown  wide  are  his  palace-doors  to  the  guest, 
While  newly  his  heart  'neath  its  burden  is  straining, 

For  the  wife  that  hath  died  in  his  halls  distressed. 
For  to  honour's  heights  are  the  high-born  lifted,     [600 
And  the  good  are  with  truest  wisdom  gifted  ; 
And  there  broods  on  mine  heart  bright  trust  unwaning 

That  the  god-reverer  shall  yet  be  blest. 

Admetus. 

0  kindly  presence  of  Pheraian  men, 

This  corpse  even  now,  with  all  things  meet,  my  servants 
Bear  on  their  shoulders  to  the  tomb  and  pyre. 
Wherefore,  as  custom  is,  hail  ye  the  dead, 
On  the  last  journey  as  she  goeth  forth.  610 

Chorus. 

Lo,  I  behold  thy  sire  with  aged  foot 
Advancing,  and  attendants  in  their  hands 
Bear  ornaments  to  deck  the  dead  withal. 

[Enter  Pheres  with  Attendants  bearing  gifts. 

Pheres. 

1  come  in  thine  afflictions  sorrowing,  son  : 

A  noble  wife  and  virtuous  hast  thou  lost,  615 

None  will  gainsay  :  yet  these  calamities 

We  needs  must  bear,  how  hard  to  bear  soever. 

Receive  these  ornaments,  and  let  her  pass 

Beneath  the  earth  :  well  may  the  corpse  be  honoured 

Of  her  who  for  thy  life's  sake  died,  my  son  ;  620 

Who  made  me  not  unchilded,  left  me  not 


ALCESTIS.  33 


Forlorn  of  thee  to  pine  in  woeful  eld. 

In  all  her  sisters'  eyes  she  hath  crowned  her  life 

With  glory,  daring  such  a  deed  as  this. 

O  saviour  of  my  son,  who  us  upraisedst  625 

In  act  to  fall,  all  hail !     May  bliss  be  thine 

Even  in  Hades.     Thus  to  wed,  I  say, 

Profiteth  men — or  nothing  worth  is  marriage. 

Admetus. 

Bidden  of  me  thou  com'st  not  to  this  burial, 
Nor  count  I  thine  the  presence  of  a  friend.  630 

Thine  ornaments  she  never  shall  put  on  ; 
She  shall  be  buried  needing  nought  of  thine. 
Thou  grieve  ! — thou  shouldst  have  grieved  in  my  death- 
hour  ! 
Thou  stood'st  aloof — the  old,  didst  leave  the  young 
To  die  : — and  wilt  thou  wail  upon  this  corpse  ?         635 
True  father  of  my  body  thou  wast  not  ; 
Nor  she  that  said  she  bare  me,  and  was  called 
My  mother,  gave  me  birth  :  of  bondman  blood 
To  thy  wife's  breast  was  I  brought  privily. 
Put  to  the  test,  thou  showedst  who  thou  art,  640 

And  I  account  me  not  thy  true-born  son. 
Peerless  of  men  in  soulless  cowardice  ! 
So  old,  and  standing  on  the  verge  of  life, 
Yet  hadst  no  will,  yet  hadst  no  heart  to  die 
For  thine  own  son  ! — Ye  suffered  her,  a  woman         645 
Not  of  our  house,  whom  I  with  righteous  cause 
Might  count  alone  my  mother  and  my  father. 
Yet  here  was  honour,  hadst  thou  dared  the  strife, 
In  dying  for  thy  son.     A  paltry  space 
To  cling  to  life  in  any  wise  was  left.  650 

Then  had  I  lived,  and  she,  through  days  to  come, 

D 


34  EURIPIDES. 


Nor  I,  left  lorn,  should  thus  mine  ills  bemoan. 

Yet  all  that  may  the  fortunate  betide 

Fell  to  thy  lot ;  in  manhood's  prime  a  king  : 

Mr  hadst  thou  son  and  heir  unto  thine  house,  655 

So  that  thou  wast  not,  dying,  like  to  leave 

A  childless  home  for  stranger  folk  to  spoil. 

Nor  canst  thou  say  that  flouting  thy  grey  hairs 

I  gave  thee  o'er  to  death,  whose  reverence 

For  thee  was  passing  word  : — and  this  the  thank     660 

That  thou  and  she  that  bear  me  render  me  ! 

Wherefore,  make  haste  :  beget  thee  other  sons 

To  foster  thy  grey  hairs,  to  compass  thee 

With  death's  observance,  and  lay  out  thy  corpse. 

Not  I  with  this  mine  hand  will  bury  thee.  665 

For  thee  dead  am  I.     If  I  see  the  light, — 

Another  saviour  found, — I  call  me  son 

To  her,  and  loving  fosterer  of  her  age. 

For  nought  the  aged  pray  for  death's  release, 

Plaining  of  age  and  weary-wearing  time.  670 

Let  death  draw  near — who  then  would  die  ?    Not  one : 

No  more  is  eld  a  burden  unto  them. 

Chorus. 

O  hush  !     Suffice  the  affliction  at  the  doors. 
O  son,  infuriate  not  thy  father's  soul. 

Pheres. 

Son,    whom,    think'st    thou — some    Lydian    slave   or 
Phrygian  675 

Bought  with  thy  money  ? — thus  beratest  thou  ? 
What,  know'st  thou  not  that  I  Thessalian  am, 
Sprung  from  Thessalian  sire,  free  man  true-born  ? 
This  insolence  passeth  ! — hurling  malapert  words 


AI.CESTIS.  35 


On  me,  not  lightly  thus  shalt  thou  come  off!  680 

Thee  I  begat  and  nurtured,  of  mine  house 

The  heir  :  no  debt  is  mine  to  die  for  thee. 

Not  from  our  sires  such  custom  we  received 

That  sires  for  sons  should  die  :  no  Greek  law  this. 

Born  for  thyself  wast  thou,  to  fortune  good  685 

Or  evil :  all  thy  dues  from  us  thou  hast. 

O'er  many  folk  thou  rulest ;  wide  demesnes 

Shall  I  leave  thee  :  to  me  my  fathers  left  them. 

What  is  my  wrong,  my  robbery  of  thee  ? 

For  me  die  thou  not,  I  die  not  for  thee.  690 

Thou  joy'st  to  see  light — shall  thy  father  joy  not  ? 

Sooth,  I  account  our  time  beneath  the  earth 

Long,  and  our  life-space  short,  yet  is  it  sweet. 

Shamelessly  hast  thou  fought  against  thy  death  : 

Thy  life  is  but  transgression  of  thy  doom  695 

And  murder  of  thy  wife  : — my  cowardice  ! 

This  from  thee,  dastard  !  worsted  by  a  woman 

Who  died  for  thee,  the  glorious-gallant  youth  ! 

Cunning  device  hast  thou  devised  to  die 

Never,  cajoling  still  wife  after  wife  700 

To  die  for  thee  ! — and  dost  revile  thy  friends 

Who  will  not  so — and  thou  the  coward,  thou  ? 

Peace  !  e'en  bethink  thee,  if  thou  lov'st  thy  life, 

So  all  love  theirs.     Thou,  if  thou  speakest  evil 

Of  us,  shalt  hear  much  evil,  and  that  true.  705 

Chorus. 

Ye  have  said  too  much,  thou  now,  and  he  before. 
Refrain,  old  sire,  from  railing  on  thy  son. 

Admetus. 
Say  on,  say  on  ;   I  have  said  :  if  hearing  truth 

D  2 


36  EURIPIDES. 


Gall  thee,  thou  shouldest  not  have  done  me  wrong. 

Pheres. 
I  had  done  more  wrong,  had  I  died  for  thee.  710 

Admetus. 
What,  for  the  young  and  old  is  death  the  same  ? 

Pheres. 
One  life  to  live,  not  twain — this  is  our  due. 

Admetus. 
Have  thy  desire — one  life  outlasting  Zeus. 

Pheres. 
Dost  curse  thy  parents,  who  hast  had  no  wrong  ? 

Admetus. 
Ay,  whom  I  marked  love-sick  for  dateless  life.  715 

Pheres. 
What  ? — art  not  burying  her  in  thine  own  stead  ? 

Admetus. 
A  token,  dastard,  of  thy  cowardice. 

Pheres. 
/  did  her  not  to  death  :  thou  canst  not  say  it. 

Admetus. 
Mayest  thou  feel  thy  need  of  me  some  day  ! 

Pheres. 
Woo  many  women,  that  the  more  may  die.  720 


ALCESTIS.  37 


Admetus. 
This  taunt  strikes  thee — 'tis  thou  wast  loth  to  die. 

Pheres. 
Sweet  is  yon  sun-god's  light,  yea,  it  is  sweet. 

Admetus. 
Base  is  thy  spirit,  and  unmeet  for  men. 

Pheres. 
No  aged  corpse  thou  bearest,  inly  laughing  ! 

Admetus. 
Yet  shalt  thou  die  in  ill  fame,  when  thou  diest.         725 

Pheres. 
Nought  reck  I  of  ill-speaking  o'er  my  grave. 

Admetus. 
Ah  me  !  how  full  of  shamelessness  is  eld  ! 

Pheres. 
Not  shameless  she, — but  senseless  hast  thou  found  her. 

Admetus. 
Begone  :  leave  me  to  bury  this  my  dead. 

Pheres. 

I  go  :  her  murderer  will  bury  her.  730 

Thou  shalt  yet  answer  for  it  to  her  kin. 

Surely  Akastus  is  no  more  a  man, 

If  he  of  thee  claim  not  his  sister's  blood.    [Exit  Pheres. 


38  EURIPIDES. 


Admetus. 

Avaunt,  with  her  that  kennelleth  with  thee  ! 

Childless  grow  old,  as  ye  deserve,  while  lives  735 

Your  child  :  ye  shall  not  come  beneath  one  roof 

With  me.     If  need  were  to  renounce  by  heralds 

Thy  fatherhood,  I  had  renounced  it  now. 

Let  us — for  we  must  bear  the  present  ill — 

Pass  on,  to  lay  our  dead  upon  the  pyre.  740 

Chorus. 

Alas  for  the  loving  and  daring  ! 

Farewell  to  the  noblest  and  best  ! 
May  Hermes  conduct  thee  down-faring 

Kindly,  and  Hades  to  rest 
Receive  thee  !     If  any  atonement 

For  ills  even  there  may  betide 
To  the  good,  O  thine  be  enthronement 
By  Hades'  bride ! 
[Exeunt  omnes  in  funeral  procession. 
Enter  Servant. 

Servant. 

Full  many  a  guest,  from  many  a  land  which  came 
Unto  Admetus'  dwelling,  have  I  known, 
Have  set  before  them  meat  :   but  never  guest 
More  pestilent  received  I  to  this  hearth  :  750 

Who  first,  albeit  he  saw  my  master  mourning, 
Entered,  and  passed  the  threshold  unashamed  ; 
Then,  nowise  courteously  received  the  fare 
Found  with  us,  though  our  woeful  plight  he  knew, 
But,  what  we  brought  not,  hectoring  bade  us  bring. 
The  ivy  cup  uplifts  he  in  his  hands,  [755 

And  swills  the  darkling  mother's  fiery  blood, 


ALCESTIS.  39 

Till  the  wine's  flame  enwrapped  him,  heating  him. 

Then  did  he  wreathe  his  head  with  myrtle  sprays, 

Dissonant-howling.     Diverse  strains  were  heard  :    760 

For  he  sang  on,  regardless  all  of  ills 

Darkening  Admetus'  house  ;  we  servants  wept 

Our  mistress  :  yet  we  showed  not  to  the  guest 

Eyes  tear-bedewed,  for  so  Admetus  bade. 

And  now  within  the  house  must  I  be  feasting  765 

This  guest, — a  lawless  thief,  a  bandit  rogue  ! 

She  from  the  house  hath  passed  :   I  followed  not, 

Nor  stretched  the  hand,  nor  wailed  unto  my  mistress 

Farewell,  who  was  to  me  and  all  the  household 

A  mother,  for  from  ills  untold  she  saved  us,  770 

Assuaging  her  lord's  wrath.     Do  I  not  well 

To  loathe  this  guest,  intruder  on  our  griefs  ? 

Enter  Herakles. 

Herakles. 

Ho,  fellow,  why  this  solemn  brooding  look  ? 
The  servant  should  not  lower  upon  the  guest, 
But  welcome  him  with  kindly-beaming  cheer.  775 

Thou,  seeing  here  in  presence  thy  lord's  friend, 
With  visage  sour  and  cloud  of  knitted  brows 
Receiv'st  him,  fretting  o'er  an  alien  grief. 
Hither  to  me,  that  wiser  thou  may'st  grow. 
The  lot  of  man — its  nature  knowest  thou  ?  780 

I  trow  not  :  how  shouldst  thou  ?     Give  ear  to  me. 
From  all  mankind  the  debt  of  death  is  due, 
Nor  of  all  mortals  is  there  one  that  knows 
If  through  the  coming  morrow  he  shall  live  : 
For  trackless  is  the  way  of  fortune's  feet,  785 

Not  to  be  taught,  nor  won  by  art  of  man. 
This  hearing  then,  and  learning  it  from  me, 


40  EURIPIDES. 


Make  merry,  drink  :  the  life  from  day  to  day 
Account  thine  own,  all  else  in  fortune's  power. 
Honour  withal  the  sweetest  of  the  Gods  790 

To  men,  the  Cyprian  Queen — a  gracious  Goddess ! 
These  thoughts  put  by,  and  hearken  to  my  words, 
If  words  of  wisdom  unto  thee  they  seem. 
I  trow  it.     Hence  with  sorrow  overwrought ;  [795 

Pass  through  yon  doors  and  quaff  the  wine  with  me, 
Thy  brows  with  garlands  bound.     Full  well  I  wot, 
From  all  this  lowering  spirit  prison-pent 
Thine  anchor  shall  Sir  Beaker's  plash  upheave. 
What,  man  ! — the  mortal  must  be  mortal-minded. 
So,  for  your  solemn  wights  of  knitted  brows,  800 

For  each  and  all, — if  thou  for  judge  wilt  take  me, — 
Life  is  not  truly  life,  but  mere  affliction. 

Servant. 

All  this  we  know  :  but  now  are  we  in  plight 
Not  meet  for  laughter  and  for  revelry. 

Herakles. 

The  woman  dead  is  alien-born  :  grieve  not  805 

Exceeding  much.     Yet  live  the  household's  lords. 

Servant. 
Live,  quotha  ! — know'st  thou  not  the  house's  ills  ? 

Herakles. 
Yea,  if  thy  master  lied  not  unto  me. 

Servant. 
Guest-fain  he  is — ah,  guest-fain  overmuch 


ALCESTIS.  41 


Herakles. 
A  stranger  dead — and  no  guest-cheer  for  me  ?  810 

Servant. 
O  yea,  an  alien  she — o'ermuch  an  alien  ! 

Herakles. 
Ha  !  was  he  keeping  some  affliction  back  ? 

Servant. 
Go  thou  in  peace  :  our  lords'  ills  are  for  us. 

Herakles. 
Grief  for  a  stranger  such  talk  heralds  not. 

Servant. 
Else  had  I  not  sore  vexed  beheld  thy  revelling.        815 

Herakles. 
How  !  have  I  sorry  handling  of  mine  hosts  ? 

Servant. 

Thou  cam'st  in  hour  unmeet  for  welcoming, 
For  grief  is  on  us  ;  and  thou  see'st  shorn  hair 
And  vesture  of  black  robes. 

Herakles. 

But  who  hath  died  ? 
Not  of  the  children  one,  or  grey-haired  sire  ?  820 

Servant. 
Nay,  but  Admetus'  wife  is  dead,  O  guest. 


4*  EURIPIDES. 


Herakles. 

How  say'st  thou  ? — Ha,  even  then  ye  gave  me  wel- 
come ? 

Servant. 

For  shame  he  could  not  thrust  thee  from  these  doors. 

Herakles. 

0  hapless !  what  a  helpmeet  hast  thou  lost  ! 

Servant. 
We  have  all  perished,  and  not  she  alone.  825 

Herakles. 

1  felt  it,  when  1  saw  his  tear-drowned  eyes, 
His  shaven  hair,  and  face  :  yet  he  prevailed, 
Saying  he  bare  a  stranger-friend  to  burial. 

I  passed  this  threshold  in  mine  heart's  despite, 

And  drank  in  halls  of  him  that  loves  the  guest,         830 

When  thus  his  plight  ! — And  am  I  revelling 

With  head  wreath-decked  ? — That  thou  should'st  ne'er 

have  told, 
When  such  affliction  lay  upon  the  home  ! 
Where  doth  he  bury  her  ?  Where  shall  I  find  her  ? 

Servant. 

By  the  straight  path  that  leads  Larissa-wards  835 

Shalt  see  the  hewn-stone  tomb  without  the  walls. 

Herakles. 

O  much-enduring  heart  and  soul  of  mine, 
Now  show  what  son  the  Lady  of  Tiryns  bare, 
Elektryon's  child  Alkmene,  unto  Zeus. 


ALCESTIS.  43 


For  I  must  save  the  woman  newly  dead,  840 

And  set  Alcestis  in  this  house  again, 
And  render  to  Admetus  good  for  good. 
I  go.     The  sable- vestured  King  of  Corpses, 
Death,  will  I  watch  for,  and  shall  find,  I  trow, 
Drinking  the  death-draught  hard  beside  the  tomb.  845 
And  if  I  lie  in  wait,  and  dart  from  ambush, 
And  seize,  and  with  mine  arms'  coil  compass  him, 
None  is  there  shall  deliver  from  mine  hands 
His  straining  sides,  or  e'er  he  yield  his  prey. 
Yea,  though  I  miss  the  quarry,  and  he  come  not      850 
Unto  the  blood-clot,  to  the  sunless  homes 
Down  will  I  fare  of  Kore  and  her  king, 
And  make  demand.     I  doubt  not  I  shall  lead 
Alcestis  up,  and  give  to  mine  host's  hands, 
Who  to  his  halls  received,  nor  drave  me  thence,      855 
Albeit  smitten  with  affliction  sore, 
But  hid  it,  like  a  prince,  respecting  me. 
Who  is  more  guest-fain  of  Thessalians  ? 
Who  in  all  Hellas  ? — O,  he  shall  not  say 
That  one  so  princely  showed  a  base  man  kindness.  860 

[Exit. 

Eater  Admetus,  with  Chorus  and  Attendants,  returning 
from  the  funeral. 

Admetus. 

O  hateful  returning  ! 

O  hateful  to  see 
Drear  halls  full  of  yearning 
For  the  lost — ah  me  ! 
What  aim  or  what  rest  have  I  ? — silence  or  speech,  of 
what  help  shall  they  be  ? 


44  EURIPIDES. 


Would  God  I  were  dead  ! 

O,  I  came  from  the  womb 
To  a  destiny  dread  ! 

Ah,  those  in  the  tomb — 
How  I  envy  them  !   How  I  desire  them,  and  long  to 
abide  in  their  home  ! 

To  mine  eyes  nothing  sweet 
Is  the  light  of  the  heaven, 
Nor  the  earth  to  my  feet ; 

Such  a  helpmeet  is  riven  870 

By  Death  from  my  side,  and  my  darling  to  Hades  the 
spoiler  hath  given. 

Chorus. 

Pass  on  thou,  and  hide  thee 
In  thy  chambers. 

Admetus. 

Ah  woe  ! 
Chorus. 

Wail  the  griefs  that  betide  thee  : 
How  canst  thou  but  so  ? 

Admetus. 

O  God! 

Chorus. 

Thou  hast  passed  through  deep  waters  of 
anguish — I  know  it,  I  know. 

Admetus. 
Alas  and  alas ! 


ALCESTIS.  45 


Chorus. 

No  help  bringeth  this 
To  thy  love  in  that  place. 

Admetus. 

Woe  ! 

Chorus. 

Bitter  it  is 
The  face  of  a  wife  well-beloved  for  ever  and  ever  to 
miss. 

Admetus. 

Thou  hast  stricken  mine  heart 

Where  the  wound  will  not  heal. 
What  is  worse  than  to  part 

From  the  loving  and  leal  ?  880 

Would  God   I   had  wedded  her  not,  home-bliss  with 
Alcestis  to  feel ! 

O,  I  envy  the  lot 

Of  the  man  without  wife, 
Without  child  :  single- wrought 
Is  the  strand  of  his  life  : 
No  soul-crushing  burden  of  sorrow,  no  strength-over- 
mastering strife. 

But  that  children  should  sicken, 

That  gloom  of  despair 
Over  bride-beds  should  thicken, 
What  spirit  can  bear  ? 
When  childless,  unwedded,  a  man  through  life's  calm 
journey  might  fare  ? 


46  EURIPIDES. 


Chorus. 

Thee  Fortune  hath  met, 

Strong  wrestler,  and  thrown  ; 
Yet  no  bounds  hast  thou  set—  890 

Admetus. 
Woe's  me  !  — 

Chorus. 

To  thy  moan. 
O,  thy  burden  is  heavy  ! 

Admetus. 
Alas! 

Chorus. 
Yet  endure  it  :  thou  art  not  alone. 

Not  thou  art  the  first 
Of  bereaved  ones. 

Admetus. 

Ah  me  ! 

Chorus. 

Such  tempest  hath  burst 
Upon  many  ere  thee. 
Unto  each  his  mischance,  when  the  surges  roll  up  from 
Calamity's  sea. 

Admetus. 

O  long  grief  and  pain 

For  beloved  ones  passed  ! 


ALCESTIS.  47 

Why  didst  thou  restrain 
When  myself  I  had  cast 
Down  into  her  grave,   with  the  noblest  to  lie  peace- 
lulled  at  the  last  ? 

Not  one  soul,  but  two  900 

Had  been  Hades'  prey, 
Souls  utterly  true 
Together  for  aye, 
Which  together  o'er  waves  of  the  underworld  mere  had 
passed  this  day. 

Chorus. 

Of  my  kin  was  there  one, 

And  the  life's  light  failed 
In  his  halls  of  a  son, 
One  meet  to  be  wailed, 
His  only  beloved  :   howbeit  the  manhood  within  him 
prevailed  ; 

And  the  ills  heaven-sent 
As  a  man  did  he  bear, 
Though  by  this  was  he  bent 
Unto  silvered  hair, 
Far  on  in  life's  path,  without  son  for  his  remnant  of 
weakness  to  care.  910 

Admetus. 

O,  how  can  I  tread 

Thy  threshold,  fair  home  ? 
How  shelter  mine  head 

'Neath  thy  roof,  now  the  doom 
Of  the  Gods'  dice  changeth  ? — ah   me,   what  change 
upon  all  things  is  come  ! 


48  EURIPIDES. 


For  with  torches  aflame 

Of  the  Pelian  pine, 
And  with  bride-song  I  came 
In  that  hour  divine, 
Upbearing  the  hand  of  a  wife — thine  hand,  O  darling 
mine  ! 

Followed  revellers,  raising 

Acclaim  :  ever  broke 
From  the  lips  of  them  praising, 
Of  the  dead  as  they  spoke, 
And  of  me,  how  the  noble,  the  children  of  kings,  Love 
joined  'neath  his  yoke.  920 

But  for  bridal  song 

Is  the  wail  for  the  dead, 
And,  for  white-robed  throng, 
Black  vesture  hath  led 
Me  to  halls  where  the  ghost  of  delight  lieth  couched  on 
a  desolate  bed. 

Chorus. 

To  the  trance  of  thy  bliss 

Sudden  anguish  was  brought. 
Never  lesson  like  this 

To  thine  heart  had  been  taught : 
Yet  thy  life  hast  thou  won,  and  thy  soul  hast  delivered 
from  death  : — is  it  nought  ? 

Thy  wife  hath  departed  : 

Love  tender  and  true  930 

Hath  she  left  : — stricken-hearted, 
Wherein  is  this  new  ? 
Hath  Death  not  unyoked  from  the  chariot  of  Love  full 
many  ere  you  ? 


ALCESTIS.  49 


Admetus. 

Friends,  I  account  the  fortune  of  my  wife  935 

Happier  than  mine,  albeit  it  seems  not  so. 

For  nought  of  grief  shall  touch  her  any  more, 

And  glorious  rest  she  finds  from  many  toils. 

But  I,  unmeet  to  live,  my  doom  outrun, 

Shall  drag  out  bitter  days  :   I  know  it  now.  940 

How  shall  I  bear  to  enter  this  mine  home  ? 

Speaking  to  whom,  and  having  speech  of  whom, 

Shall  I  find  joy  of  entering  ? — whither  turn  me  ? 

The  solitude  within  shall  drive  me  forth, 

Whenso  I  see  my  wife's  couch  tenantless,  945 

And  seats  whereon  she  sat,  and,  'neath  the  roof, 

All  foul  the  floor ;  when  on  my  knees  my  babes 

Falling  shall  weep  their  mother,  servants  moan 

The  peerless  mistress  from  the  mansion  lost. 

All  this  within  :  but  from  the  world  without  950 

Shall  bridals  of  Thessalians  chase  me  :  throngs 

Where  women  gossip  ;  for  I  shall  not  bear 

On  those  companions  of  my  wife  to  look. 

And,  if  a  foe  I  have,  thus  shall  he  scoff : 

"  Lo  there  who  basely  liveth — dared  not  die,  955 

"  But  whom  he  wedded  gave,  a  coward's  ransom, 

"  And  'scaped  from  Hades.     Count  ye  him  a  man  ? 

"  He  hates  his  parents,  though  himself  was  loth 

"  To  die  !  "     Such  ill  report,  besides  my  griefs, 

Shall  mine  be.     Ah,  what  profit  is  to  live,  960 

O  friends,  in  evil  fame,  in  evil  plight  ? 

Chorus.  (Str  1) 

I  have  mused  on  the  words  of  the  wise, 

Of  the  mighty  in  song  ; 
1  have  lifted  mine  heart  to  the  skies, 


50  EURIPIDES. 


I  have  searched  all  truth  with  mine  eyes  ; 

But  nought  more  strong 

Than  Fate  have  1  found  :  there  is  nought 

In  the  tablets  of  Thrace, 

Wither  drugs  whereof  Orpheus  taught, 

Nor  in  all  that  Apollo  brought  970 

To  Asklepius'  race, 

When  the  herbs  of  healing  he  severed,  and  out  of  their 

anguish  delivered 

The  pain-distraught. 

(Ant.  1) 

There  is  none  other  Goddess  beside, 

To  the  altars  of  whom 
No  man  draweth  near,  nor  hath  cried 
To  her  image,  nor  victim  hath  died, 

Averting  her  doom. 
O  Goddess,  more  mighty  for  ill 

Come  not  upon  me 
Than  in  days  overpast :  for  his  will 
Even  Zeus  may  in  no  wise  fulfil 
Unholpen  of  thee. 
Steel  is  molten  as  water  before  thee,  but  never  relenting 
came  o'er  thee,  980 

Who  art  ruthless  still. 

(Str.  2) 
Thee,  friend,   hath  the  Goddess  gripped  :    from   her 

hands  never  wrestler  hath  slipped. 
Yet  be  strong  to  endure  :  never  mourning  shall  bring 
our  beloved  returning 

From  the  nethergloom  up  to  the  light. 
Yea,  the  heroes  of  Gods  begotten, 
They  fade  into  darkness,  forgotten 

In  death's  chill  night.  990 


ALCESTIS.  51 


Dear  was  she  in  days  ere  we  lost  her, 

Dear  yet,  though  she  lie  with  the  dead. 

None  nobler  shall  Earth-mother  foster 

Than  the  wife  of  thy  bed. 

(Ant.  2) 

Not  as  mounds  of  the  dead  which  have  died,  so  account 

we  the  tomb  of  thy  bride, 

But  O,  let  the  worship  and  honour  that  we  render  to 

Gods  rest  upon  her : 

Unto  her  let  the  wayfarer  pray. 

As  he  treadeth  the  pathway  that  trendeth    1000 

Aside  from  the  highway,  and  bendeth 

At  her  shrine,  he  shall  say  : 

"Her  life  for  her  lord's  was  given  ; 

With  the  Blest  now  abides  she  on  high. 

Hail,  Queen,  show  us  grace  from  thine 

heaven !  " 

Even  so  shall  they  cry. 

But  lo,  Alkmene's  son,  as  seemeth,  yonder, 
Admetus,  to  thine  hearth  is  journeying. 

Enter  Herakles,  leading  a  woman  wholly  veiled. 

Herakles. 

Unto  a  friend  behoveth  speech  outspoken, 

Admetus,  not  to  hide  within  the  breast 

Murmurs  unvoiced.     I  came  mid  thine  affliction.    1010 

Fair  claim  was  mine  to  rank  amidst  thy  friends. 

Thou  told'st  me  not  how  lay  thy  wife  a  corpse : 

Thou  gavest  me  guest-welcome  in  thine  home, 

Making  pretence  of  mourning  for  a  stranger. 

I  wreathed  mine  head,  I  spilled  unto  the  Gods       1015 

Drink-offerings  in  a  stricken  house,  even  thine. 

E  2 


52  EURIPIDES. 


I  blame  thee,  thus  mishandled,  yea,  I  blame  thee. 

Yet  nowise  is  my  will  to  gall  thy  grief. 

But  wherefore  hither  turning  back  I  come, 

This  will  I  tell.     Take,  guard  for  me  this  maid,      1020 

Till,  leading  hitherward  the  Thracian  mares, 

I  come  from  slaughter  of  Bistonia's  lord. 

But  if — not  that,  for  I  would  fain  return, — 

I  give  her  then,  for  service  of  thine  halls. 

Prize  of  hard  toil  unto  mine  hands  she  came  :         1025 

For  certain  men  I  found  but  now  arraying 

An  athlete-strife,  toil-worthy,  for  all  comers, 

Whence  I  have  won  and  bring  this  victor's  meed. 

Horses  there  were  for  them  to  take  which  won 

The  light  foot's  triumph  ;  but  for  hero-strife,  1030 

Boxing  and  wrestling,  oxen  were  the  guerdon  : 

A  woman  made  it  richer.     Shame  it  seemed 

To  hap  thereon,  and  slip  this  glorious  gain. 

But,  as  I  said,  this  woman  be  thy  care:  [I035 

For  no  thief's  prize,  but  toil-achieved,  1  bring  her. 

Yea,  one  day  thou  perchance  shalt  say  'twas  well. 

Admetus. 

Not  flouting  thee,  nor  counting  among  foes, 

My  wife's  unhappy  fate  I  hid  from  thee. 

But  this  had  been  but  grief  uppiled  on  grief, 

Hadst  thou  sped  hence  to  be  another's  guest  ;         1040 

And  mine  own  ills  sufficed  me  to  bewail. 

But,  for  the  woman — if  in  any  wise 

It  may  be,  prince,  bid  some  Thessalian  guard  her, 

I  pray  thee,  who  hath  suffered  not  as  I. 

In  Pherae  many  a  friend  and  host  thou  hast. 

Awaken  not  remembrance  of  my  grief.  1045 

I  could  not,  seeing  her  mine  halls  within, 


ALCESTIS.  53 


Be  tearless  :  add  not  hurt  unto  mine  hurt. 

Burdened  enough  am  I  by  mine  affliction. 

Nay,  in  mine  house  where  should  a  young  maid  lodge  ? 

For  vesture  and  adorning  speak  her  young :—  1050 

What,  'neath  the  men's  roof  shall  her  lodging  be  ? 

And  how  unsullied,  dwelling  with  young  men  ? 

Not  easy  is  it,  Herakles,  to  curb 

The  young  :  herein  do  I  take  thought  for  thee. 

Or  shall  I  ope  to  her  my  dead  wife's  bower  ?  1055 

How  ! — cause  her  to  usurp  my  lost  love's  bed  ? 

Twofold  reproach  I  dread — from  mine  own  folk, 

Lest  one  should  say  that,  traitor  to  her  kindness, 

1  fall  upon  another  woman's  bed, — 

And  of  the  dead,  to  me  most  reverence- worthy,      1060 

Needs  must  I  take  great  heed.     But,  woman,  thou, 

Whoso  thou  art,  know  that  thy  body's  stature 

Is  as  Alcestis,  and  thy  form  as  hers. 

Ah  me  ! — lead,  for  the  Gods'  sake,  from  my  sight 

This  woman  ! — Take  not  my  captivity  captive.       1065 

For,  as  I  look  on  her,  methinks  I  see 

My  wife  :  she  stirs  mine  heart  with  turmoil  :  fountains 

Of  tears  burst  from  mine  eyes.     O  wretched  1  ! 

Now  first  I  taste  this  grief's  full  bitterness. 

Chorus. 

In  sooth  thy  fortune  can  I  not  commend  :  1070 

Yet  must  we  brook  a  God's  gift,  whoso  cometh. 

Herakles. 

O  that  such  might  I  had  as  back  to  bring 
To  light  thy  wife  from  nethergloom  abodes, 
And  to  bestow  this  kindness  upon  thee  ! 


54  EURIPIDES. 


Admetus. 

Fain  would'st  thou,  well  I  know.    But  wherefore  this  ? 
It  cannot  be  the  dead  to  light  should  come.  [1075 

Herakles. 
O'ershoot  not  now  the  mark,  but  bear  all  bravely. 

Admetus. 
Easier  to  exhort  than  suffer  and  be  strong. 

Herakles. 
But  what  thy  profit,  though  for  aye  thou  moan  ? 

Admetus. 
I  too  know  this  ;  yet  love  constraineth  me.  1080 

Herakles. 
Love  for  the  lost — ay,  that  draws  forth  the  tear. 

Admetus. 
She  hath  undone  me  more  than  words  can  tell. 

Herakles. 
A  good  wife  hast  thou  lost,  who  shall  gainsay  ? 

Admetus. 
So  that  this  man  hath  no  more  joy  in  life. 

Herakles. 
Time  shall  bring  healing  :  now  is  thy  grief  young.  1085 

Admetus. 
Time — time  ? — O  yea,  if  this  thy  Time  be  Death  ! 


ALCESTIS.  55 


Herakles. 
A  wife,  and  yearning  for  new  love,  shall  calm  thee. 

Admetus. 
Hush  ! — what  say'st  thou  ? — 1  could  not  think  thereon  ! 

Herakles. 
How  ? — wilt  not  wed,  but  widowed  keep  thy  couch  ? 

Admetus. 
Lives  not  the  woman  that  shall  couch  with  me.      1090 

Herakles. 
Look'st  thou  that  this  shall  profit  aught  the  dead  ? 

Admetus. 
I  needs  must  honour  her  where'er  she  be. 

Herakles. 
Good — good — yet  one  with  folly  so  might  charge  thee. 

Admetus. 
So  be  it,  so  thou  call  me  bridegroom  never. 

Herakles. 
I  praise  thee  for  that  leal  thou  art  to  her.  1095 

Admetus. 
Death  be  my  meed,  if  I  betray  her  dead. 

Herakles. 
Receive  this  woman  now  these  halls  within. 

Admetus. 
Nay  ! — I  beseech  by  Zeus  that  did  beget  thee ! 


56  EURIPIDES. 


Herakles. 
Yet  shalt  thou  err  if  thou  do  not  this  thing. 

Admetus. 
Yet  shall  mine  heart  be  grief-stung,  if  I  do  it.         noo 

Herakles. 
Yield  thou  :  this  grace  may  prove  perchance  a  duty. 

Admetus. 

0  that  in  strife  thou  ne'er  hadst  won  this  maid  ! 

Herakles. 
Yet  thy  friend's  victory  is  surely  thine. 

Admetus. 
Well  said  :  yet  let  the  woman  hence  depart. 

Herakles. 
Yea — if  need  be.     First  look  well — need  it  be  ?      1105 

Admetus. 
Needs  must — save  thou  wilt  else  be  wroth  with  me. 

Herakles. 

1  too  know  what  I  do,  insisting  thus. 

Admetus. 
Have  then  thy  will  :  thy  pleasure  is  my  pain. 

Herakles. 
Yet  one  day  shalt  thou  praise  me  :  only  yield. 


ALCESTIS.  57 


Admetus. 
To  Attendants. 

Lead  ye  her,  if  mine  halls  must  needs  receive.        mo 

Herakles. 
Not  to  thy  servants'  hands  will  I  commit  her. 

Admetus. 
Thou  lead  her  in  then,  if  it  seems  thee  good. 

Herakles. 
Nay,  but  in  thine  hands  will  I  place  her — thine. 

Admetus. 
I  will  not  touch  her  ! — Open  stand  my  doors. 

Herakles. 
Unto  thy  right  hand  only  trust  1  her.  1115 

Admetus. 

0  king,  thou  forcest  me  :  I  will  not  this  ! 

Herakles. 

Be  strong  :    stretch  forth   thine  hand  and  touch  thy 
guest. 

Admetus. 

1  stretch  it  forth,  as  to  a  headless  Gorgon. 

Herakles. 
Hast  her  ? 

Admetus. 
I  have. 


58  EURIPIDES. 


Herakles. 

Yea,  guard  her.     Thou  shalt  call 
The  child  of  Zeus  one  day  a  noble  guest.  1120 

[Raises  the  veil,  and  discloses  Alcestis. 
Look  on  her,  if  in  aught  she  seems  to  thee 
Like  to  thy  wife.     Step  forth  from  grief  to  bliss. 

Admetus. 

What  shall  1  say  ? — Gods  !  Marvel  this  unhoped  for  ! 

My  wife  do  I  behold  in  very  sooth, 

Or  doth  some  god-sent  mockery -joy  distract  me  ?   1125 

Herakles. 
Not  so  ;  but  this  thou  seest  is  thy  wife. 

Admetus. 
What  if  this  be  some  phantom  from  the  shades  ? 

Herakles. 
No  ghost-upraiser  hast  thou  ta'en  for  guest. 

Admetus. 
How  ? — whom  I  buried  do  I  see — my  wife  ? 

Herakles.  [ii3° 

Doubt  not :  yet  might'st  thou  well  mistrust  thy  fortune. 

Admetus. 
As  wife,  as  living,  may  I  touch,  address  her  ? 

Herakles. 
Speak  to  her  :  all  thou  didst  desire  thou  hast. 


ALCESTIS.  59 


Admetus. 

O  face,  O  form  of  my  beloved  wife, 

Past  hope  I  have  thee,  who  ne'er  thought  to  see  thee  ! 

Herakles. 
Thou  hast :  may  no  God  of  thy  bliss  be  jealous.    1135 

Admetus. 

0  scion  nobly-born  of  Zeus  most  high, 
Blessings  on  thee  !  The  Father  who  begat  thee 
Keep  thee  !  Thou  only  hast  restored  my  fortunes. 
How  didst  thou  bring  her  from  the  shades  to  light  ? 

Herakles. 

1  closed  in  conflict  with  the  Lord  of  Spirits.  1140 

Admetus. 

Where,  say'st  thou,   didst   thou  fight  this  fight  with 
Death  ? 

Herakles. 

From  ambush  by  the  tomb  mine,  hands  ensnared  him. 

Admetus. 
Now  wherefore  speechless  standeth  thus  my  wife  ? 

Herakles. 

'Tis  not  vouchsafed  thee  yet  to  hear  her  voice, 

Ere  to  the  Powers  beneath  the  earth  she  be  I:[45 

Unconsecrated,  and  the  third  day  come. 

But  lead  her  in,  and,  just  man  as  thou  art, 

Henceforth,  Admetus,  reverence  still  the  guest. 

Farewell.     But  I  must  go,  and  work  the  work 

Set  by  the  king,  the  son  of  Sthenelus.  11 50 


60  EURIPIDES. 


Admetus. 
Abide  with  us,  a  sharer  of  our  hearth. 

Herakles. 
Hereafter  this  :  now  must  I  hasten  on. 

Admetus. 

O  prosper  thou,  and  come  again  in  peace ! 

Through  all  my  realm  I  publish  to  my  folk 

That,  for  these  blessings,  dances  they  array,  lI55 

And  that  atonement-fumes  from  altars  rise. 

For  now  to  happier  days  than  those  o'erpast 

Have  we  attained.     1  own  me  blest  indeed. 

Chorus. 

O  the  works  of  the    Gods — in    manifold   forms    they 
reveal  them  : 
Manifold  things  unhoped-for  the  Gods  to  accomplish-' 
ment  bring.  1160 

And  the  things  that  we  looked  for,  the  Gods  deign  not 

to  fulfil  them  ; 
And   the  paths   undiscerned   of   our   eyes,    the    Gods 
unseal  them. 

So  fell  this  marvellous  thing. 

[Exeunt  omnes. 


MEDEA. 


THE  ARGUMENT. 

When  the  Heroes,  who  sailed  in  the  ship  Argo  to  bring 
home  the  Golden  Fleece,  came  to  the  land  of  Kolchis, 
they  found  that  fa  win  that  treasure  was  a  deed  passing 
the  might  of  mortal  man,  so  terribly  was  it  guarded  by 
monsters  magical,  even  fire-breathing  bulls  and  an  un- 
sleeping dragon.  But  Aphrodite  caused  Medea  the 
sorceress,  daughter  of  Aietes  the  king  of  the  land,  to 
love  Jason  their  captain,  so  that  by  her  magic  he  over- 
came the  bulls  and  the  dragon.  Then  jfason  took  the 
Fleece,  and  Medea  withal,  for  that  he  had  pledged  him 
to  wed  her  in  the  laud  of  Greece.  But  as  they  fled, 
Absyrtus  her  brother  pursued  them  with  a  host  of  war, 
yet  by  Medea's  devising  was  he  slain.  So  they  came  to 
the  land  of  Iolkos,  and  to  Pelias,  who  held  the  kingdom 
which  was  Jason's  of  right.  But  Medea  by  her  magic 
wrought  upon  Pelias'  daughters  so  that  they  slew  their 
father.  Yet  by  reason  of  men's  horror  of  the  deed  might 
not  jfason  and  Medea  abide  in  the  land,  and  they  came  to 
Corinth.  But  there  all  men  rejoiced  for  the  coining  of  a 
hero  so  mighty  in  war  and  a  lady  renowned  for  wisdom 
unearthly,  for  that  Medea  was  grandchild  of  the  Sun- 


IV 

god.  But  after  ten  years,  Kreon  the  king  of  the  land 
spake  to  Jason,  saying,  "  Lo,  I  will  give  thee  my  daugh- 
ter to  wife,  and  thou  shall  reign  after  me,  if  thou  wilt 
put  away  thy  wife  Medea  ;  but  her  and  her  two  sons 
will  I  banish  from  the  land."  So  Jason  consented. 
And  of  this  befell  things  strange  and  awful,  which  are 
told  herein. 


DRAMATIS   PERSONS. 

Nurse  of  Medea's  Children. 

Children's  Guardian" 

Medea. 

Chorus  of  Corinthian  Ladies. 

Kreon,  King  of  Corinth. 

Jason. 

Aigeus,  King  of  Athens. 

Messenger. 

Children  of  Medea. 

The  Scene  is  in  front  of  Jason's  House  at  Corinth. 

*  Padagogus. — A  trusted  servant,  responsible  for  keeping  the  boys 
out  of  harm's  way:  he  was  present  at  their  sports,  accompanied 
them  to  and  from  school,  and  never  let  them  be  out  of  his  sight.  A 
similar  institution  is  familiar  to  Englishmen  resident  in  India. 


MKDEA. 


Enter  Nurse  of  Medea's  Children. 

Nurse. 

Would  God  that  Argo's  hull  had  never  flown 

Through  those  blue  Clashing  Rocks  to  Kolchis-land, 

Nor  that  in  Pelion's  glens  had  fallen  ever 

The  axe-hewn  pine,  nor  filled  with  oars  the  hands 

Of  hero-princes,  who  at  Pelias'  hest  5 

Quested  the  Golden  Fleece  !    My  mistress  then, 

Medea,  to  Iolkos'  towers  had  sailed  not 

With  love  for  Jason  thrilled  through  all  her  soul, 

Nor  had  on  Pelias'  daughters  wrought  to  slay 

Their  sire,  nor  now  in  this  Corinthian  land  10 

Dwelt  with  her  lord  and  children,  gladdening 

By  this  her  exile  them  whose  land  received  her, 

Yea,  and  in  all  things  serving  Jason's  wea!, 

Which  is  the  chief  salvation  of  the  home, 

When  wife  stands  not  at  variance  with  her  lord.         15 

Now  all  is  hatred  :  love  is  sickness-stricken. 

For  Jason,  traitor  to  his  babes  and  her, 

My  mistress,  weddeth  with  a  child  of  kings, 

Daughter  of  Kreon  ruler  of  the  land. 

And,  slighted  thus,  Medea,  hapless  wife,  20 

Cries  on  the  oaths,  invokes  that  mightiest  pledge 


62  EURIPIDES. 


Of  the  right  hand,  and  calls  the  Gods  to  witness 

From  Jason  what  requital  she  receives. 

Foodless  she  lies,  her  frame  to  griefs  resigned, 

Wasting  in  tears  all  those  long  weary  hours  25 

Since  first  she  knew  her  outraged  by  her  lord, 

Never  uplifting  eye,  nor  turning  ever 

From  earth  her  face  ;    but  like  a  rock  or  sea- wave 

So  hearkens  she  to  friends  that  counsel  her  ; 

Saving  at  whiles,  when,  turning  her  white  neck,         30 

All  to  herself  she  wails  her  sire  beloved, 

Her  land,  her  home,  forsaking  which  she  came 

Hither  with  him  who  holds  her  now  dishonoured. 

Now  knows  she,  hapless,  by  affliction's  teaching, 

How  good  is  fatherland  unforfeited.  35 

She  loathes  her  babes,  joys  not  beholding  them. 

1  fear  her,  lest  some  mischief  she  devise. 

Grim  is  her  spirit,  one  that  will  not  brook 

Mishandling  :  yea,  I  know  her,  and  I  dread 

Lest  through  her  heart  she  thrust  the  whetted  knife,  40 

Through  the  halis  stealing  silent  to  her  bed, 

Or  slay  the  king  and  him  that  weds  his  child, 

And  get  herself  therefrom  some  worse  misfortune  : 

For  dangerous  is  she  :  who  begins  a  feud 

With  her,  not  soon  shall  sing  the  triumph-song.         45 

But  lo,  her  boys,  their  racing-sport  put  by, 

Draw  near,  unwitting  of  their  mother's  ills, 

For  the  young  heart  loves  not  to  brood  in  grief. 

Enter  Children's  Guardian,  with  boys. 

Children's  Guardian. 

O  ancient  chattel  of  my  mistress'  home, 

Why  at  the  gates  thus  lonely  standest  thou,  50 

Thyself  unto  thyself  discoursing  ills  ? 


MEDEA .  63 


How  wills  Medea  to  be  left  of  thee  ? 

Nurse. 

0  grey  attendant  of  the  sons  of  Jason, 

The  hearts  of  faithful  servants  still  are  touched 

By  ill-betiding  fortunes  of  their  lords.  55 

For  I  have  come  to  such  a  pass  of  grief, 

That  yearning  took  me  hitherward  to  come 

And  tell  to  earth  and  heaven  my  lady's  fortunes. 

Children's  Guardian. 
Ceaseth  not  yet  the  hapless  one  from  moan  ? 

Nurse. 
Cease  ! — her  pain  scarce  begun,  the  midst  far  off!      60 

Children's  Guardian. 

Ah  fool ! — if  one  may  say  it  of  his  lords: — 
Little  she  knoweth  of  the  latest  blow. 

Nurse. 
What  is  it,  ancient  ?     Grudge  not  thou  to  tell  me. 

Children's  Guardian. 
Nought :   I  repent  me  of  the  word  that  'scaped  me. 

Nurse. 

Nay,  by  thy  beard,  from  fellow-thrall  hide  not —         65 
Silence,  if  need  be,  will  I  keep  thereof. 

Children's  Guardian. 

1  heard  one  saying — feigning  not  to  hear, 

As  I  drew  near  the  marble  thrones,1  where  sit 
The  ancients  round  Peirene's  hallowed  fount, — 

1  So  Mahaffy,  adopted  by  Paley. 

F  a 


64  EURIPIDES. 


That  Kreon,  this  land's  lord,  will  shortly  drive  70 

These  boys  from  soil  Corinthian  with  their  mother  ? 
Howbeit,  if  the  tale  I  heard  be  true 
1  know  not  :  fain  were  I  it  were  not  so. 

Nurse. 

Will  Jason  brook  his  children  suffering  this, 

What  though  he  be  estranged  from  their  mother  ?     75 

Children's  Guardian. 

The  old  ties  in  the  race  lag  far  behind 
The  new : — no  friend  is  he  unto  this  house. 

Nurse. 

We  are  undone  then,  if  we  add  fresh  ill 
To  old,  ere  lightened  be  our  ship  of  this. 

Children's  Guardian. 

But  thou — for  'tis  not  season  that  thy  lady  80 

Should  know — keep  silence,  and  speak  not  the  tale. 

Nurse. 

Hear,  babes,  what  father  this  is  unto  you  ! 

I  curse  him — not  :  he  is  my  master  still  : 

But  to  his  friends  he  stands  convict  of  baseness. 

Children's  Guardian. 

What  man  is  not  ? — Hast  learnt  this  only  now,  85 

That  each  man  loves  self  better  than  his  neighbour, 
For  just  cause  some,  and  some  for  greed  of  gain  ? 
So,  for  a  bride's  sake,  these  their  father  loves  not. 


MEDEA .  65 


Nurse. 

Pass  in,  dear  children,  for  it  shall  be  well. 

But  thou,  keep  these  apart  to  the  uttermost :  90 

Bring  them  not  nigh  their  mother  angry-souled. 

For  late  I  saw  her  glare,  as  glares  a  bull 

On  these,  as  'twere  for  mischief ;  nor  her  wrath, 

I  know,  shall  cease,  until  its  lightning  strike. 

To  foes  may  she  work  ill,  and  not  to  friends  !  95 

Medea  (behind  the  scenes). 

O  hapless  I  ! — O  miseries  heaped  on  mine  head  ! 
Ah  me  !  ah  me  !  would  God  I  were  dead  ! 

Nurse. 

Lo,  darlings,  the  thing  that  I  told  you  ! 

Lo  the  heart  of  your  mother  astir  ! 
And  astir  is  her  anger  :  withhold  you  100 

From  her  sight,  come  not  nigh  unto  her. 
Haste,  get  you  within  :  O  beware  ye 

Of  the  thoughts  as  a  wild-beast  brood, 
Of  the  nature  too  ruthless  to  spare  ye 
In  its  desperate  mood. 

Pass  ye  within  now,  departing 

With  all  speed.     It  is  plain  to  discern 
How  a  cloud  of  lamenting,  upstarting 

From  its  viewless  beginnings,  shall  burn 
In  lightnings  of  fury  yet  fiercer. 

What  deeds  shall  be  dared  of  that  soul, 
So  haughty,  when  wrong's  goads  pierce  her, 

So  hard  to  control  ?  no 

[Exeunt  Children  with  Guardian. 


66  EURIPIDES. 


Medea  (behind  the  seenes). 

Woe  !   1  have  suffered,  have  suffered,  foul  wrongs  that 
may  waken,  may  waken, 
Mighty  lamentings  full  well !  O  ye  children  accursed 
from  the  womb, 
Hence  to  destruction,  ye  brood  of  a  loathed  one  for- 
saken, forsaken  ! 
Hence  with  your  father,  and  perish  our  home  in  the 
blackness  of  doom  ! 

Nurse. 

Ah  me,  in  the  father's  offences 

What  part  have  the  babes,  that  thine  hate 
bhould  blast  them  ? — forlorn  innocences, 

How  sorely  I  fear  for  your  fate ! 
Ah  princes — how  fearful  their  moods  are  ! — 

Long  ruling,  unschooled  to  obey, —  120 

Unforgiving,  unsleeping  their  feuds  are. 
Better  life's  level  way. 

Be  it  mine,  if  in  greatness  I  may  not, 

In  quiet  and  peace  to  grow  old. 
Sweeter  name  than  "  The  Mean  "  shall  ye  say  not ; 

But  to  taste  it  is  sweetness  untold. 
But  to  men  never  weal  above  measure 

Availed  :  on  its  perilous  height 
The  Gods  in  their  hour  of  displeasure 

The  heavier  smite.  130 

Enter  Chorus  of  Corinthian  Ladies. 

Chorus. 

I  have  hearkened  the  voice  of  the  daughter  of  Kolchis, 
the  sound  of  the  crying 


MEDEA .  67 


Of  the  misery-stricken  ;   nor  yet  is  she  stilled.     Now 
the  tale  of  her  tell, 
Grey  woman  ;  for  moaned  through  the  porch  from  her 

chamber  the  wail  of  her  sighing  ; 
And   I  cannot,  I    cannot   be  glad  while  the  home  in 
affliction  is  lying, 

The  house  I  have  loved  so  well. 

Nurse. 

Home  ?— home  there  is  none  :  it  hath  vanished  away  : 
For  my  lord  to  a  bride  of  the  princes  is  thrall  ;      140 

And  my  lady  is  pining  the  livelong  day 

In  her  bower,  and  for  nought  that  her  friends'  lips  say 
On  her  heart  may  the  dews  of  comfort  fall. 

Medea  (behind  the  scenes). 

Would  God  that  the  flame  of  the  lightning  from  heaven 
descending,  descending, 
Might  burn  through  mine  head ! — for  in  living  wherein 
any  more  is  my  gain  ? 
Alas  and  alas  !    Would  God  I  might  bring  to  an  ending, 
an  ending, 
The  life  that  I  loathe,  and  behind  me  might  cast  all 
its  burden  of  pain  ! 


Chorus. 


(Str.) 


O  Zeus,  Earth,  Light,  did  ye  hear  her, 
How  waileth  the  woe-laden  breath 
Of  the  bride  in  unhappiest  plight  ? 
What  yearning  for  vanished  delight,  150 

O  passion-distraught,  should  have  might 
To  cause  thee  to  wish  death  nearer — 
The  ending  of  all  things,  death  ? 


68  EURIPIDES. 


Make  thou  not  for  this  supplication  ! 

If  thine  husband  hath  turned  and  adored 
New  love,  that  estranged  he  is, 
O  harrow  thy  soul  not  for  this. 
It  is  Zeus  that  shall  right  thee,  I  wis. 
Ah,  pine  not  in  over-vexation 
Of  spirit,  bewailing  thy  lord  ! 

Medea  [behind  the  scenes). 

O  Lady  of  Justice,  O  Artemis'  Majesty,  see  it,  O  see 
it —  1 60 

Look  on  the  wrongs  that    I  suffer,  by  oaths  ever- 
lasting who  tied 
The  soul  of  mine  husband,  that  ne'er  from  the  curse  he 
might  free  it,  nor  free  it 
From   your   vengeance  ! — O   may    I   behold   him   at 
last,  even  him  and  his  bride, 
Them,   and   these  halls  therewithal,  all    shattered  in 
ruin,  in  ruin  ! — 
Wretches,   who  dai'e   unprovoked   to  do   to   Medea 
despite  ! 
O  father,  O  city,  whom  erst  1  forsook,  for  undoing,  un- 
doing, 
And  for  shame,  when  the  blood  of  my  brother  I  spilt 
on  the  path  of  my  flight  ! 

Nurse. 

Do  ye  hear  what  she  saith,  and  uplifteth  her  cry 
Unto  Themis  and  Zeus,  to  the  Suppliant's  King, 

Oath-steward  of  men  that  be  born  but  to  die  ?     170 

O  my  lady  will  lay  not  her  anger  by 

Soon,  making  her  vengeance  a  little  thing. 


MEDEA .  69 


Chorus. 

{Ant.) 

If  she  would  but  come  forth  where  we  wait  her, 
If  she  would  but  give  ear  to  the  sound 
Of  our  speech,  that  her  spirit  would  learn 
From  its  fierceness  of  anger  to  turn, 
And  her  lust  for  revenge  not  burn  ! 
O  ne'er  may  my  love  prove  traitor, 
Never  false  to  my  friends  be  it  found  ! 

But  go  thou,  and  forth  of  the  dwelling  180 

Thy  mistress  hitherward  lead. 
Say  to  her  that  friends  be  we  all. 
O  hasten,  ere  mischief  befall 
The  lords  of  the  palace-hall. 
For  her  grief,  like  a  tempest  upswelling, 
Resistless  shall  ruin-ward  speed. 

Nurse. 

I  will  do  it :  but  almost  my  spirit  despaireth 
To  win  her ;   yet  labour  of  love  shall  it  be. 
But  my  queen  on  her  thralls  as  a  mad  bull  glareth, 
Or  a  lioness  couched  mid  her  whelps,  whoso  dareth 
With  speech  to  draw  near  her,  so  tameless  is  she. 

He   should    err    not,  who    named    the   old    singers   in 
singing  190 

Not  cunning,  but  left-handed  bards,  for  their  lays 
Did  they  frame  for  the  mirth-tide,  the  festal  in-bringing 
Of  the  wine,  and  the  feast,  when  the  harp-strings  are 
ringing 
To  sweeten  with  melody  life's  sweet  days : 


7Q  EURIPIDES. 


But  the   dread   doom   of  mortals,  the  anguish    heart- 
rending— 
Never   minstrel    by  music   hath   breathed  on  them 
peace, 

Nor  by  song  with  his  harp-notes  in  harmony  blending  ; 

Albeit  of  these  cometh  death's  dark  ending 

Unto  many  a  home  that  is  wrecked  of  these. 

And  yet  were  it  surely  a  boon  to  bring  healing 

Of  sorrow  to  mortals  with  song  :  but  in  vain         200 
Mid  the  fulness  of  feasting  ring  voices  clear-pealing, 
And  the  banquet  itself  hath  a  glamour,  concealing 

From  mortals  their  doom,  flinging  spells  over  pain. 

[Exit  Nurse. 
Chorus. 

I  have  heard  it,  the  sigh-laden  cry  of  the  daughter 
Of  Kolchis,  the  woe-shrilling  anguish  of  wailing 
For  the  traitor  to  love  who  with  false  vows  caught  her, 
Who  in   strength  of   her  wrongs   chideth   Heaven, 

assailing 
The  Oath-queen  of  Zeus,  who  with   cords  all-pre- 
vailing [210 
Forth  haled  her,  and  brought  her  o'er  star-litten  water, 
Where  the  brine-mists  hover  o'er  Pontus'  Key, 
Unto  Hellas  far  over  the  boundless  sea. 

Enter  Medea.  ,» 

Medea. 

Corinthian  dames,  I  have  come  forth  my  doors 
Lest  ye  should  blame  me.     Many  folk  I  know  215 

Accounted  haughty,  some,  for  proud  staid  mien,1 
Some,  stranger-shy  :2  and  some,  that  softly  go, 

1  lit.  "  from  their  looks." 

2  lit.  "  as  being  (re/ivoii  (reserved)  when  amongst  strangers." 


MEDE.  1 .  71 

Have  gotten  ill  repute  of  indolence. 

For  justice  sits  not  in  the  eyes  of  man, 

Who,  ere  he  hath  discerned  his  neighbour's  heart,  220 

Hates  him  at  sight,  albeit  nowise  wronged. 

The  sojourner  must  learn  the  city's  wont ; 

Nor  praise  1  citizens-born,  law  to  themselves, 

Mannerless  churls,  which  flout  their  fellow-folk. 

But  me — unlooked-for  fell  this  blow  on  me,  225 

And  brake  mine  heart.     Undone  I  am  ;  have  lost 

All  grace  of  life,  and  long  to  die,  my  friends. 

For  he  that  was  mine  all, — thou  know'st  it  well, — 1 

My  lord,  of  all  men  basest  hath  become. 

Surely,  of  creatures  that  have  life  and  wit,  230 

We  women  are  of  all  things  wretchedest, 

Who,  first,  must  needs,  as  buys  the  highest  bidder, 

Thus  buy  a  husband,  and  our  body's  master 

So  win — for  deeper  depth  of  ill  is  this. 

Nay,  risk  is  dire  herein, — or  shall  we  gain  235 

An  evil  lord  or  good  ?     For  change  is  shame 

To  woman,  nor  may  she  renounce  her  spouse. 

And,  coming  to  new  customs,  habits  new, 

Seer  need  she  be,  to  know  the  thing  unlearnt, 

What  manner  of  man  her  couch's  mate  shall  be.      240 

But  if  we  learn  our  lesson,  if  our  lord 

Dwell  with  us,  plunging  not  against  the  yoke, 

Happy  our  lot :  if  not — no  help  but  death. 

For  the  man,  when  at  home  they  fret  his  soul, 

Goes  forth,  and  stays  his  loathing  heart's  disgust,    245 

Unto  a  friend  or  age-mate  turning  him. 

We  have  but  one,  one  heart  to  seek  for  comfort. 

But  we,  say  they,  live  an  unperilled  life 

1   Or,    reading    ytyi'wo-.veiv — "  For    he,    to    know    whom 
rightly  was  mine  all." 


72  EURIPIDES. 


At  home,  while  they  do  battle  with  the  spear. 

Falsely  they  deem  :  twice  would  I  under  shield        250 

Stand,  rather  than  bear  childbirth  peril  once. 

Yet  thee  and  me  the  selfsame  reasons  touch  not. 

Thine  is  this  city,  thine  a  father's  home  ; 

Hast  bliss  of  life  and  fellowship  of  friends. 

But  I,  lone,  cityless,  and  outraged  thus  255 

Of  him  who  kidnapped  me  from  foreign  shores, 

Mother  nor  brother  have  I,  kinsman  none, 

For  port  of  refuge  from  calamity. 

Wherefore  I  fain  would  win  of  thee  this  boon  : — 

If  any  path  be  found  me,  or  device,  260 

Whereby  to  avenge  these  wrongs  upon  mine  husband, 

On  her  who  weds,  on  him  who  gives  the  bride, 

Keep  silence.     Woman  quails  at  every  peril, 

Faint-heart  to  face  the  fray  and  look  on  steel ; 

But  when  in  wedlock-rights  she  suffers  wrong,  265 

No  spirit  more  bloodthirsty  shall  be  found. 

Chorus. 

This  will  1  ;  for  'tis  just  that  thou,  Medea, 

Requite  thy  lord  :  no  marvel  thou  dost  grieve. 

But  I  see  Kreon,  ruler  of  this  land, 

Advancing,  herald  of  some  new  decree.  270 

Enter  Kreon. 

Kreon. 

Thee  the  black-lowering,  wroth  against  thy  lord, 

Medea,  bid  I  forth  this  land  to  fare 

An  exile,  taking  thy  two  sons  with  thee, 

And  make  no  tarrying  :  daysman  of  this  cause 

Am  I,  and  homeward  go  I  not  again  275 

Ere  from  the  land's  bounds  I  have  cast  thee  forth. 


MEDEA.  73 

Medea. 

Ah  me  !  undone  am  I  in  utter  ruin  ! 

My  foes  crowd  sail  pursuing  :  landing-place 

Is  none  from  surges  of  calamity. 

Yet,  howso  wronged,  one  question  will  I  ask—  2N0 

For  what  cause,  Kreon,  dost  thou  banish  me  ? 

Kreon. 

I  fear  thee — need  is  none  to  cloak  my  words— 
Lest  on  my  child  thou  wreak  some  ill  past  cure. 
And  to  this  dread  do  many  things  conspire. 
Wise  art  thou,  cunning  in  much  evil  lore  ;  285 

Chafed  art  thou,  of  thine  husband's  couch  bereft : 
I  hear  thou  threatenest,  so  they  bring  me  word, 
To  wreak  on  sire,  on  bridegroom,  and  on  bride 
Mischief.     I  guard  mine  head  ere  falls  the  blow. 
Better  be  hated,  woman,  now  of  thee,  290 

Than  once  relent,  and  sorely  groan  too  late. 

Medea. 

Not  now  first,  Kreon, — many  a  time  ere  now 
Rumour  hath  wronged  and  wrought  me  grievous  harm. 
Ne'er  should  the  man  whose  heart  is  sound  of  wit 
Let  teach  his  sons  more  wisdom  than  the  herd.        295 
They  are  burdened  with  unprofitable  lore, 
And  spite  and  envy  of  other  folk  they  earn. 
For,  if  thou  bring  strange  wisdom  unto  dullards, 
Useless  shalt  thou  be  counted,  and  not  wise  : 
And,  grant  thy  name  o'ertop  the  self-extolled  300 

Wits,  in  the  city  odious  shalt  thou  be. 
Myself  too  in  this  fortune  am  partaker. 
Of  some  my  wisdom  wins  me  jealousy, 


7-4  EURIPIDES. 


Some  count  me  idle  ;  some,  o'erbusy  ;  some 
Unsocial  : — yet  not  over-wise  am  I.  305 

And  thou,  thou  fear'st  me,  lest  I  mar  thy  music. 
Not  such  am  I — O  Kreon,  dread  not  me — 
That  against  princes  I  should  dare  transgress. 
How   hast   thou  wronged   me  ?    Thou   hast   given  thy 
child  [310 

To  whom  so  pleased  thee.     But — I  hate  mine  husband  : 
And,  doubtless,  this  in  prudence  hast  thou  done  ? 
Nay,  but  I  grudge  not  thy  prosperity. 
Wed  ye,  and  prosper.     But  in  this  your  land 
Still  let  me  dwell :  for  I,  how  wronged  soe'er, 
Will  hold  my  peace,  o'ermastered  by  the  strong.      315 

Kreon. 

Soft  words  to  hear  :  but  lurks  mine  heart  within 

Dread  lest  thou  plottest  mischief  all  the  while  ; 

And  all  the  less  I  trust  thee  than  before. 

The  vehement-hearted  woman — yea,  or  man — 

Is  easier  watched-for  than  the  silent-cunning.  320 

But  forth  with  all  speed  :  plead  me  pleadings  none. 

For  this  is  stablished  :  no  device  hast  thou 

To  bide  with  us,  who  art  a  foe  to  me. 

Medea. 
Nay, — by  thy  knees,  and  by  the  bride,  thy  child  ! 

Kreon. 
Thou  wastest  words  ;  thou  never  shalt  prevail.        325 

Medea. 
Wilt  drive  me  forth,  respecting  nought  my  prayers  ? 


MEDEA.  75 


Kreon. 
Ay  :  more  I  love  not  thee  than  mine  own  house. 

Medea. 
O,  how  I  call  thee  now  to  mind,  my  country  ! 

Kreon. 
Ay,  dear  to  me  is  Corinth,  next  my  children. 

Medea. 
Alas  !  to  mortals  what  a  curse  is  love  !  330 

Kreon. 
Blessing  or  curse,  I  trow,  as  fortune  falls. 

Medea. 
Zeus,  may  the  cause  of  this  'scape  not  thy  ken  ! 

Kreon. 
Hence,  passionate  fool,  and  rid  me  of  my  trouble. 

Medea. 
Troubled  am  I,  nor  need  I  troubles  new. 

Kreon. 
Soon  shalt  thou  be  by  servants'  hands  thrust  out.    335 

Medea. 
Nay — nay — not  this,  O  Kreon,  I  beseech  thee  ! 

Kreon. 
A  coil  thou  wilt  make,  woman,  as  it  seems. 


76  EURIPIDES. 


Medea. 
1  will  flee  forth  : — not  this  the  boon  I  crave 

Kreon. 

Why  restive  then  ? — why  rid  not  Corinth  of  thee  ? 

Medea. 

Suffer  me  yet  to  tarry  this  one  day,  340 

And  somewhat  for  our  exile  to  take  thought, 

And  find  my  babes  a  refuge,  since  their  sire 

Cares  nought  to  make  provision  for  his  sons. 

Compassionate  these  :  a  father  too  art  thou 

Of  children  :   meet  it  is  thou  showr  these  grace.         345 

Not  for  myself  I  fret,  if  I  be  banished  : 

For  them  in  their  calamity  I  mourn. 

Kreon. 

My  spirit  least  of  all  is  tyrannous. 
Many  a  plan  have  my  relentings  marred  : 
And,  woman,  now  I  know  I  err  herein,  350 

Yet  shalt  thou  win  this  boon.     But  1  forewarn  thee, 
If  thee  the  approaching  Sun-god's  torch  behold 
Within  this  country's  confines  with  thy  sons, 
Thou  diest  : — the  word  is  said  that  shall  not  lie. 
Now,  if  remain  thou  must,  remain  one  day —  355 

Too  short  for  thee  to  do  the  deeds  I  dread.  [Exit. 

Chorus. 

O  hapless  thou ! 
Woe's  me    for   thy  misery,  woe  for  the  trouble  and 

anguish  that  meet  thee  ! 
Whitherward  wilt  thou  turn  thee  ? — what  welcoming 

hand  mid  the  strangers  shall  greet  thee  ? 


MEDEA , 


77 


What  home  or  what  land  to  receive  thee,  deliverance 
from  evils  to  give  thee,  360 

Wilt  thou  find  for  thee  now  ? 
How  mid  surge  of  despair  to  o'erwhelm  thee  in  ruin 
God's  hand  on  thine  helm 

Hath  steered,  O  Medea,  thy  prow  ! 

Medea. 

Tis  ill  done  every  way  ;  who  shall  gainsay  ? 

Yet  nowise  ill  in  this  :  deem  not  so  yet.  365 

Bridegroom  and  bride  grim  conflicts  yet  await  ; 

Nor  troubles  light  abide  these  marriage-makers. 

Think'st  thou  that  I  had  cringed  to  yon  man  ever, 

Except  to  gain  some  gain,  or  work  some  wile  ?         [370 

Nor  word  nor  touch  of  hand  had  1  vouchsafed  him. 

But  to  such  height  of  folly  hath  he  come, 

That,  when  he  might  forestall  mine  every  plot 

By  banishment,  this  day  of  grace  he  grants  me 

To  stay,  wherein  three  foes  will  I  lay  dead, 

The  father,  and  the  daughter,  and  mine  husband.    375 

And,  having  for  them  many  paths  of  death, 

Which  first  to  take  in  hand  I  know  not,  friends  ; 

Whether  to  set  the  bridal  bower  aflame, 

Or  through  the  heart  to  thrust  the  whetted  knife, 

Through  yon  halls  stealing  silent  to  their  couch.       380 

Yet  one  thing  bars  the  way — if  I  be  found 

Crossing  the  threshold  of  the  house  and  plotting, 

Die  shall  I,  and  make  mirth  unto  my  foes. 

Best  the  straight  path,  wherein  my  nature's  cunning 

Excels,  by  poisons  to  destroy  them  : — yea.  385 

Now,  grant  them  dead  :  what  city  will  receive  me, 

What  host  vouchsafe  a  land  of  refuge,  home 

Secure,  and  from  the  avenger  shield  my  life  ? 


78  EURIPIDES. 


There  is  none.     Tarrying  then  a  little  space, 

If  any  tower  of  safety  shall  appear,  390 

These  deaths  by  guile  and  silence  will  I  compass ; 

But  if  misfortune  drive  me  desperate  forth, 

Myself  will  grip  the  sword, — yea,  though  I  die, — 

And  slay,  and  dare  the  strong  hand's  reckless  deed  : 

For,  by  the  Queen  of  Night,  whom  I  revere  395 

Above  all,  and  for  fellow-worker  chose, 

Hekate,  dweller  by  mine  hearth's  dark  shrine, 

Not  one  shall  vex  my  soul,  and  rue  it  not. 

Bitter  and  woeful  bridal  will  1  give  them, 

Bitter  troth-plight  and  banishing  of  me.  400 

Up  then  ! — spare  nought  of  all  thy  sorcery-lore, 

Medea,  of  thy  plotting  and  contriving  ; 

On  to  the  dread  deed  !     Now  is  need  of  daring. 

Look  on  thy  wrongs  :  thou  must  not  make  derision 

For  sons  of  Sisyphus,  for  Jason's  bride, —  405 

Thou,  sprung  from  royal  father,  from  the  Sun  ! 

Thou  know'st  means.     Yea,  our  woman-nature  'tis — 

Say  they — to  be  most  helpless  for  all  good, 

But  fashioners  most  cunning  of  all  ill. 

Chorus. 

(Str.  1.) 

Upward  aback  to  their  fountains  the  sacred  rivers  are 
stealing ; 
Justice  is  turned  to  injustice,  the  order  of  old  to  con- 
fusion :  410 
The  thoughts  of  the  hearts  of  men  are  treachery  wholly, 
and,  reeling 
From  its  ancient  foundations,  the  faith  of  the  Gods 
is  become  a  delusion. 
Changes — and  changes  ! — the  voice  of  the  people  shall 
crown  me  with  honour  : 


MEDEA .  79 


My  life  shall  be  sunlit  with  glory  ;   for  woman  the 
old-time  story 
Is  ended,  the  slanders  hoary  no  more  shall  as  chains 
be  upon  her. 

(Ant.  i.) 
And  the  strains  of  the  singers  of  old  generations  for 
shame  shall  falter,  420 

Which  sang  evermore  of  the  treason  of  woman,  her 
faithlessness  ever. 
Alas,  that  our  lips  are  not  touched  with  the  fire  of  song 
from  the  altar 
Of   Phoebus,   the    Harper-king,  of   the   inspiration- 
giver  ! 
Else  had  I  lifted  my  voice  in  challenge  of  song  high- 
ringing 
Unto  men  :  for  the  roll  of  the  ages  shall  find  for  the 
poet-sages 
Proud  woman-themes  for  their  pages,  heroines  worthy 

their  singing. 

(Str.  2.) 

But  thou  from  the  ancient  home  didst  sail  over  leagues 
of  foam,  430 

On-sped  by  a  frenzied  heart,  and  the  sea-gates  sawest 
dispart, 

The  Twin  Rocks.     Now,  in  the  land 
Of  the  stranger,  thy  doom  is  to  waken 
To  a  widowed  couch,  and  forsaken 
Of  thy  lord,  and  woe-overtaken, 
To  be  cast  forth  shamed  and  banned. 

(Ant.  2.) 
Disannulled  is  the  spell  of  the  oath :  no  shame  for  the 

broken  troth 
In  Hellas  the  wide  doth  remain,  but  heavenward  its 
flight  hath  it  ta'en. 


G2 


so  EURIPIDES. 


No  home  of  a  father  hast  thou  440 

For  thine  haven  when  trouble-storms  lower. 
Usurped  is  thy  bridal  bower 
Of  another,  in  pride  of  her  power, 

Ill-starred,  overqueening  thee  now. 

Enter  Jason. 

Jason. 

Not  now  first,  nay,  but  ofttimes  have  1  marked 

What  desperate  mischief  is  a  froward  spirit. 

For  in  this  land,  this  home,  when  thou  might'st  stay 

Bearing  unfractiously  thy  rulers'  pleasure, 

Banished  thou  art  for  wild  and  whirling  words.        450 

Me  they  vex  not — cease  never,  an  thou  wilt, 

Clamouring,  "Jason  is  of  men  most  base  !  " 

But,  for  thy  words  against  thy  rulers  spoken, 

Count  it  all  gain — mere  exile  punishing  thee. 

For  me — still  strove  I  to  appease  the  wrath  455 

Of  kings  incensed  :  fain  would  I  thou  shouldst  stay. 

But  thou  rein'st  not  thy  folly,  speaking  still 

Evil  of  dignities  ;   art  therefore  banished. 

Yet,  for  all  this,  not  wearied  of  my  friends, 

With  so  much  forethought  come  I  for  thee,  lady,     460 

That,  banished  with  thy  babes,  thou  lack  not  gold, 

Nor  aught  beside.     Full  many  an  ill  is  brought 

In  exile's  train.     Yea,  though  thou  hatest  me, 

Ne'er  can  I  harbour  evil  thought  of  thee. 

Medea. 

Caitiff  of  caitiffs  ! — blackest  of  reproaches  465 

My  tongue  for  thine  unmanliness  can  frame — 
Thou  com'st  to  me — thou  com'st,  most  hateful  proved 
To  heaven,  to  me,  to  all  the  race  of  men  ! 


MEDEA.  81 


This  is  not  daring,  no,  nor  courage  this,  [470 

To  wrong  thy  friends,  and  blench  not  from  their  eyes, 
But,  of  all  plagues  infecting  men,  the  worst, 
Even  shamelessness.     And  yet  'tis  well  thou  cam'st, 
For  I  shall  ease  the  burden  of  mine  heart 
Reviling  thee,  and  thou  be  galled  to  hear. 
And  with  the  first  things  first  will  1  begin.  475 

I  saved  thee,  as  they  know,  what  Greeks  soe'er 
Entered  with  thee  the  self-same  Argo's  hull, 
Thee,  sent  to  quell  the  flame-outbreathing  bulls 
With  yoke-bands,  and  to  sow  the  tilth  of  death. 
The  dragon,  warder  of  the  Fleece  of  Gold,  480 

That  sleepless  kept  it  with  his  manifold  coils, 
I  slew,  and  raised  deliverance-light  for  thee. 
Myself  forsook  my  father  and  mine  home, 
And  to  Iolkos  under  Pelion  came 

With  thee,  more  zealous  in  thy  cause  than  wise,      485 
And  Pelias  slew  by  his  own  children's  hands — 
Of  all  deaths  worst, — so  cast  out  all  thy1  fear. 
And  thus  of  me,  basest  of  men,  entreated, 
For  a  new  bride  hast  thou  forsaken  me, 
Though  I  had  born  thee  children.     Wert  thou  child- 
less, 490 
Not  past  forgiving  were  this  marriage-craving. 
But  faith  of  oaths  hath  vanished.     I  know  not 
Whether  thou  deem'st  the  olden  Gods  yet  rule, 
Or  that  new  laws  are  now  ordained  for  men  ; 
For  thine  heart  speaks  thee  unto  me  forsworn.         495 
Out  on  this  right  hand,  which  thou  oft  wouldst  clasp, — 
These  knees  ! — how  vainly  have  we  been  embraced 
By  a  base  man,  thus  frustrate  of  our  hopes  ! 


1  Oy  "  Yea,  cast  out  all  their  fear. 


82  EURIPIDES. 


Come,  as  a  friend  will  I  commune  with  thee — 

Yet  what  fair  dealing  should  I  hope  from  thee  ? —   500 

Yet  will  I  :  questioned,  baser  shalt  thou  show. 

Now,  whither  turn  I  ? — to  my  father's  house, 

Which,  with  my  country,  1  for  thee  cast  off? 

To  Pelias'  hapless  daughters  ? — Graciously 

Their  father's  slayer  would  they  welcome  home  !      505 

For  thus  it  is  :  a  foe  am  I  become 

To    mine   own    house.      Whom   I    should   ne'er  have 

harmed, 
For  grace  to  thee  I  made  mine  enemies. 
So  then  midst  Hellas'  daughters  hast  thou  made  me 
Blest  in  return  for  all :  in  thee  have  I —  510 

O  wretched  I  ! — a  wondrous  spouse  and  leal,1 
If  from  the  land  cast  forth  1  pass  to  exile 
Forlorn  of  friends,  alone  with  children  lone. 
A  proud  reproach  for  our  new  bridegroom  this — 
In  poverty  thy  babes,  thy  saviour,  wander  !  515 

O  Zeus,  ah  wherefore  hast  thou  given  to  men 
Plain  signs  for  gold  which  is  but  counterfeit, 
But  no  assay-mark  nature-graven  shows 
On  man's  form,  to  discern  the  base  withal  ? 

Chorus. 

Awful  is  wrath,  and  past  all  balm  of  healing,  520 

When  they  that  once  loved  clash  in  feud  of  hate. 

Jason. 

Needs  must  I  be  not  ill  at  speech,  meseems, 
But,  like  the  careful  helmsman  of  a  ship, 
With  close-reefed  canvas  run  before  the  gale, 

1   Or,    reading    Kama-rov,    "  Woe's    me ! — a    marvellous 
spouse  beyond  belief," 


MEDEA.  83 


Woman,  of  thy  tempestuous-railing  tongue.  525 

I — for  thy  kindness  tower-high  thou  pilest — 

Deem  Kypris  saviour  of  my  voyaging, 

Her,  and  none  other  or  of  Gods  or  men. 

A  subtle  wit  thou  hast — what  need  to  force  me 

To  tell  the  tale  how  Love,  by  strong  compulsion      530 

Of  shafts  unerring,  made  thee  save  my  life  ? 

Yet  take  I  not  account  too  strict  thereof ; 

For,  in  that  thou  didst  save  me,  thou  didst  well. 

Howbeit,  more  hast  thou  received  than  given 

Of  this  my  safety,  as  my  words  shall  prove  : —  535 

First,  then,  in  Hellas  dwell'st  thou,  in  the  stead 

Of  land  barbaric,  knowest  justice,  learnest 

To  live  by  law  without  respect  of  force. 

And  all  the  Greeks  have  heard  thy  wisdom's  fame. 

Renown  is  thine  :  but  if  on  earth's  far  bourn  540 

Thou  dwelledst  yet,  thou  hadst  not  lived  in  story. 

Now  mine  be  neither  gold  mine  halls  within, 

Nor  sweeter  song  be  mine  than  Orpheus  sang, 

If  my  fair  fortune  be  to  fame  unknown. 

Thus  far  of  my  great  labours  have  I  spoken, —         545 

Since  thou  flung'st  down  this  challenge  to  dispute  : — 

But,  for  thy  railings  on  my  royal  marriage, 

Herein  will  I  show,  first,  that  wise  I  was  ; 

Then,  temperate  ;  third,  to  thee  the  best  of  friends 

And  to  my  children — nay,  but  hear  me  out.  550 

When  I  came  hither  from  Iolkos-land 

With  many  a  desperate  fortune  in  my  train, 

What  happier  treasure-trove  could  I  have  found 

Than  to  wed — I,  an  exile — with  a  princess  ? 

Not — where  it  galls  thee — loathing  couch  of  thine,  555 

And  for  a  new  bride  smitten  with  desire, 

Nor  eager  I  to  multiply  mine  offspring  ; — 


84  EURIPIDES. 


Suffice  these  born  to  me  :  no  fault  in  them  : — 

But  that  we  might  with  honour  live — grave  import, — 

And  be  not  straitened, — for  I  know  full  well  560 

How  all  friends  from  the  poor  man  stand  aloof, — 

And  I  might  nurture  as  beseems  mine  house 

Our  sons,  and  to  these  born  of  thee  beget 

Brethren,  and,  knitting  in  one  family  all,  [565 

Live  happy  days.   Thou,  what  wouldst  thou  of  children  ? 

But  me  it  profits,  through  sons  to  be  born 

To  help  the  living.     Have  I  planned  so  ill  ? 

Not  thou  wouldst  say  it,  but  the  lost  couch  galls  thee. 

But  ye — ye  women — so  unreasoning  are 

That,  wedlock-rights  unmarred,  ye  count  all  well  ;  570 

But  to  the  couch  if  aught  untoward  hap, 

With  the  best,  fairest  lot  are  ye  at  feud 

Most  bitter.     Would  that  mortals  otherwise 

Could  get  them  babes,  that  womankind  were  not, 

And  so  no  curse  had  lighted  upon  men.  575 

Chorus. 

Words,  Jason,  words,  tricked  out  full  cunningly  : 
Yet  to  me — though  I  speak  not  to  thy  mind — 
Unjust  thou  seem'st,  betraying  thus  thy  wife. 

Medea. 

Of  many  things  1  think  not  as  think  many. 

For  in  my  sight  the  villain  subtle-tongued  580 

Getteth  himself  for  gain  exceeding  loss, 

Who,  confident  his  tongue  can  gloze  the  wrong, 

Becomes  a  bold  knave  : — -no  great  wisdom  this. 

So  be  not  thou,  as  touching  me,  fair-seeming  [585 

And  crafty-tongued  :  one  word  shall  overthrow  thee  : 


MEDEA .  85 

Thou  shouldest,  if  not  base,  have  wed  this  bride 
With  my  consent,  not  hid  it  from  thy  friends. 

Jason. 

Ay,  nobly  hadst  thou  helped  in  this  my  purpose, 

Had  I  a  marriage  named,  who  even  now 

Canst  not  refrain  thy  heart's  exceeding  wrath  !         590 

Medea. 

Not  this  thine  hindrance,  but  the  alien  wife 
No  crown  of  honour  was  as  eld  drew  on. 

Jason. 

Now  know  this  well — not  for  the  woman's  sake 

I  wed  the  royal  bride  whom  I  have  won, 

But,  as  I  said,  of  my  desire  to  save  595 

Thee,  and  beget  seed  royal,  to  my  sons 

Brethren,  and  for  mine  house  a  tower  of  strength. 

Medea. 

No  prosperous  life  'neath  sorrow's  cloud  for  me, 
Nor  weal,  with  thorns  of  conscience  in  mine  heart  ! 

Jason. 

Know'st  how  to  change  thy  prayer,  and  show  the  wiser  ? 
May  thy  good  never  seem  to  thee  thy  sorrow  ;  [600 
Nor  in  fair  fortune  deem  thy  lot  misfortune. 

Medea. 

O  yea,  insult !— Thou  hast  a  refuge,  thou  ; 
But  desolate  I  am  banished  from  this  land. 

Jason. 
Thyself  hast  chosen  this  :  none  other  blame.  605 


86  EURIPIDES. 


Medea. 
I  ? — sooth,  by  wedding  and  betraying  thee  ! 

Jason. 
By  cursing  princes  with  an  impious  curse. 

Medea. 
Even  so, — and  thus  am  cursing  now  thine  house  ? 

Jason. 

With  thee  no  more  I  wrangle  touching  this. 

But  if,  or  for  the  children  or  thyself,  610 

For  help  in  exile  thou  wilt  take  my  gold, 

Speak  :  ready  am  I  to  give  with  hand  ungrudging, 

And  send  guest-tokens  which  shall  find  thee  friends. 

If  this  thou  wilt  not,  foolish  shalt  thou  be  : 

Refrain  wrath,  and  advantaged  shalt  thou  be.  615 

Medea. 

Thy  friends  ! — nothing  will  I  of  friends  of  thine. 
No  whit  will  I  receive,  nor  offer  thou. 
No  profit  is  there  in  a  villain's  gifts. 

Jason. 

In  any  wise  I  call  the  Gods  to  witness 
That  all  help  would  I  give  thee  and  thy  sons  ;  620 

But  thy  good  likes  thee  not  :  thy  stubborn  pride 
Spurns  friends  :  the  more  thy  grief  shall  therefore  be. 

Medea. 
Away  ! — impatience  for  the  bride  new-trapped 
Consumes  thee  while  thou  loiterest  at  the  doors  !    [625 
Wed  :  for  perchance — and  God  shall  speed  the  word — 
Thine  shall  be  bridal  thou  wouldst  fain  renounce. 

Exit  Jason. 


MEDEA .  87 


Chorus. 

(Str.   1.) 
Love  bringeth  nor  glory  nor  honour  to  men  when  it 

cometh  restraining 
Not  its  unscanted  excess  :  but  if  Kypris,  in  measure 
raining  630 

Her  joy,  cometh  down,  there  is  none  other  Goddess 
so  winsome  as  she. 
Not  upon  me,  O  Queen,  do  thou  aim  from  thy  bow  all- 
golden 
The  arrow  desire-envenomed  that  none  may  avoid — 
not  on  me  ! 

(Ant.  1.) 
But  let  Temperance  shield1  me,  the  fairest  of  gifts  of 

the  Gods  ever-living : 
Nor  ever  with  passion  of  jarring  contention,  nor  feuds 
unforgiving, 
In  her  terrors  may  Love's  Queen  visit  me,  smiting 
with  maddened  unrest 
For  a  couch  mismated  my  soul  :  but  the  peace  of  the 
bride-bed  be  holden  640 

In  honour  of  her,  and  her  keen  eyes  choose  for  us 
bonds  that  be  best. 

(Str.  2.) 
O  fatherland,  O  mine  home, 
Not  mine  be  the  exile's  doom  ! 
Into  poverty's  pathways  hard  to  be  trod  may  my  feet 
not  be  guided ! 

Most  piteous  anguish  were  this. 
By  death — O  by  death  ere  then  may  the  conflict  of  life 
be  decided, 

1  crrc'yoi  (Verrall),  vice   MSS.  trrepyoi,  "befriend." 


88  EURIPIDES. 


Ended  be  life's  little  day  !     To  be  thus  from  the  home- 
land divided —  650 
No  pang  more  bitter  there  is. 

(Ant.  2). 
We  have  seen,  and  it  needeth  nought 
That  of  others  herein  we  be  taught : 
For  thee  not  a  city,  for  thee  not  a  friend  hath  com- 
passionated 

When  affliction  most  awful  is  thine. 
But  he,  who  regardeth  not  friends,  accursed  may  he 
perish,  and  hated,  660 

Who  opes  not   his  heart  with   sincerity's  key  to  the 
hapless-fated — 

Never  such  shall  be  friend  of  mine  ! 


Enter  A  i gens. 


Aigeus. 


Medea,  hail  ! — for  fairer  greeting-word 
None  knoweth  to  accost  his  friends  withal. 

Medea. 

All  hail  thou  also,  wise  Pandion's  son,  665 

Aigeus.      Whence  art   thou  journeying    through    this 
land? 

Aigeus. 

Leaving  the  ancient  oracle  of  Phoebus. 

Medea. 
Why  didst  thou  fare  to  earth's  prophetic  navel  ? 

Aigeus. 
To  ask  how  seed  of  children  might  be  mine. 


MEDE  I.  Sg 


Medea. 
'Fore  Heaven  ! — aye  childless  is  thy  life  till  now  ?    670 

Aigeus. 
Childless  1  am,  by  chance  of  some  God's  will. 

Medea. 
This,  with  a  wife,  or  knowing  not  the  couch  ? 

Aigeus. 
Nay,  not  unyoked  to  wedlock's  bed  am  I. 

Medea. 
Now  what  to  thee  spake  Phcebus  touching  issue  ? 

Aigeus. 
Deep  words  of  wisdom  not  for  man  to  interpret.       675 

Medea. 
Without  sin  might  I  know  the  God's  reply  ? 

Aigeus. 
O  yea — good  sooth,  it  needs  the  wise  heart  most. 

Medea. 
What  said  he  ?     Say,  if  sin  be  not  to  hear. 

Aigeus. 
The  wine-skin's  prominent  foot  I  should  not  loose. 

Medea.  [680 

Till  thou  shouldst  do  what  thing,  or  reach  what  land  ? 


go  EURIPIDES. 


AlGEUS. 

Till  to  the  hearth  ancestral  back  I  came. 

Medea. 
And  thou,  what  wouldst  thou  sailing  to  this  shore  ? 

Aigeus. 
There  is  one  Pittheus,  king  of  Trcezen  he, — 

Medea. 
A  man  most  pious,  Pelops'  son,  they  say. 

Aigeus. 
To  him  the  God's  response  I  fain  would  tell.  685 

Medea. 
Yea — a  wise  man,  and  having  skill  herein. 

Aigeus. 
Yea,  and  my  best-beloved  spear-ally. 

Medea. 
Now  prosper  thou,  and  win  thine  heart's  desire. 

Aigeus. 
Why  droops  thine  eye  ? — why  this  wan-wasted  hue  ? 

Medea. 
Aigeus,  of  all  men  basest  is  mine  husband.  690 

Aigeus. 
What  say'st  thou  ?     Clearly  tell  me  thine  heart's  pain. 


MEDEA.  91 

Medea. 
He  wrongs  me — Jason,  nothing  wronged  of  me. 

Aigeus. 
What  hath  he  done  ?     More  plainly  tell  it  out. 

Medea. 
Another  wife  he  takes,  his  household's  mistress. 

Aigeus. 
Ha  !  hath  he  dared  in  truth  this  basest  deed  ?  695 

Medea. 
Yea  :   I  am  now  dishonoured,  once  beloved. 

Aigeus. 
Another  love  was  this  ? — or  hate  of  thee  ? 

Medea. 
Love  ? — yea,  of  the  highest : — traitor  he  to  love  ! 

Aigeus. 
Away  with  him,  if  he  be  base  as  this  ! 

Medea. 
His  love  was  for  affinity  with  princes.  700 

Aigeus. 
Who  giveth  him  his  daughter  ?     End  the  tale. 

Medea. 
Kreon,  who  ruleth  this  Corinthian  land. 


IT  R I  PIPES. 


AlGEUS. 

Sooth,  lady,  reason  was  that  thou  shouldst  grieve. 

Medea. 
Tis  death  to  me  !     Yea,  also  am  1  banished. 

Aigeus. 
Of  whom  ?     A  new  ill  this  thou  namest  is.1  705 

Medea. 
Kreon  from  Corinth  driveth  me  an  exile. 

Aigeus. 
Doth  Jason  suffer  this  ? — I  praise  it  not. 

Medea. 

In  pretence,  no  :   but  to  stand  firm — not  he  ! 
But  1  beseech  thee,  touching  this  thy  beard, 
Clasping  thy  knees,  and  so  become  thy  suppliant ; — 
Pity,  O  pity  me  the  evil-starred,  [710 

And  see  me  not  cast  forth  to  homelessness : 
Receive  to  a  hearth-place  in  thy  land  and  homes. 
So  by  heaven's  blessing  fruitful  be  thy  love 
In  children,  and  in  death  thyself  be  blest.  715 

Thou  know'st  not  what  good  fortune  thou  hast  found  : 
For  I  will  end  thy  childlessness,  will  cause 
Thy  seed  to  grow  to  sons  ;  such  drugs  I  know. 

Aigeus. 

For  many  causes  am  I  minded,  lady, 

This  grace  to  grant  thee  :  for  the  Gods'  sake  first ;  720 

Then,  for  the  seed  of  children  thou  dost  promise; 

1  Or    "  Another's    crime    thou    namest    now,"    reading 
dAAov  vice  aAXo  (Verrall). 


MEDEA .  93 


For  herein  wholly  extinct  is  Aigeus'  name. 

But  thus  it  is — if  to  my  land  thou  come, 

I  thy  defence  essay,  in  bounds  of  justice. 

Howbeit  of  this  do  I  forewarn  thee,  lady,  725 

From  this  land  will  I  not  consent  to  lead  thee. 

But,  if  thou  reachest  of  thyself  mine  homes, 

Safe  shalt  thou  bide  :  to  no  man  will  I  yield  thee. 

But  from  this  land  thou  must  thyself  escape  ; 

For  blameless  will  I  be  to  allies  too.  730 

Medea. 

So  be  it.     Yet,  were  oath-pledge  given  for  this 
To  me,  then  had  I  all  I  would  of  thee. 

Aigeus. 
Ha,  dost  not  trust  me  ? — Or  at  what  dost  stumble  ? 

Medea. 

I  trust  thee  :  but  my  foes  are  Pelias'  house  [735 

And  Kreon.     Oath-bound,  thou  couldst  never  yield  me 
To  these,  when  they  would  drag  me  from  the  land. 
Hadst  thou  but  promised,  to  the  Gods  unpledged,1 
Thou  mightest  turn  their  friend,  might'st  lightly  yield 
To  herald-summons.     Strengthless  is  my  cause  : 
Wealth  is  on  their  side,  and  a  princely  house.  740 

Aigeus. 

Foresight  exceeding,  lady,  in  thy  words  !  - 
Yet,  if  this  be  thy  will,  I  draw  not  back  ; 

1  Reading  <ivw/xotos  (737)  and  rax   (739) 

2  v.l.  TrpoOvfjiiav :  "Much  eagerness    to  help  thy  words 
imply  !  "  (ironical). 

H 


94  EURIPIDES. 


Since  for  myself  is  this  the  safest  course, 

To  have  a  plea  to  show  unto  thy  foes  ; 

And  surer  is  thy  part.     The  Oath-gods  name.  745 

Medea. 

Swear  by  Earth's  plain,  and  by  my  father's  father 
The  Sun,  and  join  the  Gods'  whole  race  thereto. 

AlGEUS. 

That  1  will  do  or  not  do — what  ?     Say  on. 

Medea. 

That  from  thy  land  thyself  wilt  never  cast  me, 

Nor,  if  a  foe  of  mine  would  hale  me  thence,  750 

Wilt,  while  thou  liv'st,  consenting  yield  me  up. 

Aigeus. 

By  Earth,  the  Sun's  pure  majesty,  and  all 

The  Gods,  I  swear  to  abide  by  this  thou  hast  said. 

Medea. 
Enough.     For  broken  troth  what  penalty  ? 

Aigeus. 
Whatso  befalleth  God-despising  men.  755 

Medea. 

Pass  on  thy  way  rejoicing  :  all  is  well. 

I  too  will  come  with  all  speed  to  thy  burg, 

When  mine  intent  is  wrought,  my  wish  attained. 

[Exit  Aigeus. 


MEDEA .  95 


Chorus. 

Now  the  Scion  of  Maia,  the  Wayfarer's  King, 

Bring  thee  safe  to  thine  home,  and  the  dream  of  thine 
heart,  760 

The  sweet  visions  that  wing  thy  feet,  may'st  thou  bring 
To  accomplishment,  Aigeus,  for  now  this  thing 
Hath  taught  me  how  noble  thou  art. 

Medea. 

Zeus,  Justice  child  of  Zeus,  and  Light  of  the  Sun, 

Over  my  foes  triumphant  now,  my  friends,  765 

Shall  we  become  :  our  feet  are  on  the  path. 

Now  is  there  hope  of  vengeance  on  my  foes. 

For  this  man,  there  where  lay  my  chiefest  weakness, 

Hath  for  my  plots  a  haven  in  storm  appeared. 

To  him  my  bark's  stern-hawser  make  I  fast,  770 

To  Pallas'  burg  and  fortress  when  I  go. 

And  all  my  plots  to  thee  now  will  I  tell ; 

Nor  look  1  that  my  words  should  pleasure  thee  : — 

One  of  mine  household  will  I  send  to  Jason, 

And  will  entreat  him  to  my  sight  to  come ;  775 

And  soft  words,  when  he  cometh,  will  I  speak, 

Saying,  "  Thy  will  is  mine,"  and,  "  It  is  well." 

How  that  his  royal  marriage,  my  betrayal, 

Is  our  advantage,  and  right  well  devised. 

I  will  petition  that  my  sons  may  stay —  780 

Not  for  that  I  would  leave  on  hostile  soil 

Children  of  mine  for  foes  to  trample  on, 

But  the  king's  daughter  so  by  guile  to  slay. 

For  I  will  send  them  bearing  gifts  in  hand 

Unto  the  bride,  that  they  may  not  be  banished,         785 

A  robe  fine-spun,  a  golden  diadem. 

H   2 


96  EURIPIDES. 


If  she  receive  and  don  mine  ornaments, 

Die  shall  she  wretchedly,  and  all  who  touch  her, 

With  drugs  so  dread  will  I  anoint  my  gifts. 

Howbeit  here  I  pass  this  story  by,  790 

And  wail  the  deed  that  yet  for  me  remains 

To  bring  to  pass  ;  for  I  will  slay  my  children, 

Yea,  mine  :  no  man  shall  pluck  them  from  mine  hand. 

Then,  having  brought  all  Jason's  house  to  wrack, 

I  leave  the  land,  fleeing  my  dear  babes'  blood,  795 

And  having  dared  a  deed  most  impious. 

For  unendurable  are  mocks  of  foes. 

Let  all  go  :  what  is  life  to  me  ?     Nor  country 

Nor  home  have  I,  nor  refuge  from  mine  ills. 

Then  erred  I,  in  the  day  when  I  forsook  800 

My  father's  halls,  by  yon  Greek's  words  beguiled, 

Who  with  God's  help  shall  render  me  requital. 

For  never  living  shall  he  see  hereafter 

The  sons  I  bare  him,  nor  shall  he  beget 

Of  his  new  bride  a  son,  for  doomed  is  she,  805 

Wretch,  to  die  wretchedly  by  drugs  of  mine. 

Let  none  account  me  impotent,  nor  weak, 

Nor  meek  of  spirit ! — Nay,  in  other  sort, 

Grim  to  my  foes,  and  kindly  to  my  friends, 

For  of  such  is  the  life  most  glorious.  810 

Chorus. 

Since  thou  hast  made  me  partner  of  this  tale, — 
Wishing  to  help  thee,  championing  withal 
The  laws  of  men,  I  say,  do  thou  not  this. 

Medea. 

It  cannot  be  but  so :  yet  reason  is 

That  thou  say  this,  who  art  not  wronged  as  I.  815 


MEDEA .  97 


Chorus. 
Woman,  wilt  have  the  heart  to  slay  thy  sons  ? 

Medea. 
Yea :  so  mine  husband's  heart  shall  most  be  wrung. 

Chorus. 
But  thou  of  wives  most  wretched  shouldst  become. 

Medea. 

So  be  it :  wasted  are  all  hindering  words.  [820 

But  ho  !  [to  the  Nurse]  go  thou  and  Jason  bring  to  me — 
Thou  whom  I  use  for  every  deed  of  trust. 
And  look  thou  tell  none  aught  of  mine  intent. 
If  thine  is  loyal  service,  thou  a  woman. 

[Exit  Medea  and  Nurse. 

Chorus. 

{Sir.  1) 
O  happy  the  race  in  the  ages  olden 

Of  Erechtheus,  the  seed  of  the  blest  Gods'  line, 
In  a  land  unravaged,  peace-enfolden, 

Aye  quaffing  of  Wisdom's  glorious  wine, 
Ever  through  air  clear-shining  brightly  830 

As  on  wings  uplifted  pacing  lightly, 
Where  they  tell  how  Harmonia  of  tresses  golden 

Bare  the  Pierid  Muses,  the  stainless  Nine. 

(Ant.  1) 
And  the  streams  of  Cephisus  the  lovely-flowing 

They  tell  how  the  Lady  of  Cyprus  drew, 
And  in  Zephyr-wafts  of  the  winds  sweet-blowing 

Breathed  far  over  the  land  their  dew. 
And  she  sendeth  her  Loves  which,  throned  in  glory 


98  EURIPIDES. 


By  Wisdom,  fashion  all  virtue's  story,  840 

Over  her  tresses  throwing,  throwing, 
Roses  in  odorous  wreaths  aye  new. 
Re-enter  Medea.  (Str.  2) 

How  then  should  the  hallowed  city, 
The  city  of  sacred  waters, 

Which  shields  with  her  guardian  hand 
All  friends  that  would  fare  through  her  land, 
Receive  a  murderess  banned, 
Who  had  slaughtered  her  babes  without  pity, 

A  pollution  amidst  of  her  daughters  ?  850 

In  thine  heart's  thoughts  set  it  before  thee — 
To  murder  the  fruit  of  thy  womb ! 
O  think  what  it  meaneth  to  slay 
Thy  sons — what  a  deed  this  day 
Thou  wouldst  do  ! — By  thy  knees  we  pray, 

By  heaven  and  earth  we  implore  thee, 

Deal  not  to  thy  babes  such  a  doom  ! 

(Ant.  2) 

O  whence,  and  O  whence  wilt  thou  gain  thee 

Such  desperate  hardihood 

That  for  spirit  so  fiendish  shall  serve, 

That  shall  strengthen  thine  heart,  that  shall  nerve 

Thine  hand,  that  it  shall  not  swerve 

From  the  ruthless  deed  that  shall  stain  thee 

With  horror  of  children's  blood  ? 

O  how,  when  thine  eyes  thou  art  turning  860 

On  thy  little  ones,  wilt  thou  refrain 
The  motherhood  in  thee,  to  feel 
No  upwelling  of  tears  ? — Canst  thou  steel 
Thy  breast  when  thy  children  kneel, 
To  crimson  thine  hand,  with  unyearning 
Heart  for  thy  darlings  slain  ? 


MEDEA .  99 


Enter  Jason. 

Jason. 

Summoned  I  come :  for,  though  thou  be  my  foe, 
This  grace  thou  shalt  not  miss  ;  but  I  will  hear 
What  new  thing,  lady,  thou  dost  wish  of  me. 

Medea. 

Jason,  I  ask  thee  to  forgive  the  words 

Late-spoken,  and  to  bear  with  that  my  mood  :  870 

Well  mayst  thou,  for  remembrance  of  old  loves. 

Now  have  I  called  myself  to  account,  and  railed 

Upon  myself — "  Wretch,  wherefore  am  I  mad  ? 

And  wherefore  rage  against  good  counsellors, 

And  am  at  feud  with  rulers  of  the  land,  875 

And  with  my  lord,  who  works  my  veriest  good, 

Wedding  a  royal  house,  to  raise  up  brethren 

Unto  my  sons  ?     Shall  I  not  cease  from  wrath  ? 

What  aileth  me,  when  the  Gods  proffer  boons  ? 

Have  I  not  children  ?     Know  I  not  that  we  880 

Are  exiles  from  our  own  land,  lacking  friends  ?  " 

Thus  musing,  was  I  ware  that  I  had  nursed 

Folly  exceeding,  anger  without  cause. 

Now  then  I  praise  thee  ;  wise  thou  seem'st  to  me 

In  gaining  us  this  kinship,  senseless  I,  885 

Who  in  these  counsels  should  have  been  thine  ally, 

Have  furthered  all,  have  decked  the  bridal  couch, 

And  joyed  to  minister  unto  the  bride. 

But  we  are — women  :  needs  not  harsher  word. 

Yet  evil  shouldst  thou  not  for  evil  render,  890 

Nor  pit  against  my  folly  folly  of  thine. 

1  yield,  confessing  mine  unwisdom  then, 

But  unto  better  counsels  now  am  come. 

Children,  my  children,  hither  :  leave  the  house  ; 


ioo  EURIPIDES. 


[Enter  Children. 
Come  forth,  salute  your  father,  and  with  me  895 

Bid  him  farewell  :  be  reconciled  to  friends 
Ye,  with  your  mother,  from  the  hate  o'erpast. 
Truce  is  between  us,  rancour  hath  given  place. 
Clasp  ye  his  right  hand. — Woe  for  ambushed  ills  ! 
I  am  haunted  by  the  shadow  of  hidden  things !         goo 
Ah  children,  will  ye  thus,  through  many  a  year 
Living,  still  reach  him  loving  arms  ?     Ah  me, 
How  swift  to  weep  am  I,  how  full  of  fear ! 
Feuds  with  your  father  ended — ah,  so  late  ! — 
Have  filled  with  tears  these  soft-relenting  eyes.         905 

Chorus. 

And  from  mine  eyes  start  tears  of  pale  dismay. 
Ah  may  no  evil  worse  than  this  befall  ! 

Jason. 

Lady,  I  praise  this  mood,  yet  blame  not  that : 

'Tis  nothing  strange  that  womankind  should  rage 

When  the  spouse  trafficketh  in  alien  marriage.         910 

But  now  to  better  thoughts  thine  heart  hath  turned, 

And  thou,  though  late,  upon  the  victor  side 

Hast  voted  :  a  wise  woman's  deed  is  this. 

And  for  you,  children,  not  unheedfully 

Your  sire  hath  ta'en  much  forethought,  so  help  heaven. 

For  ye,  I  ween,  in  this  Corinthian  land  [915 

Shall  with  your  brethren  stand  the  foremost  yet. 

Grow  ye  in  strength  :  the  rest  shall  by  your  sire, 

And  whatso  God  is  gracious,  be  wrought  out. 

You  may  I  see  to  goodly  stature  grown,  920 

In  manhood's  prime,  triumphant  o'er  my  foes. 

Thou,  why  bedew'st  thou  with  wan  tears  thine  eyes, 


MEDEA.  ioi 


Turning  aback  from  them  thy  pallid  cheek, 
And  dost  not  hear  with  gladness  this  my  speech  ? 

Medea. 

'Tis   nought  :    but    o'er    these    children    broods    mine 
heart.  925 

Jason. 

Fear  not  :  all  will  I  order  well  for  them. 

Medea. 

This  will  I  : — 'Tis  not  I  mistrust  thy  words  ; 
But  woman  is  but  woman — born  for  tears. 

Jason. 
Why,  hapless  one,  dost  make  moan  over  these  ? 

Medea. 

1  bare  them.     When  thou  prayedst  life  for  them,     930 

Pity  stole  o'er  me,  whispering,  "  Shall  this  be  ?  " 

But  that  for  which  thou  cam'st  to  speech  of  me 

In  part  is  said  ;  to  speak  the  rest  is  mine : — l 

Since  the  king  pleaseth  forth  the  land  to  send  me, 

For  me  too  this  is  best, — I  know  it  well, —  935 

That  I  bide  not,  a  stumblingblock  to  thee 

And  the  land's  lords,  whose  house's  foe  I  seem, 

So  fare  I  forth  to  exile  from  this  land. 

But,  that  my  sons  by  thine  hand  may  be  reared, 

Entreat  thou  Kreon  that  they  be  not  banished.         940 

1  Verrall  here  says  "  There  is  no  apparent  reason  for  the 
emphatic  pronoun,"  (eyw).  Is  it  not  that  the  object  of  the 
interview  was  twofold,  first,  to  ask  Jason's  pardon, — that 
had  now  been  spoken  by  him, — secondly,  to  introduce  a 
proposal  of  her  own,  involving  independent  action  on  her 
part  ? 


102  EURIPIDES. 


Jason. 
Prevail  I  may  not,  yet  must  I  essay. 

Medea. 

Nay  then,  thy  bride  bid  thou  to  pray  her  sire 
That  thy  sons  be  not  banished  from  this  land. 

Jason. 

Yea  surely  ;  and,  I  trow,  her  shall  I  win, 

If  of  her  sister  women  she  is  one.  945 

Medea. 

I  too  will  bear  a  part  in  thine  endeavour  ; 

For  I  will  send  her  gifts  unmatched  for  beauty 

Of  all  that  men  see  now,  I  know,  by  far, 

A  robe  fine-spun,  a  golden  diadem  ; 

Our  sons  to  bear  them.     Now  must  an  attendant     950 

With  all  speed  hither  bring  the  ornaments. 

Blessings  shall  hers  be,  not  one,  but  untold, 

Who  winneth  thee  for  lord,  a  peerless  spouse, 

Who  owneth  ornaments  which  once  the  Sun, 

My  father's  father,  gave  unto  his  offspring  !  955 

Take  in  your  hands,  my  sons,  these  bridal  gifts, 

And  to  the  happy  princess-bride  bear  ye 

And  give  :  with  gifts  shall  she  be  satisfied. 

Jason. 

But,  fond  one,  why  make  void  thine  hands  of  these  ? 
Deem'st  thou  a  royal  house  hath  lack  of  robes,         960 
Or  gold,  deem'st  thou  ?    Keep  these  and  give  them  not. 
For,  if  my  wife  esteems  me  aught,  my  wish 
Will  she  prefer  to  treasures,  well  I  wot. 


MEDEA .  103 


Medea. 

Nay,  speak  not  so  :  gifts  sway  the  Gods,  they  say. 
Gold  weigheth  more  with  men  than  words  untold.    965 
Hers  fortune  is  ;  God  favoureth  now  her  cause  ; 
Young  is  her  power.     Life  would  I  give  for  ransom 
Of  my  sons'  banishment,  not  gold  alone. 
Now,  children,  enter  ye  the  halls  of  wealth. 
Unto  your  sire's  new  wife,  my  lady-queen,  970 

Make  supplication,  pray  ye  be  not  exiled, 
Giving  mine  ornaments.     Most  importeth  this, 
That  she  into  her  hands  receive  my  gifts. 
Haste  ye,  and  to  your  mother  bring  glad  tidings 
Of  good  success  in  that  she  longs  to  win.  975 

[Exeunt  Jason  and  Children. 

Chorus. 

(Str.  1) 

Now  for  the  life  of  the  children  mine  hope  hath  been 

turned  to  despairing. 
No  hope  any  more  !     On  the  slaughterward  path  even 

now  are  they  faring  ! 
The  bride   shall    receive  it,   the   diadem-garland    that 

beareth  enfolden 

Doom  for  the  hapless  mid  glittering  sheen  : 
And  to  set  the  adorning  of  Hades  about  her  tresses 

golden  980 

She  shall  take  it  her  hands  between. 

(Ant.  1) 
For  its  glamour   of  beauty,  its  splendour    unearthly, 

shall  swiftly  persuade  her 
To  bedeck  her  with  robe  and  with  gold-wrought  crown  : 

she  shall  soon  have  arrayed  her 


io4  EURIPIDES. 


In  attire  as  a  bride  in  the  presence  of  phantoms  from 

Hades  uprisen  ; 

In  such  dread  gin  shall  her  feet  be  ta'en  : 
In  the  weird  of  death  shall  the  hapless  be  whelmed, 

and  from  Doom's  dark  prison 

Shall  she  steal  forth  never  again. 

(Str.  2) 

And  thou,  wretch,  bridegroom  accurst,  who  art  fain  of 
a  princely  alliance,  990 

Blasting    thou    bringest — unknowing,    un- 
thinking ! — 
Of  life  on  thy  sons,  and  thy  bride  shall  to  foul  death 
plight  her  affiance. 

How  far  from  thy  fortune  of  old  art  thou 

sinking  ! 

{Ant.  2) 

And  amidst  my  lamentings  I  mourn  for  thine  anguish, 

O  hapless  mother 

Of    children,    who   makest    thee   ready    to 

slaughter 

Thy  babes,  to  avenge  thee  on  him  who  would  lawlessly 

wed  with  another,  1000 

Would  forsake  thee  to  dwell  with  a  prince's 

daughter. 

Enter  Children's  Guardian,  with  Children. 

Children's  Guardian. 

Mistress,  remission  for  thy  sons  of  exile  ! 
Thy  gift  the  princess-bride  with  joy  received 
In  hand  ;  and  there  is  peace  unto  thy  sons. 

Medea. 
Alas  ! 


MEDEA .  105 


Children's  Guardian. 

Why  dost  thou  stand  confounded  mid  good  hap  ?    1005 
Now  wherefore  turnest  thou  thy  face  away, 
And  dost  not  hear  with  gladness  this  my  speech  ? 

Medea. 

Woe's  me ! 

Children's  Guardian. 

This  cry  is  to  the  tidings  not  attuned. 

Medea. 

Woe  yet  again  ! 

Children's  Guardian. 

Can  I  have  brought  ill  hap 
Unwitting — erred  in  deeming  these  glad  tidings  ?    1010 

Medea. 

As  they  are,  are  thy  tidings :  thee  I  blame  not. 

Children's  Guardian. 

Why   down-drooped    is   thine    eye  ?      Why    flow   thy 

tears  ? 

Medea. 

Needs  must  they,  ancient ;  for  these  things  the  Gods 
And  I  withal — O  fool ! — have  ill  contrived. 

Children's  Guardian. 
Fear  not :  thy  children  yet  shall  bring  thee  home.  1015 

Medea. 
Others  ere  then  shall  wretched  I  send  home. 


io6  EURIPIDES. 


Children's  Guardian. 

Not  thou  alone  art  severed  from  thy  sons. 
Submissively  must  mortals  bear  mischance. 

Medea. 

This  will  I  :  but  within  the  house  go  thou, 
And  for  my  children's  daily  needs  prepare.  1020 

[Exit  Children  s  Guardian. 

0  children,  children,  yours  a  city  is, 

And  yours  a  home,  where,  leaving  wretched  me, 
Dwell  shall  ye,  of  your  mother  aye  bereft. 

1  shall  go  exiled  to  another  land, 

Ere  I  have  joyed  in  you,  have  seen  your  bliss,        1025 

Ere  I  have  decked  for  you  the  couch,  the  bride, 

The  bridal  bower,  and  held  the  torch  on  high. 

O  me  accurst  in  this  my  ruthless  mood  ! 

For  nought,  for  nought,  my  babes,  I  nurtured  you, 

And  all  for  nought  I  laboured,  travail-worn,  1030 

Bearing  sharp  anguish  in  your  hour  of  birth. 

Ah  for  the  hopes — unhappy  ! — all  mine  hopes 

Of  ministering  hands  about  mine  age, 

Of  dying  folded  round  with  loving  arms, 

All  men's  desire  !     But  now — 'tis  past — 'tis  past,    1035 

That  sweet  imagining  !     Forlorn  of  you 

A  bitter  life  and  woeful  shall  I  waste. 

Your  mother  never  more  with  loving  eyes 

Shall  ye  behold,  passed  to  another  life.  [1040 

Woe  !  woe  !  why  gaze  your  eyes  on  me,  my  darlings  ? 

Why  smile  to  me  the  latest  smile  of  all  ? 

Alas  !  what  shall  I  do  ? — Mine  heart  is  failing 

As  I  behold  my  children's  laughing  eyes  ! 

Women,  I  cannot !  farewell,  purposes 


MEDEA.  107 

O'erpast  !     I  take  my  children  from  the  land.  1045 

What  need  to  wring  the  father's  heart  with  ills 

Of  these,  to  gain  myself  ills  twice  so  many  ? 

Not  I,  not  I  ! — Ye  purposes,  farewell ! 

Yet — yet — what  ails  me  ?     Would  I  earn  derision, 

Letting  my  foes  slip  from  mine  hand  unpunished  ?  1050 

I  must  dare  this.     Out  on  my  coward  mood 

That  from  mine  heart  let  loose  relenting  words  ! 

Children,  pass  ye  within.  [Exeunt  Children. 

Now,  whoso  may  not 
Sinless  be  present  at  my  sacrifice, 

On  his  head  be  it :  mine  hand  faltereth  not.  1055 

Oh  !  oh  ! 

0  heart,  mine  heart,  do  not — do  not  this  deed  ! 

Let  them  be,  wretched  heart,  spare  thou  thy  babes  ! 

There  dwelling  with  me  shall  they  gladden  thee. — 

No  ! — by  the  nether  fiends  that  dwell  with  Hades, 

Never  shall  this  betide,  that  I  will  leave  1060 

My  children  for  my  foes  to  trample  on. 

They  needs  must  die.     And,  since  it  needs  must  be, 

Even  I  will  slay  them,  I,  who  gave  them  life. 

All  this  is  utter  doom  : — she  shall  not  'scape  ! 

Yea,  on  her  head  the  wreath  is  ;  in  my  robes  1065 

The  princess-bride  is  perishing — I  know  it. 

But — for  I  fare  on  journey  most  unhappy, 

And  shall  speed  these  on  yet  unhappier — 

1  would  speak  to  my  sons.  [Re-enter  Children. 

Give,  O  my  babes, 
Give  to  your  mother  the  right  hand  to  kiss.  1070 

O  dearest  hand,  O  lips  most  dear  to  me, 
O  form  and  noble  feature  of  my  children, 
Blessing  be  on  you — there  ! — for  all  things  here 
Your  sire  hath  reft.     O  sweet,  O  sweet  embrace ! 


10S  EURIPIDES. 


0  children's  roseleaf  skin,  O  balmy  breath  !  1075 

Away,  away  !     Strength  faileth  me  to  gaze 
On  you,  but  I  am  overcome  of  evil. 

[Exeunt  Children. 
Now,  now,  I  learn  what  horrors  I  intend  : 
But  passion  overmastereth  sober  thought  : 
And  this  is  cause  of  direst  ills  to  men.  1080 

Chorus. 
1 
Full  oft  ere  this  my  soul  hath  scaled 

Lone  heights  of  thought,  empyrean  steeps, 
Or  plunged  far  down  the  darkling  deeps, 
Where  woman's  feebler  heart  hath  failed. 

Yet  wherefore  failed  ?     Should  woman  find 
No  inspiration  thrill  her  breast, 
Nor  welcome  ever  that  sweet  guest 

Of  Song,  that  uttereth  Wisdom's  mind  ? 

Alas  !  not  all !     Few,  few  are  they, — 
Perchance  amid  a  thousand  one 
Thou  shouldest  find, — for  whom  the  sun 

Of  poesy  makes  an  inner  day. 

11 

Now  this  I  say — calm  bliss,  that  ne'er  1090 

Knew  love's  wild  fever  of  the  blood, 
The  pains,  the  joys,  of  motherhood, 

Passeth  all  parents'  joy-blent  care. 

The  childless,  they  that  never  prove 
If  sunshine  comes,  or  cloud,  to  men 
With  babes,  far  lie  beyond  their  ken 

The  toils,  the  griefs,  of  parent-love. 


MEDEA .  109 


But  they  whose  halls  with  laughter  sweet 
Of  children  ring — I  mark  them  aye 
Care-fretted,  travailing  alway  1100 

To  win  their  loved  ones  nurture  meet. 

ill 

One  toils  with  love  more  strong  than  death  : 
Yet — yet — who  knoweth  whether  he 
A  wise  man  or  a  fool  shall  be 

To  whom  he  shall  his  wealth  bequeath  ? 

But  last,  but  worst,  remains  to  tell : 
For  though  ye  get  you  wealth  enow, 
And  though  your  sons  to  manhood  grow, 

Fair  sons  and  good  : — if  Death  the  fell, 

To  Hades  vanishing,  bears  down  11 10 

Your  children's  lives,  what  profit  is 
That  Heaven  hath  laid,  with  all  else,  this 

Upon  mankind,  this  sorrow's  crown  ? 

Medea. 

Friends,  long  have  1,  abiding  fortune's  hap, 

Expected  what  from  yonder  shall  befall. 

And  lo,  a  man  I  see  of  Jason's  train 

Hitherward  coming,  and  my  eager  heart 

Foretelleth  him  the  herald  of  new  ills.  11 20 


Enter  Messenger. 


Messenger. 


O  thou  who  hast  wrought  an  awful  deed  and  lawless, 

Flee,  O  Medea,  flee,  nor  once  leave  thou 

The  sea-wain,  or  the  car  that  scours  the  plain. 


no  EURIPIDES. 


Medea. 
Now  what  hath  happed  that  calleth  for  such  flight  ? 

Messenger. 

Dead  is  the  princess  even  now,  and  dead  1125 

Kreon  her  father,  by  thy  poison-drugs. 

Medea. 

A  glorious  tale  thou  tellest :  thou  henceforth 
Art  of  my  benefactors  and  my  friends. 

Messenger. 

What  say'st  ? — Of  sound  mind  art  thou,  and  not  mad, 
Who,  hearing  of  the  havoc  of  the  hearth  1130 

Of  kings,  art  glad,  and  hast  no  fear  for  this  ? 

Medea. 

O  yea  ;  I  too  with  words  of  controversy 
Could  answer  thee  : — yet  be  not  hasty,  friend, 
But  tell  how  died  they  :  thou  shouldst  gladden  me 
Doubly,  if  these  most  horribly  have  perished.  JI35 

Messenger. 

When,  with  their  father,  came  thy  children  twain, 
And  passed  into  the  halls  for  marriage  decked, 
Glad  were  we  thralls  who  sorrowed  for  thy  woes. 
And  straightway  buzzed  from  ear  to  ear  the  tale 
Of  truce  to  old  feuds  'twixt  thy  lord  and  thee.         1 140 
The  hand  one  kisseth,  one  the  golden  head 
Of  those  thy  sons  :  myself  by  joy  on-drawn 
Followed  thy  children  to  the  women's  bowers. 
Now  she  which  had  our  worship  in  thy  stead, 


MEDEA .  in 


Ere  she  beheld  thy  chariot-yoke  of  sons,  1 145 

Aye  upon  Jason  turned  her  yearning  gaze. 

But  then  her  veil  before  her  eyes  she  cast, 

And  swept  aback  the  scorn  of  her  white  neck, 

Loathing  thy  sons'  approach  :  but  now  thy  lord, 

To  turn  the  maiden's  wrath  and  spite  aside,  11 55 

Thus  spake  :  "  Nay.  be  not  hostile  to  thy  friends  : 

Cease  from  thine  anger,  turn  thine  head  again, 

Accounting  friends  whomso  thy  spouse  accounts. 

Their  gifts  receive,  and  plead  thou  with  thy  sire 

To  pardon  these  their  exile  : — for  my  sake."  1 155 

She,  when  she  saw  the  attire,  could  not  refrain, 

But  yielded  her  lord  all.     And  ere  their  father 

Far  from  her  bower  with  those  thy  sons  had  gone, 

She  took  the  rich-wrought  robes  and  clad  herself, 

Circling  her  ringlets  with  the  golden  crown,  11 60 

And  by  a  shining  mirror  ranged  her  tresses, 

Smiling  at  her  own  phantom  image  there. 

Then,  rising  from  her  seat,  she  paced  adown 

The  halls  with  mincing  tread  of  ivory  feet, 

Exulting  in  the  gifts,  and  oftentimes  1165 

Sweeping  her  glance  from  neck  to  ankle-hem. 

But  then  was  there  a  fearful  sight  to  see. 

Suddenly  changed  her  colour  :  reeling  back 

With  trembling  limbs  she  goes  ;  and  scarce  in  time 

Drops  on  the  couch  to  fall  not  on  the  ground.         11 70 

Then  a  grey  handmaid,  deeming  peradventure 

That  frenzy  was  of  Pan  or  some  God  sent, 

Raised  the  prayer-cry,  before  she  saw  the  foam 

White-frothing  from  her  lips,  or  marked  how  rolled 

Her  eyeballs,  and  her  face's  bloodless  hue.  11 75 

Then  a  scream,  unaccordant,  long  and  loud, 

She  shrilled  forth.    Straight  to  her  father's  chambers  one 


1  2 


ii2  EURIPIDES. 


Darted,  and  one  unto  her  new-made  spouse, 
To  tell  the  bride's  mischance  :  and  all  the  roof 
Echoed  with  multitudinous-hurrying  feet.  1180 

And  a  swift  athlete's  straining  limbs  had  won 
By  this  the  goal  of  the  six-plethra  course  : 
Then  she  from  trance  all  speechless  of  closed  eyes 
Awoke — ah  wretch  ! — with  horrible-shrilling  shriek  : 
For  like  two  charging  hosts  her  agony  came  : — 
The  golden  coil  about  her  head  that  lay  1185 

'Gan  spurt  a  marvellous  stream  of  ravening  fire  ; 
While  the  fine  robes,  the  gift  thy  children  brought, 
Devoured  the  white  flesh  of  the  unhappy  one. 
Upstarting  from  her  seat  she  flees,  all  flame,  1190 

Shaking  her  hair,  her  head,  this  way  and  that, 
To  cast  from  her  the  crown  ;  but  firmly  fixed 
The  gold  held  fast  its  clasp  :  the  fire,  whene'er 
She  shook  her  locks,  with  doubled  fury  blazed. 
Then  misery-vanquished  falls  she  on  the  floor,        1195 
Past  recognising,  save  for  a  father,  marred. 
No  more  was  seen  her  eyes'  imperial  calm, 
No  more  her  comely  features  ;  but  the  gore 
Dripped  from  her  head's  crown  flecked  with  blended 
fire.  [1200 

The  flesh-flakes  from  her  bones,  like  the  pine's  tears, 
'Neath  that  mysterious  drug's  devourings  melted, — 
Dread  sight  ! — and  came  on  all  folk  fear  to  touch 
The  corpse  :  her  hideous  fate  had  we  for  warning. 
But,  ignorant  of  all,  her  wretched  sire, 
Suddenly  entering,  falls  upon  her  corpse,  1205 

And  straightway  wailed  and  clasped  the  body  round, 
And  kissed  it,  crying,  "  O  my  hapless  child, 
What  God  thus  horribly  hath  thee  destroyed  ? 
Who  maketh  this  old  sepulchre  bereft 


MEDEA.  113 


Of  thee ?     Ah  me,  would  I  might  die  with  thee  !  "  1210 

But,  when  from  wailing  and  from  moans  he  ceased, 

Fain  would  he  have  upraised  his  aged  frame, 

Yet  clave,  as  ivy  clings  to  laurel  boughs, 

To  those  fine  robes  :  then  was  a  ghastly  wrestling  : 

For,  while  he  laboured  to  upraise  his  knee,  12 15 

She  strained  against  him  :  if  by  force  he  haled, 

Then  from  the  bones  he  tare  his  aged  flesh. 

At  last  refrained  he,  and  gave  up  the  ghost, 

Ill-starred,  who  could  no  more  withstand  his  bane. 

There  lie  the  corpses,  child  by  aged  sire  1220 

Clasped  ; — such  affliction  tears,  not  words,  must  mourn. 

And  of  thy  part  no  word  be  said  by  me  : — 

Thyself  from  punishment  wilt  find  escape. 

But  man's  lot  now,  as  oft,  I  count  a  shadow, 

Nor  fear  to  say  that  such  as  seem  to  be  1225 

Wise  among  men  and  cunning  in  speech-lore, 

Even  these  are  chargeable  with  deepest  folly  ; 

For  among  mortals  happy  man  is  none. 

In  fortune's  flood-tide  might  a  man  become  [1230 

More  prosperous  than  his  neighbour  :  happy  ? — no  ! 

[Exit. 

Chorus. 

Meseems  the  God  with  many  an  ill  this  day 

Will  compass  Jason, — yea,  and  rightfully. 

But  O  the  pity  of  thy  calamity, 

Daughter  of  Kreon,  who  to  Hades'  halls 

Hast  passed,  because  with  thee  Avould  Jason  wed  !  1235 

Medea. 

Friends,  my  resolve  is  taken,  with  all  speed 
To  slay  my  children,  and  to  flee  this  land, 
And  not  to  linger  and  to  yield  my  sons 


ii4  EURIPIDES. 


To  death  by  other  hands  more  merciless.  [1240 

They  needs  must  die  :  and,  since  it  needs  must  be, 
Even  I  will  give  them  death,  who  gave  them  life. 
Up,  gird  thee  for  the  fray,  mine  heart  !     Why  loiter 
To  do  the  dread  ill  deeds  that  must  be  done  ? 
Come,  wretched  hand  of  mine,  grasp  thou  the  sword  ; 
Grasp  it ; — move  toward  life's  bitter  starting-post,  1245 
And  turn  not  craven  :  think  not  on  thy  babes, 
How  dear  they  are,  how  thou  didst  bear  them  :  nay, 
For  this  short  day  do  thou  forget  thy  sons, 
Thereafter  mourn  them.     For,  although  thou  slay, 
Yet  dear  they  are,  and  I  a  wretched  woman.  1250 

[Exit  Medea. 
Chorus. 

(Str.) 
O  Earth,  O  all-revealing  splendour 

Of  the  Sun,  look  down  on  a  woman  accurst, 
Or  ever  she  slake  the  murder-thirst 
Of  a  mother  whose  hands  would  smite  the  tender 

Fruit  of  her  womb. 
Look  down,  for  she  sprang  of  thy  lineage  golden, 
And  by  terror  of  men  is  the  Gods'  seed  holden1 

And  the  shadow  of  doom. 
But  thou,  O  heaven-begotten  glory, 
Restrain  her,  refrain  her  :  the  wretched,  the  gory 
Erinnys  by  demons  dogged,  we  implore  thee,  1260 
Cast  forth  of  the  home  ! 

(Ant.) 
For  nought  was  the  childbirth-travail  wasted  ; 
For  nought  didst  thou  bear  them,  the  near  and 

the  dear, 
O  thou  who  hast  fled  through  the  Pass  of  Fear, 

1  Conjecturing  ttltvh  for  MSS.  ttitviiv. 


MEDEA.  115 


From    the   dark-blue   Clashing    Crags   who   hast 
hasted 

Speeding  thy  flight  ! 
Alas  for  her  ! — wherefore  hath  grim  wrath  stirred 

her 
Through  depths  of  her  soul,  that  ruthless  murder 

Her  wrongs  must  requite  ? 
For  stern  upon  mortals  the  vengeance  falleth 
For  kin's  blood  spilt ;  from  the  earth  it  calleth, 
A  voice  from  the  Gods,  and  the  slayers  appalleth 

On  whose  homes  it  shall  light.         1270 

[Children  s  cries  behind  the  scenes.'] 

Child  i. 
What  shall  I  do  ? — How  flee  my  mother  s  hands  ? 

Child  2. 
/  know  not,  dearest  brother.     Death  is  here  ! 

Chorus. 

Ah  the  cry  ! — dost  thou  hear  it  ? — the  children's  cry  ! 
Wretch  ! — woman  of  cursed  destiny  ! 
Shall  I  enter  ? — My  heart  crieth,  "  Rescue  the  children 
from  murder  drawn  nigh  !  " 

Child  i. 
Yea,  for  the  Gods'  sake,  help  !     Sore  is  our  need — 

Child  2. 
For  now  we  arc  hemmed  in  by  the  sword's  death-toils  ! 


n6  EURIPIDES. 


Chorus. 

Wretch  !  of  what  rock  is  thy  breast  ? — of  what  steel  is 

the  heart  of  thee  moulded, 
That  the  babes  thou  hast  born,  with  the  selfsame  hands 
that  with  love  have  enfolded  1280 

These,  thou  hast  set  thee  to  slay  ? 
Of  one  have  I  heard  that  laid  hands  on  her  loved  ones 

of  old,  one  only, 
Even  Ino  distraught  of  the  Gods,  when  Zeus'  bride 
drave  her,  lonely 

And  lost,  from  her  home  to  stray  : 
And   she  fell — ah   wretch  ! — on  the  brink  as  she 

stood 
Of  the  sea-scaur  :  guilt  of  her  children's  blood 
Dragged  downwards  her  feet  to  the  salt  sea-flood, 

And  she  died  with  her  children  twain. 
What  ghastlier  horror  remains  to  be  wrought  ? 
O  bride-bed  of  women,  with  anguish  fraught,  1290 
What    scathe   upon  mortals   ere   now   hast    thou 
brought, 

What  manifold  bane  ! 

Enter  Jason. 

Jason. 

Women,  which  stand  anear  unto  this  roof — 

Is  she  within  the  halls,  she  who  hath  wrought 

Dread  deeds,  Medea,  or  in  flight  passed  thence  ?     1295 

For  either  must  she  hide  her  neath  the  earth, 

Or  lift  on  wings  her  frame  to  heaven's  far  depths, 

Or  taste  the  vengeance  of  a  royal  house. 

How,  trusts  she,  having  murdered  the  land's  lords, 

Scatheless  herself  from  these  halls  forth  to  flee  ?      1300 


MEDEA.  117 


Yet  not  for  her  care  I,  but  for  my  sons. 

Whom  she  hath  wronged  shall  recompense  her  wrong : 

But  I  to  save  my  children's  life  am  come, 

Lest  to  my  grief  the  kinsmen  of  the  dead 

Avenge  on  them  their  mother's  impious  murder.     1305 

Chorus. 

Wretch,  thou  know'st  not  what  depth  of  woe  thou  hast 

reached, 
Jason,  cr  thou  hadst  uttered  not  such  words. 

Jason. 
What  now  ? — and  is  she  fain  to  slay  me  too  ? 

Chorus. 
Thy  sons  are  dead,  slain  by  the  mother's  hand. 

Jason. 

Ah    me  ! — what    say'st    thou  ? — thou    hast    killed    me, 
woman  !  13 10 

Chorus. 

Thy  children  are  no  more  :  so  think  of  them. 

Jason. 

How  ? — slew  them  ? — Where  ? — within,    without,    the 

halls  ? 

Chorus. 

Open,  and  thou  shalt  see  thy  children's  corpses. 

Jason. 

Shoot  back  the  bolts  with  all  speed,  serving-men  ! 
Unbar,  that  1  may  see  this  twofold  woe, —  1315 

The  dead,  and  her,  with  slaughter  to  requite  her. 


n8  EURIPIDES. 


Medea  appears  in  mid  air  in  a  chariot  drawn  by 

dragons. 

Medea. 

Why  shakest  thou  these  doors  and  wouldst  unbar, 
Seeking  thy  dead  and  me  who  wrought  the  deed  ? 
Cease  this  essay.     If  thou  wouldst  aught  of  me,   [1320 
Say  what  thou  wilt  :  thine  hand  shall  touch  me  never. 
Such  chariot  hath  my  father's  sire,  the  Sun, 
Given  me,  a  defence  from  foeman's  hand. 

Jason. 

O  thing  abhorred  !     O  woman  hatefullest 

To  Gods,  to  me,  to  all  the  race  of  men, 

Thou  that  couldst  thrust  the  sword  into  the  babes  1325 

Thou  bar'st,  and  me  hast  made  a  childless  ruin  ! 

Thus  hast  thou  wrought,  yet  look'st  thou  on  the  sun 

And  earth,  who  hast  dared  a  deed  most  impious  ? 

Now  ruin  seize  thee  ! — clear  I  see,  who  saw  not 

Then,  when  from  halls  and  land  barbarian  I33° 

To  a  Greek  home  I  bare  thee,  utter  bane, 

Traitress  to  sire  and  land  that  nurtured  thee  ! 

Thy  guilt's  curse-bolt  on  me  the  Gods  have  launched ; 

For  thine  own  brother  by  his  hearth  thou  slewest 

Ere  thou  didst  enter  fair-prowed  Argo's  hull.  1335 

With  such  deeds  thou  begannest.     Wedded  then 

To  this  man,  and  the  mother  of  my  sons, 

For  wedlock-right's  sake  hast  thou  murdered  them. 

There  is  no  Grecian  woman  that  had  dared 

This  : — yet  I  stooped  to  marry  thee,  good  sooth,     1340 

Rather  than  these,  a  hateful  bride  and  fell, 

A  tigress,  not  a  woman,  harbouring 


MEDEA.  119 

A  fiercer  nature  than  Tyrrhenian  Scylla. 

But — for  untold  revilings  would  not  sting 

Thee,  in  thy  nature  is  such  hardihood  : —  1345 

Avaunt,  thou  miscreant  stained  with  thy  babes'  blood  ! 

For  me  remains  to  wail  my  destiny, 

Who  of  my  new-wed  bride  shall  have  no  joy, 

And  to  the  sons  whom  I  begat  and  nurtured 

Living  I  shall  not  speak— lost,  lost  to  me  !  1350 

Medea. 

I  might  have  lengthened  out  long  controversy 

To  these  thy  words,  if  Father  Zeus  knew  not 

How  I  have  dealt  with  thee  and  thou  with  me. 

'Twas  not  for  thee  to  set  my  couch  at  nought 

And  live  a  life  of  bliss,  bemocking  me  !  1355 

Nor  for  thy  princess,  and  thy  marriage-kinsman, 

Kreon,  unscathed  to  banish  me  this  land  ! 

Wherefore  a  tigress  call  me,  an  thou  wilt, 

Or  Scylla,  haunter  of  Tyrrhenian  shore  ; 

For  thine  heart  have  I  wrung,  as  well  behoved.      1360 

Jason. 
Ha,  but  thou  sorrowest  too,  thou  shar'st  mine  ills  ! 

Medea. 
O  yea  :  yet  grief  is  gain,  so  thou  laugh  not. 

Jason. 
O  children  mine,  what  miscreant  mother  had  ye  ! 

Medea. 
O  sons,  destroyed  by  your  own  father's  lust ! 


i2o  EURIPIDES. 


Jason. 
Sooth,  'twas  no  hand  of  mine  that  murdered  them.  1365 

Medea. 
Nay,  but  thine  insolence  and  thy  new-forged  bonds. 

Jason. 
How,  claim  the  right  for  wedlock's  sake  to  slay  them  ! 

Medea. 
A  light  affliction  count'st  thou  this  to  woman  ? 

Jason. 
So  she  be  wise  : — in  thy  sight  nought  were  good. 

Medea. 
These  live  no  more  :  this,  this  shall  cut  thine  heart !  1370 

Jason. 
They  live — ah  me  ! — avengers  on  thine  head. 

Medea. 
The  Gods  know  who  began  this  misery. 

Jason. 
Yea,  verily,  thy  spirit  abhorred  they  know. 

Medea. 
Abhorred  art  thou  :   I  loathe  thy  bitter  tongue. 

Jason. 
And  I  thine  : — yet  were  mutual  riddance  easy.        1375 


MEDEA.  121 


Medea. 
How  then  ? — what  shall  I  do  ? — fain  would  I  this. 

Jason. 
Yield  me  my  dead  to  bury  and  bewail. 

Medea. 

Never  :  with  this  hand  will  I  bury  them, 

To  Mountain  Here's  precinct  bearing  them, 

That  never  foe  may  do  despite  to  them,  1380 

Rifling  their  tomb.     This  land  of  Sisyphus 

Will  I  constrain  with  solemn  festival 

And  rites  to  atone  for  this  unhallowed  murder. 

But  I — I  go  unto  Erechtheus'  land, 

With  Aigeus  to  abide,  Pandion's  son.  1385 

Thou,  as  is  meet,  foul  wretch,  shalt  foully  die, 

By  Argo's  wreckage  smitten  on  the  skull, 

Now  thou  hast  seen  this  bridal's  bitter  ending. 

Jason. 

Now  the  Fury-avenger  of  children  smite  thee, 

And  Justice  that  looketh  on  murder  requite  thee  !  1390 

Medea. 

What  God  or  what  spirit  will  heed  thy  request, 
Caitiff  forsworn,  who  betrayest  the  guest  ? 

Jason. 

Avaunt,  foul  thing  by  whose  deed  thy  children  have 

died! 

Medea. 

Go  hence  to  thine  halls,  thence  lead  to  the  grave  thy 
bride  ! 


i22  EURIPIDES. 


Jason. 

I  go,  a   father   forlorn   of  the  two  sons  reft   from  his 
home  !  1395 

Medea. 

Not  yet  dost  thou  truly  mourn  :  abide  till  thine  old  age 
come. 

Jason. 

O  children  beloved  above  all  ! 

Medea. 
Of  their  mother  beloved,  not  of  thee. 

Jason. 
Yet  she  slew  them  ! 

Medea. 

That  thou  mightest  fall  in  the  net  that 
thou  spreadest  for  me. 

Jason. 

Woe's  me  !     I  yearn  with  my  lips  to  press 

My  sons'  dear  lips  in  my  wretchedness.  1400 

Medea. 

Ha,  now  art  thou  calling  upon  them,  now  wouldst  thou 

kiss, 
Who  rejectedst  them  then  ? 

Jason. 

For  the  Gods'  sake  grant  me  but  this, 
The  sweet  soft  flesh  of  my  children  to  feel ! 


MEDEA.  123 


Medea. 
No — wasted  in  air  is  all  thine  appeal. 

Jason. 

0  Zeus,  dost  thou  hear  it,  how  spurned  I  am  ? — 
What  outrage  I  suffer  of  yonder  abhorred       [i4°5 
Child-murderess,  yonder  tigress-dam  ? 

Yet  out  of  mine  helplessness,  out  of  my  shame, 

1  bewail  my  beloved,  I  call  to  record 

High  heaven,  1  bid  God  witness  the  word,       1410 
That  my  sons  thou  hast  slain,  and  withholdest  me 

That  mine  hands  may  not  touch  them,  nor  bury 
their  clay  ! 

Would  God  I  had  gotten  them  never,  this  day 
To  behold  them  destroyed  of  thee  ! 

Chorus. 

All  dooms  be  of  Zeus  in  Olympus  ;   'tis  his  to  reveal 
them.  1415 

Manifold  things  unhoped-for  the  Gods  to  accomplish- 
ment bring. 
And  the  things  that  we  looked  for,  the  Gods  deign  not 

to  fulfil  them  ; 
And  the  paths  undiscerned  of  our  eyes,  the  Gods  unseal 
them. 

So  fell  this  marvellous  thing. 

[Exeunt  Omnes. 


HIPPOLYTUS. 


ARGUMENT. 

Hippolyta,  Queen  of  the  Amazons,  bore  to  Theseus,  king 
of  Athens  and  Trcezen,  a  son  whom  he  named  from  her, 
Hippolytus.  Now  this  youth  grew  up  of  all  men  most 
pure  in  heart,  reverencing  chiefly  Artemis  the  Maiden, 
Goddess  of  the  chase,  and  utterly  contemning  the  worship 
of  Aphrodite.  Wherefore  the  wrath  of  the  Queen  of 
Love  was  kindled  against  him,  and  she  made  Phcedra, 
his  father  s  young  wife,  mad  with  love  for  him  ;  and 
although  she  wrestled  with  her  malady,  and  strove  to 
hide  it  in  her  heart,  till  by  the  fever  of  it  she  'was 
brought  nigh  to  death's  door,  yet  in  the  end  it  was  re- 
vealed, and  was  made  destruction  to  her  and  to  Hippolytus 
also , 


K   2 


DRAMATIS  PERSONS. 

Aphrodite  (or  Kvpris),  the  Queen  of  Love. 

Hippolytus,    son    of    Theseus   and    Hippolyta    Queen   of    the 
Amazons. 

Ph.-edra,  daughter  of  Minos  king  of  Crete,  and  wife  of  Theseus. 

Nurse  of  Phaedra. 

Theseus,  king  of  Athens  and  Trcezen. 

Artemis,  Goddess  of  Hunting. 

Servant  of  Hippolytus. 

Messenger,  henchman  of  Hippolytus. 

Chorus,  composed  of  women  of  Trcezen. 

Attendants,  huntsmen,  and  handmaids. 

Scene  :— Before  the  palace  of  Theseus  at  Troezen,  where 
Theseus  dwelt,  being  self-exiled  for  a  year  from  Athens, 
to  expiate  the  shedding  of  the  blood  of  kinsmen  who 
had  sought  to  dethrone  him. 


HIPPOLYTUS. 


Enter  Aphrodite. 

Aphrodite. 

Mighty  on  earth,  and  named  by  many  a  name 

Am  I,  the  Goddess  Kypris,  as  in  heaven. 

And  of  all  dwellers  'twixt  the  Pontic  Sea 

And  Atlas'  bourn,  which  look  on  the  sun's  light, 

I  honour  them  which  reverence  my  power,  5 

But  bring  the  proud  hearts  that  defy  me  low. 

For  even  to  the  Gods  this  appertains, 

That  in  the  homage  of  mankind  they  joy. 

And  I  will  give  swift  proof  of  these  my  words. 

For  Theseus'  son,  born  of  the  Amazon,  10 

Hippolytus,  pure-hearted  Pittheus'  ward, 

Sole  mid  the  folk  of  this  Trcezenian  land 

Sayeth  that  vilest  of  the  Gods  am  I  ; 

Rejects  the  couch  ;  of  marriage  will  he  none  ; 

But  Phoebus'  sister  Artemis,  Zeus'  child,  15 

Honours,  of  all  Gods  chiefest  holding  her  : 

And  through  the  greenwood  in  the  Maid's  train  still 

With  swift  hounds  sweeps  the  wild   beasts  from  the 

earth, 
Linked  with  companionship  for  men  too  high. 
Yet  this  I  grudge  not :  what  is  this  to  me  ?  20 

But  that  his  wrong  to  me  will  I  avenge 


126  EURIPIDES. 


Upon  Hippolytus  this  day  :  the  path 

Well-nigh  is  cleared  ;  scant  pains  it  needeth  yet. 

For,  as  from  halls  of  Pittheus  once  he  sought 

Pandion's  land,  to  see  and  to  be  sealed  25 

In  the  Great  Mysteries,  Phaedra,  high-born  wife 

Of  his  own  father,  saw  him  ;  and  her  heart 

Of  fierce  love  was  enthralled  by  my  device. 

And,  ere  she  came  to  this  Trcezenian  land, 

Hard  by  the  Rock  of  Pallas,  which  looks  down  30 

On  this  land,  built  she  unto  me  a  shrine 

For  love  of  one  afar  ;  and  his  memorial 

That  fane  divine  she  named  for  days  to  be. 

But  since  from  Kekrops'  land  forth  Theseus  passed 

Fleeing  the  blood-guilt  of  the  sons  of  Pallas,  35 

And  unto  this  shore  with  his  wife  hath  sailed, 

From  his  land  brooking  one  year's  banishment, 

Thenceforward,  sighing  and  by  stings  of  love 

Distraught,  the  hapless  one  wastes  down  to  death 

Silent :  her  malady  no  handmaid  knows.  40 

Ah,  but  not  so  shall  this  love's  issue  fall. 

Theseus  shall  know  this  thing  ;  all  bared  shall  be  : 

And  him  that  is  my  foe  his  sire  shall  slay 

By  curses,  whose  fulfilment  the  Sea-king 

Poseidon  in  this  boon  to  Theseus  gave,  45 

That,  to  three  prayers,  he  should  ask  nought  in  vain. 

She,  how  high-born  soe'er,  yet  perisheth, 

Phaedra  : — I  will  not  so  regard  her  pain 

That  I  should  not  exact  such  penalty 

Of  them  which  hate  me  as  shall  do  me  right.  50 

But, — forasmuch  as  Theseus'  son  I  see 

Yonder  draw  near,  forsaking  hunting's  toil, 

Hippolytus, — forth  will  I  from  this  place. 

And  a  great  press  of  henchmen  following  shout, 


HIPPOLYTUS.  127 


Honouring  with  songs  the  Goddess  Artemis.  55 

He  knows  not  Hades'  gates  wide  flung  for  him, 
And  this  day's  light  the  last  his  eyes  shall  see.   _.' 

[Exit. 
Enter  Hippolytus  and  Attendant  Huntsmen. 

Hippolytus. 

Follow  on,  follow  on,  ring  out  the  lay 

Unto  Artemis  high  enthroned  in  the  sky  60 

Zeus'  child,  in  her  keeping  who  hath  us  aye. 

Chorus  of  Huntsmen. 

O  Majesty,  Daughter  of  Zeus,  dread  Queen, 

I  hail  thee,  Artemis,  now, 
O  Leto's  Daughter,  O  Zeus's  child, 
Loveliest  far  of  the  Undefiled  ! 
In  the  Hall,  "  of  the  Mighty  Father"  styled, 
The  palace  of  Zeus,  mid  the  glory-sheen 

Of  gold — there  dwellest  thou. 
O  Fairest,  to  theeward  in  greeting  I  call,  70 

O  fairest  Artemis  thou  of  all 
The  Maidens  Divine  in  Olympus'  hall  ! 

Hippolytus. 

For  thee  this  woven  garland  from  a  mead 

Unsullied  have  I  twined,  O  Queen,  and  bring. 

There  never  shepherd  dares  to  feed  his  flock,  75 

Nor  steel  of  sickle  came  :  only  the  bee 

Roveth  the  springtide  mead  undesecrate : 

And  Reverence  watereth  it  with  river-dews. 

They  which  have  heritage  of  self-control 

In  all  things, — not  taught,  but  the  pure  in  heart, —   80 

These  there  may  gather  flowers,  but  none  impure. 


128  EURIPIDES. 


Now  Queen,  dear  Queen,  receive  this  anadem 

From  reverent  hand  to  deck  thy  golden  hair ; 

For  to  me  sole  of  men  this  grace  is  given, 

That  I  be  with  thee,  converse  hold  with  thee,  85 

Hearing  thy  voice,  yet  seeing  not  thy  face. 

And  may  I  end  life's  race  as  I  began. 

Servant. 

Prince, — for  the  Gods  we  needs  must  call  our  Lords, — 
Wouldst  thou  receive  of  me  good  counselling  ? 

Hippolytus. 

Yea  surely  :  else  were  I  fool  manifest.  go 

Servant. 

Knowest  thou  then  the  stablished  wont  of  men  ? 

Hippolytus. 
Not  I :  whereof  is  this  thou  questionest  me  ? 

Servant. 
To  hate  the  proud  reserve  that  owns  few  friends. 

Hippolytus. 
Rightly  :  what  proud  man  is  not  odious  ? 

Servant. 
And  in  the  gracious  is  there  nought  of  charm  ?  95 

Hippolytus. 
Yea,  much,  and  profit  won  with  little  pains. 

Servant. 
And  deem'st  thou  not  this  same  may  hold  with  Gods  ? 


HIPPOLYTUS.  129 


KlPPOLYTUS. 

Yea,  if  men  live  by  laws  derived  from  Gods. 

Servant. 
Why  not  then  greet  a  Goddess  worshipful  ? 

Hippolytus. 
Whom  ? — have  a  care  thy  lips  in  no  wise  err.1  100 

Servant. 
Even  Kypris,  there  above  thy  portals  set. 

Hippolytus. 
From  far  I  greet  her,  who  am  undefiled. 

Servant. 
Worshipful  is  she,  glorious  among  men. 

Hippolytus. 
Of  Gods,  of  men,  each  maketh  still  his  choice. 

Servant. 
Now  prosper  thou  ; — be  needful  wisdom  thine  !  105 

Hippolytus. 
No  God  who  hath  night-homage  pleaseth  me. 

Servant. 
Guerdons  of  Gods,  my  son,  ought  men  to  use. 

1  "  The  Worshipful  Goddesses  "  was  the  peculiar  title  of 
the  Eumenides,  whom  it  was  ill-omened  to  name. 


130  EURIPIDES. 


HlPPOLYTUS. 

Depart,  mine  henchmen,  enter  ye  the  halls, 

And  set  on  bread.     The  full  board  welcome  is         [no 

When  hunting's  done.    And  one  must  groom  my  steeds, 

That  I  may  yoke  them  to  the  chariot-pole, 

Being  full  of  meat,  and  breathe  them  in  the  race. 

But  to  thy  Kypris  wave  I  long  farewell.  [Exit. 

Servant. 

But  we,  who  must  not  tread  in  steps  of  youth,         [115 

Who  are  wise1 — so  far  as  thralls  dare  claim  to  be, — 

Make  supplication  to  thine  images, 

Queen  Kypris.     It  beseems  thee  to  forgive, 

If  one  that  bears  through  youth  a  vehement  heart 

Speak  folly.     Be  as  though  thou  heardest  not  ; 

For  wiser  Gods  should  be  than  mortal  men.  120 

[Exit. 
Enter  Chorus  of  Trcezenian  Ladies. 

Chorus. 

{Sir.  1) 

A  rock  there  is,  wherefrom,  as  they  tell,  the  springs  of 
the  heart  of  the  Ocean  well, 

Whence   the   rifts  of  the  crags  overbeetling 
send 
For  the  plunging  urns  their  founts  outstreaming  : 
Even  there  did  I  light  on  a  maiden  my  friend, 
As  she  drenched  the  mantles  purple-gleaming 
In  the  riverward-glittering  spray, 
And  spread  the  dye  of  the  Tyrian  shell  on  the  rocks 
where  glowing  the  sunbeams  fell. 

Hers  were  the  lips  that  I  first  heard  say 

How  wasteth  our  lady  away  :  130 

1    cfrpovovvres  sc.   tv. 


HIPPOLYTUS.  131 


(Ant.  1) 
For  a  tale  they  told  of  a  fevered  bed,  of  the  feet  that 
forth  of  her  bower  ne'er  tread, 

Of  the  dainty-woven  veil  that  is  cast 
For  a  darkness  over  the  tresses  golden. 

Yea,  and  by  this  hath  the  third  day  past 
That  the  queen  from  her  fainting  lips  hath  with- 
holden 

The  gift  of  the  Lady  of  Corn, 
Keeping  her   body    thereof   unfed,    as    though    'twere 
pollution  to  taste  of  bread, 

With  anguish  unuttered  longing  forlorn 

One  haven  to  win — death's  bourn.        140 

(Str.  2) 
O  queen,  what  if  this  be  possession 
Of  Pan  or  of  Hekate  ?— 

Of  the  Mother  of  Dindymus'  Hill  ?- 
Or  the  awful  Corybant  thrill  ? — 
Or  Dictynna  hath  found  transgression 
Of  offerings  unrendered  in  thee — 

If  the  hand  of  the  Huntress  be  here  ? — 
For  she  flasheth  o'er  mountain  and  mere, 
And  rideth  her  triumph-procession 

Over  surges  and  swirls  of  the  sea.  150 


(Ant.  2) 


Or  thy  princely  lord,  in  whose  leading 
Be  the  hosts  of  Erechtheus'  race, 
Hath  one  in  his  halls  beguiled, 
That  thy  couch  is  in  secret  defiled  ? 
Or  hath  some  sea-trafficker,  speeding 
From  Crete  over  watery  ways 

To  the  haven  where  shipmen  would  be, 
Brought  dolorous  tidings  to  thee 


132  EURIPIDES. 


That  hath  bowed  thee  with  anguish  exceeding 
On  thy  bed  through  thy  soul's  prison-days  ?  160 

(Epode.) 

Or    shall    this   be    the    discord    mournful,    weirdly 

haunting, 

That  ofttimes  jarreth  and  jangleth  the  strings  of 

woman's  being  ? 

'Tis  the  shadow  of   travail-throes  nigh,  a  delirium 

spirit-daunting : 
Yea,  I  have  known  it,  through  mine  own  bosom  have 
felt  it  shiver  : 
But  I  cried  to  the  Queen  of  the  Bow,  to  the  Helper  in 
travail-throe  for  refuge  fleeing  ; 
And  by  grace  of  the  Gods  she  hearkeneth  ever  my 
fervent  request,  she  is  there  to  deliver.  170 

But  lo,  through  the  doors  where  cometh  the  grey- 
haired  nurse 
Leading  the  stricken  one  forth  of  her  bowers  : 
On  her  brows  aye  darker  the  care-cloud  lowers. 
My  spirit  is  yearning  to  know  what  is  this  strange 
curse, 

Wherefore  the  queen's  cheek  ever  is  paling, 
And  her  strength  is  failing. 

Enter  Phcedra,  Nurse,  and  Handmaids. 

Nurse. 

O  afflictions  of  mortals,  O  bitter  pain  ! 

What  shall  I  do  unto  thee,  or  refrain  ? 
Lo  here  is  the  light  of  the  sun,  the  sky  : 
Brought  forth  of  the  halls  is  thy  bed  ;  hereby  180 
Thy  cushions  lie. 


HIPPOLYTUS.  133 


Hitherward  wouldst  thou  come  ;  it  was  all  thy  moan  : 
Yet  aback  to  thy  bowers  wilt  thou  fret  to  be  gone. 
Thou  art  soon  disappointed,  hast  pleasure  in  nought, 
Nor  the  present  contents  thee  ;  a  thing  far-sought 
Thy  fancy  hath  caught. 

Better  be  sick  than  tend  the  sick  : 
Here  is  but  one  pain  ;  grief  of  mind 
And  toil  of  hands  be  there  combined. 

O'er  all  man's  life  woes  gather  thick  ;  190 

Ne'er  from  its  travail  respite  is. 
If  better  life  beyond  be  found, 
The  darkness  veils,  clouds  wrap  it  round  ; 

Therefore  infatuate-fond  to  this 

We  cling — this  earth's  poor  sunshine-gleam  : 
Nought  know  we  of  the  life  to  come, 
There  speak  no  voices  from  the  tomb  : 

We  drift  on  fable's  shadowy  stream. 

Ph^dra. 

Uplift  ye  my  body,  mine  head  upraise. 

Friends,  faint  be  my  limbs,  and  unknit  be  their  bands. 

Hold,  maidens,  my  rounded1  arms  and  mine  hands. 
Ah,  the  coif  on  mine  head  all  heavily  weighs  :  [200 

Take  it  thence  till  mine  hair  o'er  my  shoulders  strays ! 


1  Here,  as  in  /.  222,  her  thoughts  revert,  with  a  touch  of 
natural  pathos,  to  the  beauty,  once  her  pride,  so  unavailing 
now.  c.  f.  Troilus  &  Cressida,  iv,  2,  "Tear  my  bright 
hair,"  &c. 


134  EURIPIDES. 


Nurse. 

Take  heart,  my  child,  nor  in  such  wild  wise 

Toss  thou  thy  body  so  feveredly. 

Lighter  thy  sickness  to  bear  shall  be, 
If  thine  high-born  courage  in  calm  strength  rise  : 
For  the  doom  of  sorrow  on  all  men  lies. 

Ph/edra. 

Oh  but  to  quaff,  where  the  spray-veil  drifteth 

O'er  taintless  fountains,  the  dear  cool  stream  !       210 

Oh  to  lie  in  the  mead  where  the  soft  wind  lifteth 
Its  tresses — 'neath  poplars  to  lie  and  dream  ! 

Nurse. 

My  child,  my  child,  what  is  this  thou  hast  cried  ? 
Ah,  speak  not  thus,  with  a  throng  at  thy  .aide, 
Wild  words  that  on  wings  of  madness  ride  ! 

Ph^dra. 

Let  me  hence  to  the  mountain  afar — I  will  hie  me 

To  the  forest,  the  pines  where  the  stag-hounds  follow 
Hard  after  the  fleet  dappled  hinds  as  they  fly  me  ! 
Oh,  I  long  to  cheer  them  with  hunter's  hollo, — 
Ah  God,  were  I  there  ! — 
And  to  grasp  the  Thessalian  shaft  steel-gleaming,    220 
And  to  swing  it  on  high  by  my  hair  outstreaming — 
My  golden  hair  ! 

Nurse. 

What  wouldst  thou,  my  darling,  of  suchlike  things  ? 
Will  nought  save  the  hunt  and  the  hounds  content  ? 

And  why  art  thou  yearning  for  fountain-springs  ? 
Lo,  nigh  to  thy  towers  is  a  soft-sloped  bent 
With  streams  for  thy  drinking  dew-besprent. 


HIPPOLYTUS.  135 


Phaedra. 

Lady  of  Limne,  the  burg  looking  seaward, 

Of  the  thunder  of  hoofs  on  the  wide  race-courses, 

Oh  for  the  plains  where  the  altars  to  theeward  230 

Flame,  there  to  be  curbing  the  Henetan  horses  ! 

Nurse. 

What  speech  in  thy  frenzy  outfiingest  thou  ? 

The  mountain-ward  path  then  fain  hadst  thou  taken 
On  the  track  of  the  beasts  ;  and  thou  yearnest  now 

For  the  steeds  on  the  sea-sands  wave-forsaken  ! 
Of  a  surety  the  lore  of  a  seer  we  lack 
To  tell  what  God,  child,  reineth  thee  back, 
And  scourgeth  thy  spirit  from  reason's  track. 

PHjEDRA. 

0  hapless  I — what  is  this  I  have  done  ?  [240 
Whitherward  have  I  wandered  from  wisdom's  way  ? 

1  was  mad,  by  a  God's  curse  overthrown. 

Oh  ill-starred — welladay  ! 
Dear  Nurse,  veil  over  mine  head  once  more  ; 

For  I  blush  for  the  words  from  my  lips  that  came. 
Veil  me  :  the  tears  from  mine  eyes  down  pour, 

And  mine  eyelids  sink  for  shame. 
For  anguish  wakes  when  re-dawneth  the  mind. 
Though  a  curse  be  madness,  herein  is  it  kind, 
That  the  soul  that  it  ruins  it  striketh  blind. 

Nurse. 

I  veil  thee  : — ah  that  death  would  veil  250 

Me  too  ! — with  many  a  lesson  stern 
The  years  have  brought,  this  too  I  learn — 

Be  links  of  mortal  friendship  frail  : 


136  EURIPIDES. 


Let  heart-strings  ne*er  together  cling, 
Nor  be  indissolubly  twined 
The  cords  of  love,  but  lightly  joined 

For  knitting  close  or  severing. 

Ah  weary  burden,  where  one  soul 

Travails  for  twain,  as  mine  for  thee  !  260 

Ruin,  not  bliss,  say  they,  shall  be 

Care's  life-absorbing  heart-control. 

Yea,  that  way  sickness,  madness,  lies. 
Therefore  "  the  overmuch  "  shall  be 
Less  than  "  the  nought-too-much  "  for  me  : 

So  say  I  ;  so  shall  say  the  wise. 

Chorus. 

Thou  grey-haired  dame,  queen  Phaedra's  loyal  nurse, 

In  sooth  I  mark  her  lamentable  plight, 

Yet  what  her  malady,  to  us  is  dark. 

Fain  would  we  question  thee  and  hear  thereof.  270 

Nurse. 
I  know  not,  though  I  ask  :  she  will  not  tell. 

Chorus. 
Nor  what  was  the  beginning  of  these  woes  ? 

Nurse. 
The  same  thy  goal :  nought  sayeth  she  of  all. 

Chorus. 
How  strengthless  and  how  wasted  is  her  frame ! 


HIPPOLYTUS.  137 


Nl'RSE. 

No  marvel,  being  three  days  foodless  now.  275 

Chorus. 
Madness  is  this,  or  set  resolve  to  die  ? 

Nurse. 
To  die  :  she  fasteth  to  make  end  of  life. 

Chorls. 
Strange  is  thy  tale,  if  this  content  her  lord. 

Nurse. 
Nay,  but  she  hides  her  pain,  nor  owns  she  ails. 

Chorus. 
Should  he  not  guess  ? — one  glance  upon  her  face  ?   280 

Nurse. 
Nay,  absent  is  he  from  this  land  of  late. 

Chorus. 

But  thou — dost  not  constrain  her,  strive  to  learn 
Her  malady  and  wandering  of  her  wit  ? 

Nurse. 

All  have  I  tried,  and  nought  the  more  availed. 

Yet  will  I  not  even  now  abate  my  zeal  :  285 

So  stand  thou  by  and  witness  unto  me 

How  true  am  I  to  mine  afflicted  lords. 

Come,  darling  child,  the  words  said  heretofore 

Forget  we  both  ;  more  gracious-souled  be  thou  : 


138  EURIPIDES. 


Thy  lowering  brow,  thy  wayward  mood,  put  by.       290 

And  I,  wherein  I  erred  in  following  thee, 

Refrain,  and  unto  wiser  counsels  seek. 

If  thy  disease  be  that  thou  mayst  not  name, 

Lo  women  here  to  allay  thy  malady. 

But  if  to  men  thy  trouble  may  be  told,  295 

Speak,  that  to  leeches  this  may  be  declared. 

Ha,  silent  ? — silence,  child,  beseems  thee  not. 

Or  thou  shouldst  chide  me  if  I  speak  not  well, 

Or  unto  pleadings  wisely  uttered  yield. 

One  word  ! — look  hitherward  ! — ah,  woe  is  me !        300 

Women,  we  toil  and  spend  our  strength  for  nought, 

And  still  are  far  as  ever  :  of  my  words 

Unmelted  was  she  then,  nor  hearkeneth  now. 

Howbeit  know  thou — then  be  waywarder 

Than  is  the  sea, — thy  death  shall  but  betray  305 

Thy  sons,  who  shall  not  share  their  father's  halls. 

Yea,  by  that  chariot-queen,  the  Amazon, 

Who  bare  unto  thy  sons  a  bastard  lord, — 

Not  bastard-thoughted, — well  thou  knowest  him, 

Hippolytus — 

Ph>edra. 

Woe's  me  ! 

Nurse. 

It  stings  thee,  this  ?         310 

Ph^dra. 

Thou  hast  undone  me,  nurse :  by  heaven,  I  pray, 
Speak  thou  the  name  of  this  man  nevermore. 

Nurse. 

Lo  there  ! — thy  wit  is  sound  :  yet  of  thy  wit 
Thou  wilt  not  help  thy  sons  nor  save  thy  life  ! 


HIPPOLYTUS.  139 


Ph/edra. 
I  love  them  :  in  that  storm  of  fate  1  toss  not.  315 

Nurse. 
Sure,  thine  are  hands,  my  child,  unstained  with  blood  ? 

Phaedra. 
Pure  be  mine  hands  :  the  stain  is  on  my  soul. 

Nurse. 
Not,  not  of  sorcery-spells  by  some  foe  cast  ? 

Phaedra. 
A  friend— unwitting  he,  nor  wilful  I. 

Nurse. 
Hath  Theseus  wrought  against  thee  any  sin  ?  320 

PHjEDRA. 

May  I  be  found  as  clear  of  wrong  to  him. 

Nurse. 

What  then  is  this  strange  thing  that  deathward  drives 

thee? 

Phaedra. 

Let  be  my  sin  ! — Not  against  thee  I  sin. 

Nurse. 

Of  my  will,  never  ! — On  thine  head  my  failure  ! 

[Clings  to  PhcedrcCs  hands. 

Phaedra. 
Violence  to  me  ! — on  mine  hand  hangest  thou  ?         325 

L    2 


i4o  EURIPIDES. 


Nurse. 
Yea,  and  thy  knees  I  never  will  let  go. 

Ph.edra. 
Thy  bane,  unhappy,  shouldst  thou  hear  in  mine. 

Nurse. 
What  greater  bane  for  me  than  thee  to  lose  ? 

Phaedra. 

Thy    death1  : — the    selfsame    thing    shall    save    mine 

honour. 

Nurse. 

Still  dost  thou  hide  it,  when  I  pray  thy  good  ?  330 

Phaedra. 
Yea,  for  I  fashion  honour  out  of  shame. 

Nurse. 
If  then  thou  tell  me,  more  shall  be  thine  honour. 

Phaedra. 
For  God's  sake  hence  away  :  let  go  mine  hand. 

Nurse. 
No  !— while  thou  grantest  not  the  boon  my  due. 

Ph;edra. 
I  will,  in  reverence  of  thy  suppliant  hand.  335 

1  "  A  remark  of  little  force.  Why  should  the  nurse 
die  ?  "  (Mahaffy  and  Bury.)  Answered  by  the  nurse  her- 
self, /.  356.  Moreover,  is  it  likely  that,  in  the  sequel,  she 
lived,  or  would  have  been  allowed  to  live  ? 


HIPPOLYTUS.  141 


Nurse. 
I  am  dumb  :  henceforth  thy  part  it  is  to  speak. 

Phaedra. 

0  hapless  mother1 ! — what  strange  love  was  thine  ! 

Nurse. 
Love  for  the  bull,  my  child  ? — or  what  wouldst  name  ? 

PH/EDRA. 

And  thou,  sad  sister,  Dionysus'  bride'2 ! 

Nurse. 
What  ails  thee,  child  ? — dost  thou  revile  thy  kin  ?     340 

PH/EDRA. 

And  I  the  third — how  am  I  misery-wrecked  ! 

Nurse. 

1  am  'wildered  all — whereunto  tend  thy  words  ? 

Ph^dra. 
To  the  rock  that  wrecks  us  all,  yea,  from  of  old. 

Nurse. 
None  the  more  know  I  that  I  fain  would  know. 

Phaedra. 
Ah,  couldst  thou  say  for  me  what  I  must  say !  345 

1  Pasiphae,  wife  of  Minos  King  of  Crete,  and  mother  of 
the  Minotaur. 

2  Ariadne. 


142  EURIPIDES. 


Nurse. 
No  seer  am  I  to  interpret  hidden  things. 

Phaedra. 
What  mean  they  when  they  speak  of  this — to  love  ? 

Nurse. 
The  sweetest  thing,  my  child— the  bitterest  too. 

PHiEDRA. 

For  me,  the  second  only  have  I  proved. 

NURSE. 

What  say'st  thou  ? — child,  dost  thou  love  any  man  ?  350 

Phaedra. 
Whate'er  his  name — 'tis  he — the  Amazon's — 

Nurse. 
Hippolytus ! 

Phaedra. 
Thou  sayest  it,  not  I. 

Nurse. 

Woe,  child !     What  wilt  thou  say  ?     Thou  hast  dealt 

me  death  ! 
Friends,  'tis  past  bearing.     I  will  not  endure 
To  live.     O  hateful  life,  loathed  light  to  see  !  355 

I'll  cast  away,  yield  up,  my  frame,  be  rid 
Of  life  by  death  !     Farewell,  I  am  no  more. 
The  virtuous  love — not  willingly,  yet  love 
The  evil.     Sure  no  Goddess  Kypris  is, 
But,  if  it  may  be,  something  more  than  God,  360 

Who  hath  ruined  her,  and  me,  and  all  this  house. 


HIPPOLYTUS.  i43 


Chorus. 

(Str.  to  669-79) 

Hast    thou    heard  ? — the  unspeakable   tale  hast   thou 

hearkened, 

The  wail  of  my  lady's  anguish-throe  ? 

O  may  I  die,  ah  me  !  ere  I  know, 
Dear  lady,  a  spirit  as  thine  so  darkened.  365 

O  misery  burdened,  O  whelmed  in  woe  ! 

O  troubles  that  cradle  the  children  of  men  ! 

Undone  ! — all's  bared  to  the  daylight's  ken. 
Ah,  weariful  season  for  thee  remaining  !  [370 

Dark  looms  o'er  the  household  the  shadow  of  doom. 
Plain  now  where  the  star  of  thy  love  is  waning, 

0  hapless  daughter  of  Crete's  proud  home  ! 

Phaedra. 

Trcezenian  women,  ye  which  here  abide 

Upon  the  utmost  march  of  Pelops'  land,  375 

Oft  sleepless1  in  the  weary-wearing  night 

Have  I  mused  how  the  life  of  men  is  wrecked. 

And  not,  meseems,  through  evil  thoughts  inborn 

So  ill  they  fare, — discretion  dwells  at  least 

With  many, — but  we  thus  must  look  hereon  : — 

That  which  is  good  we  learn  and  recognise,  5nj 

Yet  practise  not  the  lesson,  some  from  sloth, 

And  some  preferring  pleasure  in  the  stead 

Of  duty.     Pleasures  many  of  life  there  be — 

Long  gossip,  idlesse, — pleasant  evils  sooth, — 

And  sense  of  shame — twofold  :  no  ill  the  one,-'  385 

1  Reading  av7rvos  (Nauck)  vice  uAAws,  "  idly." 

-  Mahaffy  &  Bury  regard  this  passage  as  corrupt,  mainly  on 
the  ground  that  "  aidok  cannot  possibly  be  classed  as  a 
species  of  rjSovrj,"  and  that  the  description  in  the  text  of  its 


i44  EURIPIDES. 


But  one  drags  houses  down.    Were  men's  choice  clear, 

These  twain  had  never  borne  the  self-same  names. 

Forasmuch  then  as  I  knew  this  before, 

No  philtre-spell  was  like  to  change  mine  heart 

To  make  me  fall  away  from  this  my  faith.  390 

Thee  will  I  tell  the  path  my  reason  trod  ; — 

When  love's  wound  smote  me,  straight  I  cast  about 

How  best  to  bear  it  :  wherefore  I  began 

Thenceforth  to  hush  my  moan,  to  veil  my  pang. 

For  the  tongue  none  may  trust,  which  knoweth  well  395 

To  lesson  rebel  thoughts  of  other  men, 

Yet  harboureth  countless  evils  of  its  own. 

Then  did  I  take  thought  nobly  to  endure 

My  folly,  triumphing  by  self-control. 

Lastly,  when  even  so  I  nought  availed  400 

To  o'ermaster  Love's  Queen,  then  I  deemed  it  best 

To  die  :  no  man  shall  gainsay  my  resolve. 

two  aspects  is  absurd.  Phaedra's  argument  is,  that  the  only 
safe-guiding  star  is  duty,  from  which  even  well-meaning 
persons  (for  she  does  not  touch  on  the  case  of  those  who 
wish  to  sin,  as  having  no  relevance  to  her  own  position)  are 
diverted  either  by  disinclination  for  effort,  or  by  "  pleasure," 
either  innocent  but  frivolous,  or  that  equivocal  pleasure 
which  is  an  out-growth  of  the  sense  of  shame  implanted  in 
man  ;  for  atSws  is  respect  for  appearances,  for  the  world's 
opinion ;  and  compliance  with  it  commonly  produces  a 
sense  of  satisfaction  which  certainly  may  be  classed  as  a 
species  of  pleasure.  It  has  been  the  mainspring  of  the 
world  of  convention  and  fashion  in  all  ages.  The  lady  who 
declared  that  "the  sense  of  being  perfectly  well-dressed 
gives  a  feeling  of  inward  tranquillity  which  religion  is  power- 
less to  bestow,"  had  no  doubts  as  to  the  rjSovq. 

To  illustrate  the  good  aspect  of  ai8ws,  and  that  in  which 
it  literally  "  dragged  a  house  down,"  we  need  go  no  further 
than  Euripides'  play  of  "  The  Suppliants,"  and  note  its 
effect  on  Adrastus,  who  (/.  160)  was  ashamed  to  withstand 
popular  clamour,  and  on  Theseus,  who  was  ashamed  to 
incur  deserved  reproach  (342-5). 


HIPPOLYTUS.  145 


For  be  it  mine  to  do  not  good  unseen, 

Nor  ill  before  a  cloud  of  witnesses. 

1  knew  the  deed,  the  very  pang,  was  shame.  405 

Yea,  well  I  knew  withal  myself  a  woman, 

The  all-abhorred.     Foul  curses  upon  her 

Who  showed  the  way  the  first,  with  alien  men 

To  shame  the  couch  !     Ah,  'twas  from  princely  homes 

That  first  this  curse  on  womankind  had  birth.  410 

For,  when  the  noble  count  their  shame  their  good, 

The  lowly  sure  will  hold  it  honourable. 

And  O,  I  hate  the  continent-professed 

Which  treasure  secret  recklessness  of  shame. 

How  can  they,  O  Queen  Kypris,  Sea-born  One,       415 

Look  ever  in  the  faces  of  their  lords, 

Nor  shudder  lest  their  dark  accomplice,  night, 

And  their  own  bowers  may  utter  forth  a  voice  ? 

Me — friends,  'tis  even  this  dooms  me  to  die, 

That  never  I  be  found  to  shame  my  lord,  420 

Nor  the  sons  whom  I  bare  ;  but  free,  with  tongues 

Unfettered,  flourish  they,  their  home  yon  burg 

Of  glorious  Athens,  blushing  ne'er  for  me. 

For  this  cows  man,  how  stout  of  heart  soe'er, 

To  know  a  father's  or  a  mother's  sin.1  425 

And  this  alone  can  breast  the  shocks  of  life, 

An  honest  heart  and  good,  in  whomso  found. 

But  vile  ones  Time  unmasketh  in  his  hour, 

1  "  Lines  42i-4?5  are  quite  inconsistent  with  the  last  five 
lines  of  the  speech,  426-430.  The  former  speak  of  illegiti- 
mate birth  as  an  unmitigated  evil,"  &c.  (Mahaffy  and  Bury). 
No — but  of  a  father's  or  mother's  disgrace,  which  was  by 
no  means  necessarily  implied  in  a  son's  illegitimate  birth. 
Phaedra  is  referring  to  a  mother's  conviction  and  punish- 
ment as  an  adulteress,  which  might  well  make  her  children 
(though  lawfully  born)  hang  their  heads. 


1 46  EURIPIDES. 


Holding  his  mirror  up,  as  to  a  maid. 

With  such  consorting  ne'er  may  I  be  seen.  430 


Chorus. 

Lo  now,  how  fair  is  virtue  everywhere, 
Which  yieldeth  fruit  of  good  repute  mid  men  ! 

Nurse. 

Mistress,  thy  mischance,  suddenly  revealed 
But  now,  wrought  in  me  terrible  dismay. 
Yet  I  discern  my  folly  now.     'Tis  strange  435 

How  second  thoughts  for  men  are  wisest  still. 
Thine  is  the  common  lot,  not  past  cool  weighing  : 
The  Goddess's  passion-bolts  have  smitten  thee. 
Thou  lov'st — what  marvel  this  ? — thou  art  as  many- — 
And  lo,  for  love's  sake  wouldst  fling  life  away  !         440 
Sooth,   'twere  small  gain  for  them    which  love  their 

fellows, 
Or  yet  shall  love,  if  help  be  none  save  death. 
For  Kypris  crusheth,  swooping  in  her  might  ; 
Yet  gently  stealeth  she  on  whoso  yield. 
But  whom  she  findeth  wayward,  arrogant-souled,    445 
She  graspeth,  mocketh,  past  imagining. 
Through  air  she  roveth,  in  the  ocean-surge 
Is  Kypris  ;  all  things  have  their  birth  of  her. 
'Tis  she  that  sows  love,  gives  increase  thereof, 
Whereof  all  we  that  dwell  on  earth  are  sprung.        450 
Whoso  have  scrolls  writ  in  the  ancient  days,1 
And  wander  still  themselves  by  paths  of  song, 
They  know  how  Zeus  of  yore  desired  the  embrace 
Of  Semele  ;  they  know  how  radiant  Dawn 

1  Or,  "  pictures  of  the  olden  time." 


HIPPOLYTUS.  147 


Up  to  the  Gods  snatched  Kephalus  of  yore,  455 

And  all  for  love  ;  yet  these  in  Heaven  their  home 
Dwell,  neither  do  they  flee  the  face  of  Gods, 
Content,  I  trow,  in  their  mischance's  triumph. 
Thou — wilt  not  yield  ?     Thy  sire  by  several  treaty 
Thee  should  have  gotten,  or  with  other  Gods  460 

For  lords,  if  thou  wilt  bow  not  to  these  laws- 
How  many  men,  think'st  thou,  and  wise  men  they, 
Knowing  their  beds  dishonoured,  shut  their  eyes  ? 
How  many  a  father  in  his  son's  transgression 
Playeth  love's  go-between  ? — the  maxim  this  465 

Of  wise  men,  that  dishonour  be  not  seen. 
Why  should  men  toil  to  over-perfect  life  ? 
Lo,  even  the  house-roofs  pitch  the  craftsman's  rule 
Can  make  not  utter-true.     How  thinkest  thou, 
Plunged  in  fate's  deep  abyss,  to  swim  thereout  ?      470 
Tush — if  more  good  than  evil  is  in  thee, 
Who  art  but  human,  thou  shalt  do  full  well. 
Nay,  darling,  from  thy  deadly  thoughts  refrain 
And  from  presumption — sheer  presumption  this, 
That  one  should  wish  to  be  more  strong  than  Gods.   475 
In  love,  flinch  not ;  a  God  hath  willed  this  thing. 
In  pain,  victorious  wrestle  with  thy  pain. 
Lo,  charms  there  be,  and  words  of  soothing  spell. 
Some  cure  for  this  affliction  shall  appear. 
Sooth,  it  were  long  ere  men  would  light  thereon,      480 
Except  we  women  find  devices  forth. 

Chorus. 

Phaedra,  she  speaketh  words  that  more  avail 

For  this  thine  imminent  plight  :  yet  thee  I  praise. 

But  haply  this  my  praise  shall  gall  thee  more 

Than  those  her  words,  and  harsher  sound  to  thee.    4S5 


i4S  EURIPIDES. 


Ph/edra. 

This  is  it  which  doth  ruin  goodly  towns 
And  homes  of  men,  these  speeches  over-fair. 
It  needeth  not  to  speak  words  sweet  to  ears, 
But  those  whereby  a  good  name  shall  be  saved. 

Nurse. 

Out  on    thine    high-flown  talk  !       No  speech    tricked 
fair  490 

Thou  needest  !     Haste  we  must  and  learn  the  mind 
Of  this  man,  telling  all  thy  tale  straight  out. 
For,  were  thy  life  not  in  such  desperate  case, 
Or  thou  a  woman  strong  in  self-control, 
Never  for  thy  lust's  sake  and  pleasure  I  495 

To  this  would  bring  thee  :  but  we  must  fight  hard 
Now  for  thy  life,  and  void  of  blame  is  this. 

Phaedra. 

Speaker  of  horrors  ! — wilt  not  seal  thy  lips  ? 
Wilt  not  refrain  from  utter-shameful  words  ? 

Nurse. 

Shameful — yet  better  than  the  good  for  thee.  500 

Better  this  deed,  so  it  but  save  thy  life, 

Than  that  name,  whose  proud  vaunt  shall  be  thy  death. 

Phaedra. 

No,  by  the  Gods  ! — fair  words,  but  words  of  shame  ! — 
No  farther  go  :   I  have  schooled  mine  heart  to  endure 
This  love  :  but  if  thou  plead  shame's  cause  so  fair,  505 
I  shall  be  trapped  in  that  sin  which  I  flee. 


HIPPOLYTUS.  149 


tfu 


rsk. 


If  such  thy  mind,  thine  heart  should  not  have  sinned  : 

But  now — obey  me  :  thank  me  or  thank  me  not : — 

I  have  within  some  certain  charms  to  assuage 

Love  :  'twas  but  now  they  came  into  my  thought.  510 

These,  not  with  shame,  nor  hurt  unto  thy  mind, 

Shall  lull  thy  pang,  so  thou  be  not  faint-hearted. 

Howbeit  there  needs  of  him  thou  yearnest  for 

Some  token,  or  a  word,  or  fragment  caught 

From  vesture,  so  to  knit  two  loves  in  one.  515 

PHiEDRA. 

A  salve,  or  potion,  is  this  charm  of  thine  ? 

Nurse. 
I  know  not  :  be  content  with  help,  not  knowledge. 

Phaedra. 
I  fear  lest  over-cunning  thou  shalt  prove. 

Nurse. 
Then  know  thyself  all  fears.     What  dreadest  thou  ? 

Ph.«dra. 
Lest  thou  show  aught  of  this  to  Theseus'  son.  520 

Nurse. 

Let  be,  my  child :  this  will  I  order  well. 
Only  do  thou,  Queen  Kypris,  Sea-born  One, 
Work  with  me.     Whatso  else  I  have  in  mind 
Shall  it  suffice  to  speak  to  friends  within. 

[Exit  Nurse. 


i5o  EURIPIDES. 


Chorus. 

(Str.  i) 
O  Eros,  O  Eros,  how  melts  love's  yearning 

From  thine  eyes,  when  thy  sweet  spell  witcheth  the 
heart 
Of  them  against  whom  thou  hast  marched  in  thy 

might  ! 
Not  me,  not  me  for  mine  hurt  do  thou  smite, 
My  life's  heart-music  to  discord  turning. 

For  never  so  hotly  the  flame-spears  dart,  530 

Nor  so  fleet  are  the  star-shot  arrows  of  light, 
As  the  shaft  from  thy  fingers  that  speedeth  its  flight, 
As  the  flame  of  the  Love-queen's  bolts  fierce-burning, 

0  Eros,  the  child  of  Zeus  who  art ! 

{Ant.  1.) 
O  vainly,  O  vainly  by  Alpheus-1  river 

And  in  Phoebus's  Pythian  shrine  hath  the  land 
Of  Hellas  the  blood  of  her  oxen  outpoured. 
But  Eros,  but  Love,  who  is  all  men's  lord, 
Unto  whom  Aphrodite  is  wont  to  deliver 

Her  keys,  that  the  doors  be  unsealed  by   his  hand 
Of  her  holy  of  holies,  we  have  not  adored,        [540 
Though  he  marcheth  through  ruin  victory-ward, 
Though  he  raineth  calamity  forth  of  his  quiver 
On  mortals  against  his  on-coming  that  stand. 

(Str.  2.) 
For  I  call  to  remembrance  Oechalia's  daughter,2 

1  Usually  Alpheius  ("  In  vain,  O  in  vain  by  Alpheius  the 
river");  but  in  this  passage  Euripides  gives  it  the  Doric 
form  as  above. 

2  Iole,  daughter  of  Eurytus,  king  of  Oechalia,  promised 
by  her  father  to  the  victor  in  a  contest  of  archery.  Herakles 
proved  victorious,  but  her  father  refused  to  fulfil  his  promise. 
Herakles  thereupon  sacked  Oechalia,  slew  Eurytus'  sons, 
and  bore  away  his  bride. 


HIPPOLYTUS.  151 


Who,  ere    Love    'neath    his  tyrannous   car-yoke    had 
brought  her, 
Had  been   spouseless   and  free — overseas   how  she 
hasted, 
When  Kypris  the  dear  yoke  of  home  had  disparted, 
Like  a  bacchanal  fiend  out  of  hell  that  hath  darted,  550 
And  with  blood,  and  with  smoke  of  a  palace  flame- 
wasted, 
And  with  death-shrieks  for  hymns  at  her  bridal-feast 

chanted, 
By  Love's  Queen  to  the  son  of  Alkmena  was  granted — 
Woe,  woe  for  the  joys  of  espousal  she  tasted  ! 

(Ant.  2.) 
And  ye,  O  ye  ramparts  of  hallowed  Thebe, 
And  ye  lips  wave-welling  of  Dirke,  might  ye  be 

Witness  how  dire  was  the  Love-queen's  coming, 
When  a  slumber  that  knoweth  not  waking  was  given 
Of  her  spells  by  the  flame-enfolded  levin  [560 

To  the  mother  of  Zeus'  seed  Bacchus :  for  dooming 
Of  death  had  she  blent  with  the  bride-chant's  singing. 
For  the  Dread  One  breatheth  on  all  life,  winging 
Softly  her  flight  as  a  bee  low-humming. 

[Voices  within.] 

Phaedra, 

Hush  ye,  O  hush  ye,  women  !  .  .  .  .  Lost  am  I !     565 

Chorus. 
What  is  this  dread  thing,  Phaedra,  in  thine  halls  ? 

Ph^dra. 
Peace — let  me  hear  the  voice  of  them  within. 


152  EURIPIDES. 


Chorus. 
I  am  dumb  :  an  ominous  prelude  sure  is  this. 

Ph.«dra. 

Ah  me  !  ah  me  !    alas  ! 

0  wretched,  wretched  ! — ah,  mine  agonies  !  570 

Chorus. 

What  cry  dost   thou   utter  ?     What    word  dost  thou 

shriek  ? 
What   boding  of  terror  hath  rushed  on  thy  soul  ? — O 

lady,  speak  ! 

Phaedra. 

1  am  undone  !     O  stand  ye  by  these  doors, 
And  hear  what  clamour  clasheth  in  the  house. 

Chorus. 

Nay,  thou  art  thereby,  and  the  cry  from  the  palace  sped 
forth  is  for  thee. 
O  tell  me  what  evil  came  forth — tell  it  me  !  580 

Ph^dra. 

The  son  of  the  Amazon,  Hippolytus, 

Shouts,  hurling  fearful  curses  at  mine   handmaid. 

Chorus. 

A  noise  do  I   hear ;  yet   it  passeth  me  clearly  to  tell 

whereby 
It  came — through  the  doors  to  thee  came  that  cry. 

Phaedra. 

Ah  clear — ah  clear  ! — yea,  pandar  of  foul  sin, 
Traitress  to  her  lord's  bed,  he  calleth  her.  590 


HIPPOLYTUS.  153 


Chori    . 

Woe  !  Thou  art  betrayed,  beloved  one  ! 
What  shall  I  counsel  ?     Thy  secret  is  bared  :  thou  art 
wholly  undone. 

Phaedra. 
Woe's  me  !  ah  woe  ! 

Chorus. 
From  the  hand  that  loved  came  the  traitor's  blow. 

Ph.^dra. 

She  hath  undone  me,  telling  my  mischance  : 

In  love,  in  shame,  she  sought  these  pangs  to  heal. 

Chorus. 
What  wilt  thou  do,  O  thou  in  desperate  plight  ? 

Phaedra. 

No  way  save  one  I  know — straightway  to  die — 

The  one  cure  for  the  ills  that  compass  me.  600 

Enter  Hippolytus,  followed  by  the  Nurse. 

Hippolytus. 

0  mother  Earth,  unveilings  of  the  sun, 
What  words  unutterable  have  I  heard  ! 

Nurse. 
Hush,  O  my  son,  ere  one  have  heard  thy  cry. 

Hippolytus. 

1  have  heard  horrors — should  I  hold  my  peace  ? 

M 


154  EURIPIDES. 


Nurse. 
Yea,  I  beseech  thee  by  thy  fair  right  hand.  605 

Hippolytus. 
Hence  with  thine  hand  ! — touch  not  my  vesture  thou. 

Nurse. 
Oh,  by  thy  knees,  do  not — ah,  slay  me  not  ! 

Hippolytus. 
How,  if  thou  hast  said  no  wrong,  as  thou  dost  say  ? 

Nurse. 
No  tale  is  this,  my  son,  for  all  men's  ears. 

Hippolytus. 
Tush,  a  fair  tale  is  fairer  told  to  the  world.  610 

Nurse. 
My  son,  thine  oath  ! — dishonour  not  thine  oath. 

Hippolytus. 
My  tongue  hath  sworn  :  no  oath  is  on  my  soul. 

Nurse. 
O  son,  what  wilt  thou  do  ? — wilt  slay  thy  friends  ? 

Hippolytus. 
Avaunt  the  word  ! — no  villain  is  my  friend. 

Nurse. 
Forgive,  son  :  men  are  men,  they  needs  must  err.     615 


HIPPOLYTUS.  155 


HlPPCLYTUS. 

Why  hast  thou  given  a  home  beneath  the  sun, 

Zeus,  unto  woman,  specious  curse  to  man  ? 

For,  were  thy  will  to  raise  a  mortal  seed, 

This  ought  they  not  of  women  to  have  gotten, 

But  in  thy  temples  should  they  lay  its  price,  620 

Or  gold,  or  iron,  or  a  weight  of  bronze, 

And  so  buy  seed  of  children,  every  man 

After  the  worth  of  that  his  gift,  and  dwell 

Free  in  free  homes  unvexed  of  womankind. 

But  now — soon  as  we  go  about  to  bring  625 

This  bane  to  the  home,  we  hurl  to  earth  its  weal. 

Hereby  is  woman  proved  a  grievous  bane — 

He,  who  begat  and  reared  her,  banishes, 

Yea,  adds  a  dower,  to  rid  him  of  his  bane  ; 

While  he  which  taketh  home  the  noisome  weed        630 

Rejoices,  decks  with  goodly  bravery 

The  loathly  image,  and  tricks  out  with  robes, — 

Filching  away,  poor  wretch  !  his  household's  wealth. 

He  may  not  choose  :  who  getteth  noble  kin 

With  her,  content  must  stomach  his  sour  feast :        635 

Who  getteth  a  good  wife,  but  worthless  kin, 

Must  muffle  up  the  evil  'neath  the  good. 

Happiest  who  wins  a  cipher,  in  whose  halls 

A  brainless  fadge1  is  throned  in  uselessness. 

But  the  keen-witted  hate  I  :  in  mine  house  640 

Ne'er  dwell  one  wiser  than  is  woman's  due  ; 

For  Kypris  better  brings  to  birth  her  mischief 

In  clever  women  :  the  resourceless  'scapes 

1  "  And  I  sail  hae  naething  to  mysel' 
But  a  fat  fadge  by  the  fyre." 

Lord  Thomas  and  Fair  Annet. — Percy's  Reliques. 

M    a 


156  EURIPIDES. 


That  folly  by  the  short -weight  of  her  wit. 

Handmaids  should  ne'er  have  had  access  to  wives,  645 

But  brutes,  with  teeth,  no  tongue,  should  dwell  with 

them, 
That  so  they  might  not  speak  to  any  one, 
Nor  win  an  answering  word  from  such  as  these. 
But  now  the  vile  ones  weave  vile  plots  within, 
And  out  of  doors  their  handmaids  bear  the  web  :      650 
As  thou  hast  come,  foul  quean,  to  tender  me 
Commerce  in  mine  own  father's  sacred  couch  ! — 
Words  that  with  fountain-streams  I'll  wash  away, 
Sluicing  mine  ears.     How  should  I  be  so  vile, 
Who  even  with  hearing  count  myself  defiled  ?  655 

Woman,  I  fear  God  :  know,  that  saveth  thee. 
For,  had  I  not  by  oaths  been  trapped  unwares, 
I  had  ne'er  forborne  to  tell  this  to  my  sire. 
Now  from  mine  home,  while  Theseus  yet  is  far, 
I  go,  and  I  will  keep  my  lips  from  speech.  660 

But — with  my  father  I  return,  to  see 
How  thou  wilt  meet  his  eye,  thou  and  thy  mistress, 
And  so  have  taste  of  thy  full  shamelessness. 
Curse  ye  !     My  woman-hate  shall  ne'er  be  sated, 
Not  though  one  say  that  this  is  all  my  theme  :  665 

For  they  be  ever  strangely  steeped  in  sin. 
Let  some  one  now  stand  forth  and  prove  them  chaste, 
Or  leave  me  free  to  trample  on  them  ever.  [Exit. 

Chorus. 

(Ant.  to  362-72) 

O  drear  dark  doom  that  on  women  hath  lighted  ! 

By  what  cunning  of  pleading,  when  feet  once  trip, 

Shall  we  loose  the  accuser's  iron  grip1  ?  [670 

1  K(Wa/x/j.a  Xoyov  (wrestling  metaphor)  is  the  now  irresist- 
ible force  ("  the  hammerlock  ")  of  the  indictment  just  uttered 


HIPPOLYTUS.  157 


Ph/edra. 

O  earth,  O  sun,  I  am  justly  requited  ! 

Through  the  snares  of  calamity  how  shall  I  slip  ? 
How,  friends,  shall  I  cloke  my  woe,  how  hide  ? 
What  God  or  what  man  shall  stand  forth  on  my  side, 
Shall  consent  in  my  sin  to  be  made  partaker  ?  [675 

For  all  life's  anguish,  and  all  life's  shame, 
Are  upon  me,  and  whelm  like  a  shipwrecking  breaker ! 

Most  accurst  of  my  fate  among  women  I  am. 

Chorus. 

Woe,  woe  !  'Tis  done.  Queen,  it  hath  nought  availed, 
Thy  bower-maid's  device  :  'tis  ruin  all.  [680 

Phaedra. 

Vilest  of  vile  !  destroyer  of  thy  friends  ! 

How  hast  thou  ruined  me  !     May  Zeus  my  sire 

Smite  thee  with  flame,  and  wholly  abolish  thee  ! 

Did  I  not  tell  thee — not  divine  thy  purpose  ? —        685 

To  speak  not  that  whereby  I  am  now  dishonoured  ? 

But  thou  wouldst  not  forbear.     I  shall  not  now 

Even  die  unshamed  !         (A  pause.) 

Some  new  plea  must  I  find. 
For  yonder  boy  with  soul  keen-edged  with  wrath 
Shall  to  his  sire  accuse  me  of  thy  sin,  690 

Shall  tell  to  aged  Pittheus  my  mischance, 
Shall  blaze  the  shameful  tale  through  every  land. 

by  Hippolytus.  The  Chorus  know  in  their  hearts  that  the 
sweeping  denunciation  is  unjust,  but  the  facts  of  this  appar- 
ently typical  case  seem  to  be  dead  against  them  ;  and, 
though"  they  would  fain  enter  the  lists  in  defence  of  their 
sex,  they  feel  that  their  feet  have,  as  it  were,  been  knocked 
from  under  them,  and  they  are  like  a  wrestler  who  is  thus 
placed  at  his  opponent's  mercy. 


158  EURIPIDES. 


Curses  on  thee,  and  whoso  thrusteth  in 
To  do  base  service  to  unwilling  friends  ! 

Nurse. 

Mistress,  thou  may'st  revile  mine  evil  work,  695 

For  rankling  pain  bears  thy  discernment  down  : 

Yet  somewhat  might  I  answer,  wouldst  thou  hear. 

I  nursed  thee,  loved  thee,  sought  for  thy  disease 

A  healing  balm, — and  found  not  that  I  would. 

Had  I  sped  well,  right  wise  had  I  been  held  ;  700 

For,  as  we  speed,  so  is  our  wisdom's  fame. 

PH/EDRA. 

Ha  !  is  this  just  ? — should  this  suffice  me  now, 

To  have  stabbed  me,  and  then  close  in  strife  of  words  ? 

Nurse. 

We  waste  the  time  in  speech.     I  was  not  wise. 

Yet  even  from  this  there  is  escape,  my  child.  705 

PH/EDRA. 

Peace  to  thy  talk.     Thy  counsel  heretofore 
Was  shame,  and  mischief  thine  endeavour  was. 
Hence  from  my  sight :  for  thine  own  self  take  thought. 
I  with  my  needs  will  deal — and  honourably. 

[Exit  Nurse. 
But  ye,  O  Trcezen"s  daughters  nobly  born,  710 

Grant  to  my  supplication  this,  but  this — 
With  silence  veil  what  things  ye  here  have  heard. 

Chorus. 

I  swear  by  reverend  Artemis,  Zeus'  child, 
Never  to  bare  to  light  of  thine  ills  aught. 


HIPPOLYTUS.  159 


Phaedra. 

Thou  hast  well  said.     Now,  as  I  muse,  I  find  715 

One  refuge,  one,  from  this  calamity, 

So  to  bequeath  my  sons  a  life  of  honour, 

And  what  I  may  from  this  day's  ruin  save. 

For  never  will  I  shame  the  halls  of  Crete, 

Nor  will  I  meet  the  face  of  Theseus  ever,  720 

For  one  poor  life's  sake,  after  all  this  shame. 

Chorus. 
Ah,  wilt  thou  do  a  deed  of  ill  past  cure  ? 

PH/EDRA. 

Die  will  I.     How— for  this  will  I  take  thought. 


Ah  hush 


Chorus. 


Ph;edra. 


O  yea,  advise  me  wisely  thou. 
But  I  shall  gladden  Kypris  my  destroyer  725 

By  fleeting  out  of  life  on  this  same  day, 
And  vanquished  so  by  bitter  love  shall  be. 
Yet  in  my  death  will  I  become  the  bane 
Of  one  beside,  that  he  may  triumph  not 
Over  my  woes,  and  taking  of  my  pain  730 

His  share,  may  learn  sound  wisdom's  temperance. 

[_Exit  Phczdra. 

Chorus. 

{Str.  1) 
Under  the  arched  cliffs  O  were  I  lying, 

That  there  to  a  bird  might  a  God  change  me, 

And  afar  mid  the  flocks  of  the  winged  things  flying 


i6o  EURIPIDES. 


Over  the  swell  of  the  Adrian  sea 

I    might    soar — and    soar, — upon    poised    wings 
dreaming, 
O'er  the  strand  where  Eridanus'  waters  be, 
Where  down  to  the  sea-swell  purple-gleaming 
The  tears  of  the  Sun-god's  daughters  are  streaming, 
Of  the  thrice-sad  sisters  for  Phaethon  sighing,  740 

Star-flashes  of  strange  tears  amber-beaming1 ! 

(Ant.  1) 
O  to  win  to  the  strand  where  the  apples  are  growing 

Of  the  Hesperid  chanters  kept  in  ward, 
Where  the  path  over  Ocean  purple-glowing 
By  the  Sea's  Lord  is  to  the  seafarer  barred  ! 

O  to  light  where  Atlas  hath  aye  in  his  keeping 
The  bourn  twixt  earth  and  the  heavens  bestarred, 
Where  the  fountains  ambrosial  sunward  are  leaping 
By  the  couches  where  Zeus  in  his  halls  lieth  sleeping, 
Where  the  bounty  of  Earth  the  life-bestowing  750 

The  bliss  of  the  Gods  ever  Higher  is  heaping  ! 

(Str.   2) 

0  white-winged  galley  from  Crete's  far  shore, 
Whose  keel  over  deep-sea  surges  speeding, 

Through  their  flying  brine  and  their  battle-roar, 

Onward  and  onward  my  lady  bore, 

From  a  bliss-fraught  palace  a  princess  leading 
To  the  joy  of  a  bridal  of  woe  exceeding  ! — 

For,  a  bird  ill-boding,  thy  sail  flitted  o'er, 

1  Phaethon,  for  his  presumption  in  attempting  to  drive 
the  horses  of  the  Sun,  his  father,  was  smitten  by  the  thunder- 
bolt of  Zeus,  and  hurled  to  the  depths  of  the  river  Eridanus 
(Po),  where  his  corpse  lay  for  ever  smouldering.  His  sisters, 
mourning  unceasingly  beside  his  watery  grave,  were  changed 
into  poplars,  and  their  tears,  as  they  fell,  became  drops  of 
amber. 


HIPPO  f. VI 'IS.  161 


For  a  curse  to  the  Cretan  land  and  to  Athens'  glorious 
strand,  760 

When  the  seafarers  lashed  to  the  beach   Munychian 

the  hawser-band, 

And  sprang  unto  earth's  firm  floor. 

(Ant.  2) 
Wherefore,  with  love-pangs  all  unblest 

For  her  gift,  entered  in  Aphrodite,  wringing 

Her  heart-strings  asunder,  a  fearful  guest. 

Like  a  wrecked  ship  sinking,  disaster-oppressed 

Over  her  bride-bower's  rafters  flinging 

The  noose,  shall  she  cast  the  coil  close-clinging 

Round  the  neck  that  was  whitest  and  loveliest,     770 

Because  that  with  shuddering  shame  she  shrank  from 

a  loathed  name, 

And  she  chose,  for  its  foulness,  the  stainless  renown  of 

a  wife's  fair  fame, 

And,  for  anguish  of  love,  heart-rest. 

[A  cry  within.] 

Run  to  the  rescue,  all  ye  High  the  house  ! 

In  the  strangling  noose  is  Theseus'  wife,  our  mistress  ! 

Chorus. 

Woe  !  Woe  !     'Tis  done  !     No  more — no  more  is  she, 
The  queen — in  yon  noose  rafter-hung  upcaught ! 

[Cry  within.'] 

0  haste  ! — will  no  one  bring  the  steel  two-edged,         780 
Wherewith  to  loose  this  cincture  of  her  neck  ? 

Semi-Chorus  i. 

What  shall  we  do,  friends  ?     Deem  ye  we  should  pass 
The  doors,  and  from  the  noose-grip  loose  the  queen  ? 


162  EURIPIDES. 


Semi-Chorus  2. 

Wherefore  ? — Are  no  young  handmaids  at  her  side  ? 
The  busy  meddler  treadeth  perilous  paths.  785 

[Cry  within^] 

Uncramp  the  limbs,  streak  out  the  hapless  corpse. 
Bitter  house-warding  this  is  for  my  lords  ! 

Chorus. 

Dead  is  the  woeful  lady,  by  that  cry : 

Even  now  they  streak  her  as  a  corpse  is  streaked. 

Enter  Theseus. 

Theseus. 

Women,  know  ye  what  means  this  cry  within  ?         790 
A  dolorous  shriek  of  handmaids  reached  mine  ears. 
Nor  deigns  the  house  to  open  doors  and  greet  me 
Blithely,  as  from  the  oracle  come  home. 
Hath  aught  untoward  happed  to  Pittheus'  eld  ? 
Well-stricken  in  years  is  he,  yet  dole  were  ours        795 
If  haply  fare  his  feet  from  these  halls  forth. 

Chorus. 

Not  to  the  old  pertains  this  thy  mischance, 
Theseus  :  the  young  have  died,  for  grief  to  thee. 

Theseus. 
Woe  ! — is  a  child's  life  by  the  spoiler  reft  ? 

Chorus. 
They  live,  their  mother  dead — alas  for  thee  !  800 


HIPPOLYTUS.  163 


Thesi 

What  say'st  thou  ? — dead — my  wife  ? — by  what  mis- 
hap ? 

Chorus. 

The  strangling  noose  she  coiled  about  her  neck. 

Theseus. 
By  griefs  touch  frozen,  or  of  what  mischance  ? 

Chorus. 

No  more  I  know,  for  to  thine  halls  but  now, 
Theseus,  I  came,  o'er  these  thine  ills  to  mourn.        805 

Theseus. 

Woe  !  with  these  wreathed  leaves  why  is  mine  head 

Crowned — ill-starred  harbinger  of  oracles  ? 

Shoot  back  the  bolts,  my  servants,  of  the  doors  : 

Loose  bars,  that  I  may  see  this  bitter  sight, 

My  wife,  who  hath  destroyed  me  by  her  death.         810 

The  Palace  is  thrown  open,  and  the  corpse  of  PJicedra 
disclosed,  with  her  handmaids  grouped  round  it. 

Chorus. 

Woe  for  thy  misery  !     Woe  for   thine  ills,  who  hast 
suffered  and  wrought 
Such  a  thing  as  in  ruin  shall  whelm  thine  home  ! 
Ah  for  thy  desperate  deed,  who  by  violence  unhallowed 

hast  sought 
Death,     who   with    hand    despairing    the    all-quelling 
wrestler  hast  caught ! 
Who  shroudeth  thy  life,  O  hapless,  in  gloom  ? 


1 64  EURIPIDES. 


Theseus. 

{Sir.) 

Ah  me  for  my  woes  ! — I  have  suffered  calamity,  great 
Beyond  all  ills  overpast ! — O  foot  of  fate, 

How  hast  thou  heavily  trampled  me  and  mine, 

Unlooked-for  blight  from  some  avenging  fiend —  820 
Nay,  but  destruction  that  blasteth  my  life  evermore  ! 
On  a  sea  of  disaster  1  look,  on  a  sea  without  shore, 

So  vast,  that  never  can  I  swim  thereout, 

Nor  ride  the  surge  of  this  calamity. 
What  word  can  I  speak  unto  thee  ? — how  name,  dear 

wife, 
The  doom  that  on  thee  hath  descended  and  crushed  thy 
life? 

Like  a  bird  hast  thou  fleeted  from  mine  hands, 

And  with  swift  leap  hast  rushed  to  Hades'  halls. 
Never  sorrow  of  sorrows  was  like  unto  mine.  830 

On  mine  head  have  I  gathered  the  load 
Of  the  far-off  sins  of  an  ancient  line  ; 

And  this  is  the  vengeance  of  God. 

Chorus. 

Not  to  thee  only,  king,  this  grief  hath  come  ; 

With  many  more  a  dear  wife's  loss  thou  sharest.      835 

Theseus. 

(Ant.) 

In  the  darkness  under  the  earth — ah  me,  to  have  died, 

That  in  blackness  of  darkness  under  the  earth  I  might 

hide, 

Who  am  reft  of  thy  most  dear  companionship  ! 

For   thou   hast   dealt    worse  death   than  thou  hast 

suffered.  [840 

Of  whom  shall  I  hear  whence  came  it,  the  deadly  stroke 


HIPPOLYTUS.  165 


Of  doom,  that  the  heart  of  thee,  my  beloved,  broke  ? 
Will  none  speak  what  befell  ? — or  all  for  nought 
Doth  this  my  palace  roof  a  menial  throng  ? 

Woe's  me,  my  beloved,  stricken  because  of  thee  ! 

Ah  for  the  grief  of  mine  house,  for  the  travail  I  see, 
Past  utterance,  past  endurance  ! — lost  am  I  : 
Mine  house  is  desolate,  motherless  my  babes. 

O  my  darling,  my  wife,  thou  are  gone,  thou  art  gone, 
O  best  upon  whom  the  light 

Looketh  down  of  the  all-beholding  sun,  850 

Or  the  splendour  of  star-eyed  night ! 

Chorus. 

Woe's  me  for  thine  house  !  woe's  me  for  its  burden  of 

ill! 
With  ruth  for  thy  fate  running  o'er  do  mine  eyelids  the 

tear-drops  pour  : 
\_Aside.~]     But   for  woe  which   must  follow  I  shudder 

and  shudder  still. 

Theseus. 

Ha! 

What  is  this  tablet,  what,  to  her  dear  hand 

Fastened  ?     What  new  thing  meaneth  it  to  tell  ? 

Now  hath  she  writ,  unhappy  one,  to  pray 

Touching  my  marriage  or  my  children  aught  ? 

Fear  not,  lost  love  :  the  woman  is  not  born  860 

Shall  lie  in  Theseus'  couch,  or  tread  his  halls. 

Lo,  how  the  impress  of  the  carven  gold 

Of  her  that  is  no  more  smiles  up  at  me  ! 

Come,  let  me  uncoil  the  seal's  envelopings, 

And  see  what  would  this  tablet  say  to  me.  865 


166  EURIPIDES. 


Chorus. 

Woe,  woe  !     How  God  bringeth  evil  following  hard  on 
the  track 

Of  evil !     I  count  for  living  unmeet 

The   lot   of  a  life  such  as  this,  as  on  deeds  that  are 
wrought  I  look  back  i1 

For  the  house  of  my  lords  standeth  not  any  more,  but 
in  ruin  and  wrack 

I  behold  it  hurled  from  its  ancient  seat.  870 

Ah  God,  if  this  may  be,  wreck  not  the  house, 
But  hearken  my  beseeching,  for  I  trace, 
Seer-like,  an  evil  omen  from  his  face.2 

Theseus. 

Ah  me  ! — a  new  curse  added  to  the  old, 

Past  utterance,3  past  endurance  !     Woe  is  me  !         875 

Chorus. 
What  is  it  ?     Speak,  if  I  may  share  the  tale. 

Theseus. 

It  shrieketh, — ah,  horrors  the  tablet  outshrieketh  !     O 
how  can  I  flee 

My  burden  of  woes  ?     I  am  utterly  ruin-sped  ! 

1   Reading  ipoi  y'av  ovv,  "  in  my  opinion  would  the  lot, 
etc." 

2  Taking  nvos  as  referring  to  Theseus  :  c.f.  Portia  watch- 
ing Bassanio's  expression  as  he  reads  Antonio's  letter. 
Merch.  Ven.  iii,  2. 

3  Xzktov  "cannot  be  right,  on  account  of  the  following 
verse  "  (Mahaffy  and  Bury).  But,  though  the  full  import 
cannot  be  expressed,  the  bare  facts  (for  which  the  chorus  is 
asking)  can. 


HIPPOLYTUS.  167 


They  sing — what   curses  they  sing,  the  words  I  have 
read 

Graved  on  the  wax — woe's  me  !  880 

Chorus. 
Alas  !  thou  utterest  speech  that  heralds  ill. 

Theseus. 

No  more  within  my  lips'  gates  will  1  pen 

The  horror  that  chokes  utterance — ah  wretch  ! 

Hippolytus  hath  dared  assail  my  bed  ss5 

With  violence,  flouting  Zeus's  awful  eye  ! 

Father  Poseidon,  thou  didst  promise  me 

Three  curses  once.     Do  thou  with  one  of  these 

Destroy  my  son  :  may  he  not  'scape  this  day, 

If  soothfast  curses  thou  hast  granted  me.  890 

Chorus. 

O  King,  recall  thou  from  the  Gods  this  prayer  !    , 
Thou  yet  shall  know  thine  error  :  yield  to  me. 

Theseus. 

Never  !     Yea,  I  will  drive  him  from  the  land, 

And,  of  two  dooms,  with  one  shall  he  be  scourged  : — 

Either  Poseidon,  reverencing  my  prayers,  895 

Shall  slay  and  speed  him  unto  Hades'  halls, 

Or,  banished  from  this  land,  a  vagabond 

On  strange  shores,  shall  he  drain  life's  bitter  dregs. 

Chorus. 

Lo,  where  thy  son's  self  comes  in  season  meet, 
Hippolytus  :  refrain  thy  wrath,  O  king  900 

Theseus,  and  for  thine  house  the  best  devise. 


168  EURIPIDES. 


Enter  Hippolytus. 

Hippolytus. 

Father,  I  heard  thy  crying,  and  I  came 

In  haste  :  yet  for  what  cause  thou  makest  moan 

I  know  not,  but  of  thee  I  fain  would  hear. 

Ha  !  what  is  this  ? — Father,  thy  wife  I  see—  905 

Dead  ! — matter  this  for  marvel  passing  great. 

But  now  I  left  her,  who  upon  this  light 

Looked,  it  is  not  yet  a  long  season  since. 

What  hath  befallen  her  ?     How  perished  she  ? 

Father,  I  fain  would  learn  it  from  thy  mouth.  910 

Silent  ! — In  trouble  silence  nought  avails. 

The  heart  that  yearns  to  know  all  cares  of  thine 

Fain  shall  be  found  to  prove  thy  troubles  too. 

Sure  from  thy  friends — yea,  and  thy  more  than  friends, 

Father,  it  is  not  right  to  hide  thy  griefs.  915 

Theseus. 

O  men  that  ofttimes  err,  and  err  in  vain.1 

Why  are  ye  teaching  ever  arts  untold, 

And  search  out  manifold  inventions  still, 

But  one  thing  know  not,  no,  nor  hunt  for  it, 

To  teach  them  wit,  in  whom  no  wisdom  dwells  ?       920 


1  "  What  is  the  meaning  of  the  MSS.  reading,  a/x.ajOT<xj/ovres 
jxaTrjv  ?  It  does  not  agree  with  the  following  lines,  and  /xdryv 
is  superfluous"  (Mahafty  and  Bury).  Does  it  not  mean  that, 
among  the  many  blunders  that  men  commit,  without  taking 
warning  from  past  mistakes,  is  the  vital  one  of  pursuing  the 
unessential,  and  neglecting  the  all-essential  ?  As  to  fiaTrji/ 
being  superfluous — surely  we  sometimes  err,  yet  not  in  vain, 
but,  profiting  by  our  errors,  "rise  on  stepping-stones  of  our 
dead  selves  to  higher  things." 


HIPPOLYTUS.  169 


HlFPOLYTUS. 

A  cunning  sophist  hast  thou  named,  of  power 
Them  to  constrain  to  sense  who  sense  have  none  : 
But — so  ill-timed  thy  speculations  are — 
Father,  1  fear  thy  tongue  for  grief  runs  wild. 

Theseus. 

Out  !     There  should  dwell  in  men  some  certain  test  925 

Of  friendship,  a  discerner  of  the  heart, 

To  show  who  is  true  friend  and  who  is  false. 

Yea,  all  men  should  have  had  two  several  voices, 

One  honest,  one — how  it  might  chance  soe'er  ; 

That  so  the  traitor  voice  might  be  convict  930 

Before  the  honest,  nor  we  be  deceived. 

Hippolytus. 

How  ? — to  thine  ear  hath  some  friend  slandered  me, 

That  I  the  innocent  am  in  evil  case  ? 

Astonied  am  I,  for  thy  words  amaze  me, 

Thus  wandering  wide  astray  from  reason's  throne.  935 

Theseus. 

Out  on  man's  heart  ! — to  what  depths  will  it  sink  ? 

Where  shall  assurance  end  and  hardihood  ? 

For  if  it  swell  with  every  generation, 

And  the  new  age  reach  heights  of  villainy 

Above  the  old,  the  Gods  must  needs  create  940 

A  new  earth  unto  this,  that  room  be  found 

For  the  unrighteous  and  unjust  in  grain. 

Look  on  this  man,  who,  though  he  be  my  son, 

Hath  shamed  my  couch,  and  shall  be  manifest  proved 

Most  vile,  by  testimony  of  the  dead.  945 

N 


i7o  EURIPIDES. 


Hither, — since  to  this  foulness  thou  hast  come, — 

And  set  thy  face  against  thy  father's  face. 

Dost  thou  with  Gods — O  thou  no  common  man  ! — 

Consort  ?     Art  thou  the  chaste,  the  stainless  one  ? 

I  will  not  trust  thy  boasts,  for  so  should  I  950 

Impute  to  Gods  unwisdom's  ignorance. 

Now  vaunt,  ay  now  ! — set  out  thy  paltry  wares 

Of  lifeless  food  :x  take  Orpheus  for  thy  king : 

Rave,  worship  vapourings  of  many  a  scroll : 

For  ah,  thou'rt  caught !     I  warn  all  men  to  shun     955 

Such  hypocrites  as  this  ;  for  they  hunt  souls 

With  canting  words,  the  while  they  plot  foul  sin. 

Dead  is  she  :  thinkest  thou  this  saveth  thee  ? 

Hereby  thou  art  most  convicted,  basest  thou  ! 

What  oaths,  what  protestations  shall  bear  down       960 

[Shows  tablet 
This,  for  thine  absolution  of  the  charge  ? 

And  wilt  thou  say,  "  She  hated  me  :  the  bastard 

Is  foe  by  blood  of  those  in  wedlock  born  ?  " 

Fools'  traffic  this  in  life — to  fling  away 

For  hate  of  thee  the  dearest  thing  she  owed  !  965 

Or — say'st  thou  ?— "  Frailty  is  not  in  men, 

But  in  the  blood  of  women."     Youths,  I  have  proved, 

Are  no  whit  more  than  women  continent 

When  Kypris  stirs  a  heart  in  flush  of  youth  : 

Yet  all  the  strength  of  manhood  helpeth  them.  970 

But  wherefore  thus  contend  against  thy  pleas, 

When  there  the  corpse  lies,  witness  faithful  and  true  ? 

Hence  from  this  land,  an  exile,  with  all  speed. 

Never  come  thou  to  god-built  Athens  more, 

Nor  any  marches  where  my  spear  hath  sway  :  975 

1  Abstinence  from  animal  food  was  a  feature  of  the  ascetic 
doctrines  attributed  to  Orpheus,  as  of  those  of  Pythagoras. 


HIPPOLYTUS.  171 


For  if  'neath  thy  mishandling  1  sit  still, 

Never  shall  Isthmian  Sinis  testify 

That  I  slew  him,  but  name  it  idle  vaunt  ; 

Nor  those  Skironian  Rocks  that  skirt  the  sea 

Shall  call  me  terrible  to  evil-doers.  )8o 

Chorus. 

I  dare  not  name  of  mortals  any  man 
Happy,  for  lo,  the  first  is  made  the  last. 

Hippolytus. 

Father,  thy  rage  and  strong-strained  fury  of  soul 

Are  fearful  :  yet,  fair-seeming  though  the  charge, 

If  one  unfold  it,  all  unfair  it  is.  985 

I  have  no  skill  to  speak  before  a  throng : 

My  tongue  is  loosed  with  equals,  and  those  few. 

And  reason  :  they  that  are  among  the  wise 

Of  none  account,  to  mobs  are  eloquent. 

Yet  needs  I  must,  now  this  mischance  hath  lighted, 

Unrein  my  tongue.     And  first  will  I  begin  [990 

Where  thou  didst  first  assail,  as  thou  wouldst  crush  me, 

And  I  find  no  reply.     See'st  thou  yon  sun 

And  earth  ? — within  their  compass  is  no  man — 

Though  thou  deny  it — chaster-souled  than  I.  995 

For  I  have  learnt,  first,  to  revere  the  Gods, 

Then,  to  have  friends  which  seek  to  do  no  wrong, 

Friends  who  think  shame  to  proffer  aught  of  base, 

Yea,  or  to  render  others  shameful  service. 

No  mocker  am  I,  father,  at  my  friends,  1000 

But  to  the  absent  even  as  to  the  present : 

In     one     thing     flawless, — where    thou    think'st    me 

trapped, — 
For  to  this  day  my  body  is  clean  of  lust. 


172  EURIPIDES. 


I  know  this  commerce  not,  save  by  the  ear 

And  sight  of  pictures, — little  will  have  I  1005 

To  look  thereon,  who  keep  a  virgin  soul. 

Yet,  grant  my  virtue  wins  not  thy  belief, 

Sure  'tis  for  thee  to  show  whereby  I  fell. 

Wilt  say  this  woman's  form  in  grace  outshone 

All  women  ? — that  I  hoped  thy  state  to  inherit       1010 

By  winning  for  mine  own  thine  heiress-queen  P1 

Vain  fool  were  I — nay  rather,  wholly  mad  !2 

"  Nay,"  (say'st  thou)  "  sweet  is  power,  though  one   be 

chaste." 
Nay  verily  ! — save  the  lust  of  sovereignty 
Poison  the  wit  of  all  who  covet  it.  1015 

Fain  would  I  foremost  victor  be  in  games 
Hellenic,  and  be  second  in  the  realm, 
And  with  pure-hearted  friends  be  happy  still. 
For  there  is  true  well-being,  peril  far, 
Which  giveth  sweeter  joys  than  sovereignty.  1020 

So  hast  thou  all  my  counterpleas,  save  one  : — 


1  We  find  a  parallel  suggestion  in  I  Kings  ii,  22. 

2  I  must  confess  myself  unable  to  appreciate  Mahafty  and 
Bury's  objections  to  the  lines  1012-18,  as  they  stand  in 
the  MSS.  1012  is,  from  Hippolytus'  point  of  view,  a 
perfect  answer  to  1010-11  ;  but,  remembering  that  it  may 
not  be  to  his  father  so  self-evident  as  to  himself,  he  proceeds 
to  state  and  meet  the  former's  supposed  objection,  taking 
occasion  to  specify  what  his  own  ambition  really  is.  Hence 
it  seems  strange  to  be  told  that  1016-18  "are  quite  out  of 
place  in  the  mouth  of  Hippolytus,  whose  sole  delight  was 
in  hunting  in  the  woods,  in  the  company  of  Artemis."  Then 
what  did  he  want  with  a  chariot  and  horses,  and  to  what  end 
did  he  so  assiduously  use  them,  as  referred  to  in  //.  111-12, 
228-31,  1132-34?  Doubtless  he  regularly  hunted  (on  foot) 
before  breakfast,  before  the  dew  was  dried,  (c.f.  Xenophon, 
Cynegeticus,  and  Apoll.  Rhod.  Argonautica  IV.  109-13),  and 
practised  for  the  chariot  race  after. 


HIPPOLYTUS.  173 


Had  I  a  witness, — one  who  knows  mine  heart, — 1 

And  made  defence  while  she  stood  living  there, 

By  deeds  shouldst  thou  search  out  and  know  the  wicked  : 

But  now — by  Zeus  Oath-warden,  by  Earth's  plain, 

Swear  I,  I  ne'er  attempted  couch  of  thine,  [io25 

No,  nor  had  wished  it,  nor  had  dreamed  thereof. 

God  grant  I  perish  nameless,  fameless  all, 

Cityless,  homeless,  exile,  vagabond 

On  earth, — may  sea  nor  land  receive  my  corpse      1030 

When  I  am  dead,  if  I  be  this  vile  thing  ! 

Now  if  through  fear  she  flung  away  her  life 

I  know  not : — more  I  cannot  sinless  say. 

Honest  she  was,  yet  honest  could  not  be  :2 

I,  caught  at  disadvantage,  bore  with  wrong.  1035 

Chorus. 

Thou  hast  said  enough  to  turn  this  charge  from  thee 
In  tendering  the  Gods'  oath,  that  dread  pledge. 

Theseus. 
Lo,  is  not  this  a  mountebank,  a  juggler, 

1  Or,  according  to  the  Scholiast's  interpretation — "  Had  I 
a  witness,  upright  as  myself." 

2  There  is  a  play  on  words  in  the  Greek  which  seems  to 
be  rendered  by  the  word  honest  in  its  twofold  Shakspearean 
sense,  first,  of  chastity,  second,  of  truthfulness.  In  1035, 
taking  ov  /caXws  with  exoVT€<;>  I  understand  him  to  refer  to 
having  been  entrapped  into  a  pledge  of  silence,  and  to  his 
accepting  the  situation  (e^pw/xe^a),  sooner  than  violate  his 
oath.  Retaining  the  ordinary  punctuation,  the  sense  of  1035 
might  be — 

"  I  was  not,  who  might  have  been,  circumspect." 

i.e.  in  letting  myself  be  so  entrapped. 


i74  EURIPIDES. 


Who  thinks  by  his  unruffled  calm  to  outface1 

My  mood,  when  his  own  father  he  hath  shamed  ?  1040 

Hippolvtis. 

Nay,  but  I  marvel,  father,  at  this  in  thee: — 
For,  if  my  son  thou  wert,  and  I  thy  sire, 
I  had  slain  thee  :  exile  should  not  be  thy  mulct, 
If  on  my  wife  thou  hadst  dared  to  lay  a  hand. 

Theseus. 

Good  sooth,  well  said  :  yet  not  so  shalt  thou  die  1045 

After  the  doom  thou  speakest  for  thyself ; 

For  easiest  for  the  wretched  is  swift  death. 

But  from  the  home-land  exiled,  wandering 

To  strange  soil,  shalt  thou  drain  life's  bitter  dregs. 

For  this  is  meet  wage  for  the  impious  man.  1050 

Hippolytus. 

Woe's  me  ! — what  wilt  thou  do  ?     Wilt  not  receive 
Time's  witness  in  my  cause,  but  banish  now  ? 

Theseus. 

Beyond  the  sea,  beyond  the  Atlantic  bourn, 
If  this  I  could  ;  so  much  I  hate  thy  face. 

Hippolytus. 

Nor  oath,  nor  pledge,  nor  prophet's  utterance         1055 
Wilt  test,  but  cast  me  forth  the  land  untried  ? 

1  "  A  mountebank,   a  threadbare  juggler  ....  out- 
facing me."     Comedy  of  Errors,  V.  i. 


HIPPOLYTUS.  175 


Theseus. 

This  tablet,  though  it  bear  no  prophet's  sign, 

Accuseth  thee,  nor  lieth  : — but  the  birds 

That  roam  o'erhead,  I  wave  them  long  farewell.1 

Hippolytus  (aside). 

O  Gods,  why  can  1  not  unlock  my  lips,  1060 

Who  am  destroyed  by  you  whom  I  revere  ? 
No — whom  I  need  persuade,  I  should  not  so, 
And  all  for  nought  should  break  the  oaths  I  swore. 

Theseus. 

Faugh  ! — how  it  chokes  me,  this  thy  saintly  mien  ! 
Out  from  thy  fatherland  !     Straightway  begone  !    1065 

Hippolytus. 

Unhappy  !  whither  shall  I  flee  ? — What  home 
Of  what  friend  enter,  banished  on  such  charge  ? 

Theseus. 

Of  whoso  joys  in  welcoming  for  guests 
Defilers  of  men's  wives,  which  dwell  with  sin. 

Hippolytus. 

Alas !  this  stabs  mine  heart  well-nigh  to  weeping,  1070 
If  I  be  published  villain,  thou  believe  it  ! 

Theseus. 

Then  shouldest  thou  have  moaned  and  taken  thought, 
Then,  when  thou  dar'dst  insult  thy  father's  wife. 

1  c.f.  Hector's  words,  Iliad  xii,  237-240  (where  see  Leaf's 
note),  and  Odyssey  ii,  141-2. 


176  EURIPIDES. 


HlPPOLYTUS. 

O  halls,  could  ye  but  find  a  voice  for  rue, 

And  witness  if  I  be  a  wicked  man  !  1075 

Theseus. 

To  speechless  witnesses  thou  fieest  ? — Clearly 
This  deed,  though  it  speak  not,  declares  thee  vile. 

HlPPOLYTUS. 

Ah,  to  stand  face  to  face  and  see  myself, 
That  for  the  wrongs  I  suffer  I  might  weep  ! 

Theseus. 

Yea,  'tis  thy  wont  to  gaze  on  thy  perfections  1080 

More  than  to  render  parents  righteous  honour. 

HlPPOLYTUS. 

Ah,  hapless  mother  ! — ah,  my  bitter  birth  ! 
Base-born  be  never  any  that  I  love  ! 

Theseus. 

Will  ye  not  hale  him  hence,  thralls  ? — heard  ye  not 
Long  since  his  banishment  pronounced  of  me  ?       1085 

HlPPOLYTUS. 

Who  layeth  hand  on  me  of  them  shall  rue  ! 
Thou  thrust  me  from  the  land  if  such  thy  mood. 

Theseus. 

That  will  I,  an  thou  wilt  not  heed  mine  hest. 

No  pity  for  thine  exile  visits  me.  [Exit  Theseus. 


HIPPOLYTUS.  177 


HlPPOLYTUS. 

So  then  my  fate  is  sealed.     Ah,  woe  is  me  !  1090 

I  know  the  truth,  yet  know  not  how  to  tell  it. 
Dearest  of  Gods  to  me,  O  Leto's  Child, 
Companion,  fellow-huntress,  I  shall  flee 
Athens  the  glorious.     Farewell  ye,  O  burg, 
Land  of  Erechtheus  !     O  Trcezenian  plain,  J095 

How  many  pleasant  paths  of  youth  hast  thou  ! 
Farewell  :   I  see  thee,  hail  thee,  the  last  time. 
Come,  O  ye  youths,  mine  age-mates  in  this  land, 
Speak  parting  word  :  escort  me  from  this  soil : 
For  never  shall  ye  see  a  chaster  man,  1100 

Albeit  this  my  sire  believeth  not.  [Exit. 

Chorus. 

(Sty.  1) 

When   faith  overfloweth  my  mind,  God's   providence 

all-embracing1 

Banisheth  griefs  :  but  when  doubt  whispereth  "  Ah 

but  to  know  !  " 

No  clue  through  the  tangle  I  find  of  fate  and  of  life  for 

my  tracing : 

There  is  ever  a  change  and  many  a  change, 

And  the  mutable  fortune  of  men  evermore  sways  to 

and  fro 

Over  limitless  range.  11 10 

(Ant.  1) 

Ah,  would  the  Gods  hear  prayer  ! — would  they  grant 

to  me  these  supplications — 

1  Following  Paley's  interpretation.  There  is  no  more 
inconsistency  here  than  in  myriads  of  religions  meditations 
from  David  downwards.  The  comfort  of  the  general  trust 
is  disturbed  by  individual  instances  of  the  prevalence  of 
evil.     The  book  of  Job  is  a  monograph  on  this  very  theme. 


i78  EURIPIDES. 


A  lot  with  prosperity  sweet,  and  a  soul  unshadowed 

of  pain, 

And  a  faith  neither  fixed  foursquare  on  the  flint,  nor 

on  sandy  foundations  ! 

Quick-shifting  my  sail  to  the  coming  breeze 

Of  the  morrow,  so  may  I  fleet,  ever  voyaging  life's 

wide  main 

Over  stormless  seas.  1120 

(Str.  2) 

For  my  mind  is  a  fountain  stirred,  and  1  see  things  all 

undreamed  : 

For  the  Star  of  Athens,  that  beamed 

The  brightest  withal  in  Hellas-land, 

We  have  seen  him  driven  to  an  alien  strand, 

By  the  wrath  of  a  father  have  seen  him  banned. 

Ah,  cityward  sands,  ye  shall  wait  him  in  vain, 

And  ye  mountain  woods,  where  streamed 

'Twixt  the  oaks  the  pack  on  the  wild  boar's  track 

In  dread  Dictynna's  hunter-train,  11 30 

Till  the  quarry  was  slain. 

(Ant.  2) 

Nevermore  shall  he  harness  the  Henetan  horses  and 

leap  on  his  car, 

O'er  the  race-course  of  Limne  afar 

To  speed  the  coursers'  feet  of  fire  : 

And  the  songs,  that  once  'neath  the  strings  of 

the  lyre 

Slept  never,  shall  cease  in  the  halls  of  his  sire. 

Ungarlanded  Artemis'  bowers  shall  be 

In  the  greenwood  depths  that  are. 

By  thine   exile    have  perished    the   sweet   hopes 

cherished  11 40 

Of  our  maids,  and  their  gentle  rivalry 

In  love  for  thee. 


HIPPOLYTUS.  179 


(Epodc  I 
For  thy  woeful  fate  shall  I  pass  amid  tears  fast-flowing 
A  fortuneless  fortune.     O  mother  evil-starred, 
This  day  thy  birth-joy  effaces  ! 
I  am  wroth  with  the  Gods : — O  Graces 
Aye  linked  in  loving  embraces, 
Why  do  ye  suffer  that  he  from  his  land  should  be  going, 
From  his  home,  who  hath  nowise  earned  a  doom  so 
bitter-hard  ?  11 50 

But  lo,  1  see  Hippolytus'  henchman  nigh 
Hasting  unto  the  halls  with  clouded  brows. 

Enter  Messenger. 

Messenger. 

Where  should  I  go  and  find  this  country's  king, 
Theseus,  ye  women  ?     If  ye  know,  declare 
Straightway  to  me.     Within  these  halls  is  he  ?        1 155 

Chorus. 
Lo  yonder  where  he  cometh  forth  the  halls. 

Enter  Theseus. 

Messenger. 

Theseus,  I  bring  a  sorrow-kindling  tale 
To  thee  and  all  the  citizens  which  dwell 
In  Athens  and  the  bounds  of  Troezen-land. 

Theseus. 

What  now  ?— Hath  some  disaster  unforeseen  1160 

Fallen  on  these  two  neighbour-citied  states  ? 

Messenger. 

Hippolytus  is  no  more,  one  may  say, 
Though  yet  a  little  space  he  seeth  light. 


i  So  EURIPIDES. 


Theseus. 

Of  whom  slain  ? — Hath  one  met  him  in  his  wrath, 
Whose  wife  he  had  outraged,  even  as  his  sire's  ?    1165 

Messenger. 

His  proper  chariot-team  hath  dealt  him  death, 
And  thy  mouth's  curses,  which  thou  didst  call  down 
From  the  Sea's  Lord,  thy  father,  on  thy  son. 

Theseus. 

O  Gods  !     Poseidon  !  how  thou  wast  indeed 

My  father,  who  hast  heard  my  malison  !  11 70 

How  perished  he  ?     In  what  way  did  the  gin 

Of  justice  snap  on  him  who  wrought  me  shame  ? 

Messenger. 

We,  hard  beside  the  beach  that  greets  the  surf, 

With  combs  were  smoothing  out  his  horses'  manes 

Weeping  :  for  word  had  come  to  us  to  say  11 75 

That  no  more  in  this  land  Hippolytus 

Might  walk,  of  thee  to  wretched  exile  doomed. 

Then  came  he,  bringing  the  same  tale  of  tears 

To  us  upon  the  strand  :  a  countless  throng 

Of  friends  his  age-mates  following  with  him  came.  1 180 

But,  ceasing  at  the  last  from  moan,  he  cried  : 

"  Why  rave  I  thus  ?     I  must  obey  my  sire. 

Harness  the  horses  to  the  chariot-yoke, 

My  thralls  :  this  city  is  no  more  for  me." 

Then,  then  did  every  man  bestir  himself.  1185 

Swifter  than  one  could  say  it  were  the  steeds 

Harnessed,  and  by  our  lord's  side  set  we  them. 

Then  the  reins  caught  he  from  the  chariot-rail, 


HIPPOLYTUS.  181 


Settling  his  feet,  all  buskined  as  he  was1 ; 
And  to  the  Gods  first  stretched  his  hands  and  cried  : 
"  Zeus,  may  I  die  if  I  a  villain  am  !  [IJ90 

May  my  sire  know  that  he  is  wronging  me, 
When  I  am  dead,  if  not  while  I  see  light !  " 
Then  in  his  hands  he  took  the  scourge2  and  smote 
At  once  the  steeds.     We  henchmen  by  the  car       1195 
Fast  by  the  reins  attended  on  our  lord 
Towards  Argos  straight  and  Epidauria. 
And,  as  we  entered  on  a  desert  tract, 
Beyond  this  Troezen's  border  lies  a  beach 
Sloping  full  down  to  yon  Saronic  Sea.  1200 

There  from  earth's  womb  a  noise  like  Zeus's  thunder 
Made  muffled  roaring,  a  blood-curdling  sound. 
Then  the  steeds  lifted  head  and  pricked  the  ear  ; 
And  thrilled  through  us  most  vehement  dismay 
Whence    might   the   sound    be.      To     the   sea-lashed 
shores  1205 

Then  glanced  we,  and  a  surge  unearthly  saw 
Up-columned  to  the  sky,  that  from  my  sight 
Shrouded  was  all  the  beach  Skironian  ; 
Veiled  was  the  Isthmus  and  Asklepius'  Crag. 

1  Better  perhaps, 

"  And  set  his  feet  fair  in  the  car's  foot-rests." 

So  Mahaffy  and  Bury,  according  to  the  apparent  meaning  of 
the  Scholiast.  It  seems,  however,  rather  too  strong  to 
characterize  the  common  interpretation,  that  in  his  haste  to 
obey,  he  had  not  removed  his  hunter's  boots,  as  "  so  ridi- 
culous that  it  scarce  deserves  mention," — unless  we  are 
prepared  to  find  something  ridiculous  in  "  With  your  loins 
girded,  and  shoes  en  your  feet,  and  your  staff  in  your  hand 
....  in  haste." 

2  For  the  identity  of  ttevrpov  and  fxacrTig,  see  Leaf's  most 
valuable  note  on  Iliad  xxiii,  387. 


iSj  EURIPIDES. 


Then  swelling  higher,  higher,  and  spurting  forth     1210 

All  round  a  cloud  of  foam  and  sea-blown  spray, 

Shoreward  it  rusheth  toward  the  four-horse  car. 

Then  from  the  breaker's  midst  and  hugest  surge 

The  wave  belched  forth  a  bull,  a  monster  fierce, 

With  whose  throat-thunder  all  the  land  was  filled  12 15 

And  echoed  awfully,  as  on  our  gaze 

He  burst,  a  sight  more  dread  than  eyes  could  bear. 

Straightway  wild  panic  falleth  on  the  steeds  : 

Yet  their  lord,  wholly  conversant  with  wont 

Of  horses,  caught  the  reins  in  both  his  hands,  1220 

And  tugs,  as  shipman  tugs  against  the  oar, 

Throwing  his  body's  weight  against  the  reins. 

But  on  the  fire-forged  bits  they  clenched  their  teeth, 

And  whirl  him  on  o'ermastered,  recking  not 

Of  steering  hand,  or  curb,  or  strong  car's  weight.   1225 

And  if,  yet  holding  to  the  chariot-helm, 

Toward  the  smooth   ground  he  strove  to  guide  their 

course, 
Aye  showed  that  bull  in  front,  to  turn  them  back, 
Maddening  with  fright  the  fourfold  chariot-team. 
If  toward  the  rocks  they  rushed  with  frenzied  heart, 
Fast  by  the  rail  in  silence  followed  he  [1230 

On,  till  he  fouled  and  overset  the  car, 
Dashing  against  a  rock  the  chariot  felly. 
Then  all  was  turmoil :  upward  leapt  in  air 
Naves  of  the  wheels  and  linchpins  of  the  axles.       1235 
And  he,  unhappy,  tangled  in  the  reins, 
Bound  in  indissoluble  bonds,  is  haled 
Dashing  his  head  against  the  cruel  rocks, 
Rending  his  flesh,  outshrieking  piteous  cries — 
"  O  stay,  ye  horses  nurtured  at  my  cribs,  1240 

Destroy  me  not ! — ah,  father's  curse  ill-starred  ! 


HIPPOLYTUS.  183 


Who  wills  to  save  an  utter-innocent  man  ?" 

Ah,  many  willed,  but  far  behind  were  left 

With  feet  outstripped.     Loosed  from  the  toils  at  last 

Of  clean-cut  reins, — I  know  not  in  what  wise, —     1245 

He  falls,  yet  breathing  for  short  space  of  life. 

Vanished  the  steeds  and  that  accursed  monster, 

The  bull,  mid  rock-strewn  ground,  I  know  not  where. 

Thrall  am  I  verily  of  thine  house,  O  king  ; 

Howbeit  so  foul  a  charge — I  never  can  1250 

Believe  it  of  thy  son,  that  he  is  vile, 

Not  though  all  womankind  should  hang  themselves, 

Though  one  should  fill  with  writing  all  the  pine 

In  Ida  : — he  is  righteous,  this  I  know. 

Chorus. 

Woe  for  accomplishment  of  new  disaster  !  1255 

No  refuge  is  there  from  the  doom  of  fate. 

Theseus. 

For  hatred  of  the  man  who  thus  hath  fared, 

Glad  for  this  tale  was  I  :  but  now,  for  awe 

Of  heaven,  and  for  that  he  is  yet  my  son, 

Nor  glad  am  I  nor  sorry  for  these  ills.  1260 

Messenger. 

How  then  ? — must  we  bear  yonder  broken  man 
Hither  ? — -or  in  what  wise  perform  thy  pleasure  ? 
Bethink  thee :  if  my  counsel  thou  wilt  heed, 
Harsh  to  thy  stricken  son  thou  wilt  not  be. 

Theseus. 

Bear  him,  that  I  may  see  before  mine  eyes  1265 

Him  who  denied  that  he  had  stained  my  bed, 
By  words  and  heaven's  judgment  to  convict  him. 

[Exit  Messenger. 


1 84 


EURIPIDES. 


Chorus. 

Love,  under  thy  dominion 

Unbending  hearts  bow  low 
Of  Gods,  and  hearts  of  mortals, 
When,  flashing  through  thy  portals 
On  glory-gleaming  pinion,  1270 

Flits  Eros  to  and  fro  ; 

Love,  under  thy  dominion 
Unbending  hearts  bow  low. 

Gold-glittering  wings  wide-soaring, 

They  rain  down  witchery, 
O'er  maddened  hearts  prevailing, 
O'er  earth  triumphant  sailing, 
O'er  music  of  the  roaring 
Of  spray-bemantled  sea, 

Gold-glittering  wings  wide-soaring, 
They  rain  down  witchery. 

He  kindleth  with  his  yearning 

All  things  of  earth-born  race  ; 
The  mountain's  whelps  he  thrilleth, 
The  ocean's  brood  he  filleth, 
Where'er  the  sun's  eye  burning 
Down-looketh  on  earth's  face, 

He  kindleth  with  his  yearning 
All  things  of  earth-born  race. 

They  bend — all,  all  are  bending, 

Love-queen,  beneath  thy  hand  !  1280 

O  crowned  brows,  whom  loyal 
Vassals  acclaim  sole-royal 


HIPPOLYTUS.  185 


By  spells  all-comprehending 
In  sky  and  sea  and  land  ; 

They  bend — all,  all  are  bending, 
Love-queen,  beneath  thy  hand  ! 

Enter  Artemis. 

Artemis. 

Thou  high-born  scion  of  Aigeus,  I  call  upon  thee  : 

Theseus,  give  ear  unto  me. 
It  is  Artemis,  Leto's  Daughter,  that  nameth  thy  name  : 

Why  dost  thou  joy  in  thy  shame  ?  [I2^5 

Thou  hast  murdered  thy  son    unrighteously,    thereto 
moved 

Of  the  lies  of  thy  wife  unproved. 
By  infatuate  folly  all-manifest,  lo,  thou  wast  bound. 

How  wilt  thou  hide  underground  1290 

Thy  dishonour,  or  soar  to  the  heaven,  by  changing  thy 
life 

To  escape  from  this  anguish -strife  ? 
For  the  part  that  was  erstwhile  thine  in  the  good  man's 
lot, 

Behold,  it  is  not.  I295 

Theseus,  hear  thou  the  posture  of  thy  woes  ; — 
Yet  have  I  no  help  for  thee,  only  pain  ; 
But  I  have  come  to  show  the  righteousness 
Of  thy  son,  that  in  fair  fame  he  may  die, 
And  thy  wife's  fever-flame, — yet  in  some  sort  1300 

Her  nobleness, — who,  stung  by  goads  of  her 
Whom  most  we  loathe,  who  joy  in  purity, 
Of  all  the  Gods,  was  lovesick  for  thy  son, 
Yet  strove  by  reason  to  o'ermaster  passion, 
And  died  through  wiles  unsanctioned  of  her  nurse,  1305 
WTho  under  oath-seal  told  thy  son  her  pangs  ; 

o 


1 86  EURIPIDES. 


And  he,  even  as  was  righteous,  would  not  heed 
The  tempting  ;  no,  nor  when  sore-wronged  of  thee 
Broke  he  the  oath's  pledge,  for  he  feared  the  Gods. 
But  she,  adread  to  be  of  sin  convict,  1310 

Wrote  that  false  writing,  and  by  treachery  so 
Destroyed  thy  son  : — and  thou  believedst  her  ! 

Theseus. 
Ah  me  ! 

Artemis. 

Is  it  torture,  Theseus  ? — Nay,  but  hear  me  out, 

That  hearing  all  thou  mayst  the  more  lament. 

Three  soothfast  curses  hadst  thou  of  thy  sire  :  I3I5 

One  hast  thou  thus  misused,  O  villain  thou, 

Against  thy  son,  which  might  have  quelled  a  foe  ! 

Thy  sire  the  Sea-king,  in  his  love's  despite, 

Gave  as  he  needs  must,  seeing  he  had  pledged  him  : 

Yet  wicked  in  his  eyes  and  mine  art  thou,  1320 

Who  wouldst  not  wait  for  proof,  nor  prophet's  voice, 

Nor  yet  make  inquisition,  nor  wouldst  trace 

Time's  slow  step,  but  with  haste  that  did  thee  wrong 

Didst  hurl  the  curse  upon  thy  son,  and  slay. 

Theseus. 
Queen,  ruin  seize  me  ! 

Artemis. 

Deep  thy  sin  ;  but  yet       1325 
Even  thou  for  this  mayst  win  forgiveness  still  : 
For  Kypris  willed  that  all  this  should  befall 
To  glut  her  spite.     And  this  the  Gods'  wont  is : — 
None  doth  presume  to  thwart  the  fixed  design 
Willed  by  his  fellow  :  still  aloof  we  stand.  J  33° 

Else  be  thou  sure  that,  but  for  dread  of  Zeus, 


HIPPOLYTUS.  187 

I  never  would  have  known  this  depth  of  shame, 

To  suffer  one,  of  all  men  best  beloved 

Of  me,  to  die.     But  thy  transgression,  first, 

Thine  ignorance  from  utter  sin  redeems  ;  1 335 

Then,  by  her  death  thy  wife  made  void  all  test 

Of  these  her  words,  and  won  thy  credence  so. 

Now,  most  on  thee  this  storm  of  woe  hath  burst  ; 

Yet  grief  is  mine  :  for  when  the  righteous  die 

The  Gods  joy  not.     The  wicked,  and  withal  1340 

Their  children  and  their  homes,  do  we  destroy. 

Chorus. 

Lo,  lo,  the  stricken  one  borne 

Hitherward,  with  his  young  flesh  torn 
And  his  golden  head  of  its  glory  shorn  ! 

Ah,  griefs  of  the  house  ! — what  doom 

Twofold  on  thine  halls  hath  come 
By  the  Gods'  will  shrouded  in  sorrow's  gloom  ! 

Enter  bearers  with  Hippolytus. 

Hippolvtus. 

Woe,  woe  for  a  son 

By  the  doom  of  his  sire 
All  marred  and  undone  !  J  350 

Through  mine  head  leapeth  fire 
Of  the  agony-flashes,  and  throbbeth  my  brain  like  a 
hard-stricken  lyre. 

Let  me  rest — ah  forbear  ! 

For  my  strength  is  sped. 
Cursed  horses,  ye  were 
Of  mine  own  hands  fed, 
Yet  me  have  ye  wholly  destroyed,  yet   me  have    ye 
stricken  dead  ! 


1 88  EURIPIDES. 


For  the  Gods'  sake,  bear 

Me  full  gently,  each  thrall  ! 
Thou  to  right — have  a  care  !—  1360 

Soft  let  your  hands  fall  ; 
Tenderly   bear  the  sore-mangled,  on-stepping  in  time, 
one  and  all, 

The  unhappy  on-bearing, 

And  cursed,  I  ween, 
Of  his  father's  own  erring  : — 
Ah  Zeus,  hast  thou  seen  ? 
Innocent    I,   ever  fearing  the  Gods,   who  was  wholly 
heart-clean 

Above  all  men  beside, — 

Lo,  how  am  I  thrust 
Unto  Hades,  to  hide 
My  life  in  the  dust ! 
All  vainly  I  reverenced  God,  and  in  vain  unto  man  was 
I  just. 

Let  the  stricken  one  be  ! —  I37° 

Ah,  mine  anguish  again  ! — 
Give  ye  sleep  unto  me, 
Death-salve  for  my  pain, 
The  sleep  of  the  sword  for  the  wretched — I  long,  oh  I 
long  to  be  slain. 

Dire  curse  of  my  father  ! — ■ 

Sins,  long  ago  wrought 
Of  mine  ancestors,  gather  :  1380 

Their  doom  tarries  not, 
But  the  scourge  overfloweth  the  innocent — wherefore 
on  me  is  it  brought  ? 


HIPPOLYTUS.  189 


Ah  for  words  of  a  spell, 

That  my  soul  might  take  flight 
From  the  tortures,  with  fell 
Unrelentings  that  smite ! 
Oh  for  the  blackness  of  Hades,  the  sleep  of  Necessity's 
night ! 

Artemis. 

Unhappy,  bowed  'neath  what  disaster's  yoke  ! 

Thine  own  heart's  nobleness  hath  ruined  thee.  1390 

Hippolytus. 

Ah,  perfume-breath  celestial  ! — mid  my  pains 
I  feel  thee,  and  mine  anguish  is  assuaged. 
Lo  in  this  place  the  Goddess  Artemis  ! 

Artemis. 
Yea,  hapless  one,  of  Gods  best  friend  to  thee. 

Hippolytus. 

0  Queen,  seest  thou  my  plight — the  stricken  one  ?   1395 

Artemis. 

1  see — but  tears  are  to  mine  eyes  forbid. 

Hippolytus. 

None  now  shall  hark  thine  hounds,  nor  do  thee  ser- 
vice— 

Artemis. 

Ah  no  ! — Yet  dear  to  me  thou  perishest. 

Hippolytus. 
Nor  tend  thy  steeds,  nor  guard  thine  images. 


i9o  EURIPIDES. 

Artemis. 
This  all-pernicious  Kypris  hath  contrived —  1400 

Hippolytus. 
Ah  me  !  what  Goddess  blasts  me  now  I  know — 

Artemis. 
Jealous  for  honour,  wroth  with  chastity. 

Hippolytus. 
Three  hath  one  hand  destroyed  ;  I  see  it  now. 

Artemis. 
Thy  father — thee — thy  father's  wife  the  third. 

Hippolytus. 
Yea,  and  I  wail  my  father's  misery.  1405 

Artemis. 
By  plots  of  deity  was  he  beguiled. 

Hippolytus. 
Ah  father,  woe  is  thee  for  this  mischance  ! 

Theseus. 
I  am  slain,  my  son  :  no  joy  have  I  in  life  ! 

Hippolytus. 
More  than  myself  I  mourn  thee  for  thine  error. 

Theseus. 
Would  God  I  could  but  die  for  thee,  my  son  !  14 10 


HIPPOLYTUS.  i9i 


HlPPOLYTUS. 

Ah,  bitter  gifts  of  that  Sea-god,  thy  sire  ! 

Theseus. 
Ah  that  the  word  had  never  passed  my  lips  ! 

HlPPOLYTUS. 

Wherefore  ? — thou  wouldst  for  wrath   have  slain    me 
still. 

Theseus. 
Yea,  for  the  Gods  had  caused  my  wit  to  stumble. 

HlPPOLYTUS. 

Oh  that  men's  curses  could  but  strike  the  Gods  !    14 15 

Artemis. 

Let  be  :  for  even  in  the  nether  gloom 

Not  unavenged  shall  be  the  stroke  that  fell 

Upon  thy  frame  through  rage  of  Kypris'  spite, 

For  thy  pure  soul's  and  for  thy  reverence'  sake. 

For  upon  one,  her  minion,  with  mine  hand—  1420 

One  who  is  dearest  of  all  men  to  her — 

With  these  unerring  shafts  will  I  avenge  me. 

And  to  thee,  hapless  one,  for  these  thy  woes 

High  honours  will  I  give  in  Troezen-town. 

Ere  their  espousals  shall  all  maids  unwed  1425 

For  thee  cut  off  their  hair  :  through  age  on  age 

Full  harvests  shalt  thou  reap  of  grief  in  tears. 

Ever  of  thee  song-waking  memory 

Shall  live  in  virgins  ;  nor  shall  Phaedra's  love 

Forgotten  in  thy  story  be  unhymned.  1430 

But  thou,  O  son  of  ancient  Aigeus,  take 


192  EURIPIDES. 


Thy  child  into  thine  arms,  and  fold  him  close. 

Not  of  thy  will  thou  slewest  him,  and  well 

May  men  transgress  when  Gods  are  thrusting  on. 

Thee  too  I  charge,  Hippolytus — hate  not  H35 

Thy  father  :   'tis  by  fate  thou  perishest. 

Farewell  :   I  may  not  gaze  upon  the  dead, 

Nor  may  with  dying  gasps  pollute  my  sight  : 

And  now  I  see  that  thou  art  near  the  end. 

[Exit  Artemis. 
Hippolytus. 

Farewell  to  thy  departing,  maiden  blest.  I44° 

Light  falls  on  thee  long  fellowship's  severance  !' 

Lo,  I  forgive  my  father  at  thy  suit, 

As  heretofore  have  I  obeyed  thy  word. 

Ah,  o'er  mine  eyes  even  now  the  darkness  draws ! 

Take,  father,  take  my  body,  and  upraise.  I445 

Theseus. 
Ah  me  !  what  dost  thou,  child,  to  hapless  me  ? 

Hippolytus. 
I  am  gone — yea,  I  behold  the  gates  of  death  ! 


This  line  has  been  a  stumbling-block  to  editors.  It  has 
been  interpreted  as  a  reproach,  and  so  quite  out  of  harmony 
with  Hippolytus'  attitude  to  her,  besides  being  unjust.  In 
reality  it  is  a  very  natural  touch — this  sigh  (not  reproach)  of 
the  mortal  who  cannot  but  feel  how  much  more  it  must,  by 
the  necessities  of  their  natures,  mean  to  him  than  to  her. 
To  him  it  is  the  end,  the  going  into  outer  darkness:  to  her 
a  spot  of  shadow  on  a  bright  unending  existence.  The  idea 
is  by  no  means  unique  in  literature,  any  more  than  in  life. 
A  single  poem  of  Tennyson's  furnishes  many  parallels : — c.f. 
In  Memoriam  xl  vv.  5 — 8,  and  xli,  lx — lxiv,  lxxxv  vv.  6,  7,  8, 
ciii,  12. 


HIPPOLYTUS.  193 


Theseus. 
Wilt  leave  me — and  my  conscience  murder-stained  ? 

Hippolytus. 
No,  no  !     I  do  absolve  thee  of  my  death. 

Theseus. 
How  say'st  thou  ? — dost  assoil  me  of  thy  blood  ?    1450 

Hippolytus. 
I  call  to  witness  Bow-queen  Artemis. 

Theseus. 
Dearest,  how  noble  show'st  thou  to  thy  sire  ! 

Hippolytus. 
Father,  farewell  thou  too — untold  farewells  ! 

Theseus. 
Woe  for  thy  reverent  soul,  thy  righteous  heart  ! 

Hippolytus. 
Pray  to  have  such  sons — sons  in  wedlock  born.       1455 

Theseus. 
Forsake  me  not,  my  son  ! — be  strong  to  bear ! 

Hippolytus. 

My  strength  is  overborne — I  am  gone,  my  father. 
Cover  my  face  with  mantles  with  all  speed.  [Dies. 


ig4  EURIPIDES. 


Theseus. 

O  bounds  of  Athens,  Pallas'  glorious  realm, 

What  hero  have  ye  lost  !     Ah,  woe  is  me  !  1460 

Kypris,  how  oft  shall  I  recall  thy  wrong  ! 

Chorus. 

On  the  city  hath  lighted  a  stroke  without  warning, 

On  all  hearts  desolation. 
Rain  down,  O  ye  fast-falling  tears  of  our  mourning  ! 
When  the  mighty  are  fallen,  their  burial-oblation   1465 

Is  the  wail  of  a  nation.1 

[Exeunt  Omnes. 

1  1462-66  allude  to  the  death  of  Pericles,  which  happened 
shortly  before  the  representation  of  this  play.  The  poet  in 
fact  changed,  to  meet  the  occasion,  the  original  ending, 
which  ran  thus  : — 

O  blest  one,  what  honours  have  fallen  to  thee, 

O  hero,  because  of  thy  chastity  ! 

Never  shall  aught  be  more  of  worth 

Than  virtue  unto  the  sous  of  earth  ; 

For  soon  or  late  on  the  fear  of  God 

Goodly  reward  shall  be  bestowed. 

[Stobaeus,  Florilegium.] 


HECUBA 


ARGUMENT. 

When  Troy  was  taken  by  the  Greeks,  Hecuba,  the  wife 
of  Priam,  and  her  daughters,  Kassandra  the  prophetess, 
and  Polyxena,   with    the   other  women    of   Troy,   were 
made  slaves,  being  portioned  among  the  victors,  so  that 
Kassandra   became  the  concubine  of  Agamemnon.     But 
Polydorus,  the  youngest  of  Priam's  sons,  had  long  ere 
this    been    sent,   with   much    treasure   of  gold,  for   safe 
keeping  to  his  father  s  friend,  Polymestor  king  of  Thrace, 
so  that  his  mother  had  one  consolation  of  hope  amidst 
her   afflictions.       Note    the    host    of   Greece   could    not 
straightway   sail  home,  because   to   the    spirit    of  their 
dead  hero  Achilles  was  given  power  to  hold  the  winds 
from  blowing,  till  meet  sacrifice  were  rendered  to  him, 
even  a  maiden  of  Troy,  most  beautiful  of  the  seed  royal ; 
and  for   this    they   chose    Polyxena.      And    now    king 
Polymestor,    lusting   for    the    gold,    and   fearing    no 
vengeance  of  man,  sleiu  his  ward,  the  lad  Polydorus, 
and  flung   his    body    into   the    sea,  so    that  it    was    in 
process  of  time  cast  up  by  the  waves  on  the  shore  whereby 
was  the  camp  of  the  Greeks,  and  was  brought  to  Hecuba. 
And   herein    are    told   the  sorrow   if  Hecuba   and  her 
revenge. 


DRAMATIS  PERSON /£. 

Phantom    of    Polydorus,    son    of  Priam    King   of  Troy,   and 
Hecuba. 

Hecuba,  wife  of  Priam,  and  mother  of  Polydorus  and  Polyxena 

Polyxena,  youngest  daughter  of  Priam  and  Hecuba. 

Odysseus,  chief  est  in  subtlety  of  the  Greeks,  King  of  Ithaca. 

Talthybius,  herald  of  King  Agamemnon. 

Agamemnon,  King  of  Mycenw,  and  captain  of  the  host  of  Greece. 

Polymestor,    King  of    Eastern    Thrace,    which   is   called   the 

Chersonese. 
Handmaid  of  Hecuba. 
Chorus  of  captive  Trojan  women. 
Attendants,  Greek  and  Thracian  guards,  captive  women. 

Scene  : — Before    Agamemnon's   tent   in    the   camp    of    the 
Greeks  on  the  coast  of  the  Thracian  Chersonese. 


HECUBA. 


The  phantom  of  Polydorus  appears  hovering  over  the  tent 

of  Agamemnon. 

Polydorus. 

I  come  from  vaults  of  death,  from  gates  of  darkness, 

Where  from  the  Gods  aloof  doth  Hades  dwell, 

Polydorus,  born  of  Hecuba,  Kisseus'  child, 

And  Priam,  who,  when  peril  girt  the  town 

Of  Phrygians,  by  the  spear  of  Greece  to  fall,  5 

In  fear  from  Troyland  privily  sent  me  forth 

To  Polymestor's  halls,  his  Thracian  friend, 

Lord  of  the  fair  tilth-lands  of  Chersonese, 

Who  with  the  spear  rules  that  horse-loving  folk. 

And  secretly  with  me  my  sire  sent  forth  10 

Much  gold,  that,  should  the  towers  of  Ilium  fall, 

His  sons  yet  living  might  not  beggared  be. 

Youngest  of  Priam's  house  was  I  :  for  this 

He  sent  me  forth  the  land,  whose  youthful  arm 

Availed  not  or  to  sway  the  shield  or  spear.  15 

So,  while  unbowed  the  land's  defences  stood, 

And  yet  unshattered  were  the  towers  of  Troy, 

While  triumphed  yet  my  brother  Hector's  spear, 

Fair-nurtured  by  the  Thracian,  my  sire's  friend, 

Like  some  young  sapling  grew  I — hapless  I  !  20 


2oo  EURIPIDES. 


But,  when  Troy  perished,  perished  Hector's  soul, 

And  my  sire's  hearths  were  made  a  desolation, 

And  himself  at  the  god-built  altar  fell 

Slain  by  Achilles'  son,  the  murder-stained, 

Then  me  for  that  gold's  sake  my  father's  friend  25 

Slays,  and  the  slaughtered  wretch  mid  sea-surge  cast, 

That  in  his  halls  himself  might  keep  the  gold. 

Here  on  the  beach  I  welter,  surf-borne  there 

Drift  on  the  racing  waves'  recoil  and  rush, 

Tombless,  unwept.     O'er  my  dear  mother's  head        30 

Now  flit  I,  leaving  tenantless  my  body. 

This  is  the  third  day  that  I  hover  so, 

Even  all  the  time  that  in  this  Chersonese 

My  hapless  mother  tarrieth,  haled  from  Troy. 

And  all  the  Achaians  idle  with  their  ships  35 

Sit  on  the  beaches  of  this  Thracian  land. 

For  Peleus'  son  above  his  tomb  appeared, 

And  all  the  Hellenic  host  Achilles  stayed, 

Even  as  they  homeward  aimed  the  brine-dipt  oar, 

And  claimed  for  his  Polyxena  my  sister,  40 

For  sacrifice  and  honour  to  his  tomb ; 

Yea,  and  shall  win,  nor  of  his  hero-friends 

Giftless  shall  be.     And  Fate  is  leading  on 

Unto  her  death  my  sister  on  this  day. 

And  of  two  children  shall  my  mother  see  45 

Two  corpses,  mine,  and  that  her  hapless  daughter's. 

For  I,  to  gain  a  tomb,  will — wretch — appear 

Before  her  handmaid's  feet  amidst  the  surge. 

For  with  the  Lords  of  Death  have  I  prevailed 

'Twixt  mother-hands  to  fall,  and  win  a  tomb.  50 

Accomplished  shall  be  all  for  which  1  longed. 

But  aged  Hecuba's  sight  will  I  avoid  ; 

For  forth  of  Agamemnon's  tent  she  sets 


HECUBA.  201 

Her  feet,  appalled  by  this  my  ghostly  phantom. 

Hecuba,  dressed  as  a  slave',  and  supported  by  fellow- 
captives,  appears  coming  out  of  Agamemnon's  tent . 

Mother,  who  after  royal  halls  hast  seen  55 

The  day  of  thraldom,  how  thy  depth  of  woe 
Equals  thine  height  of  weal !     A  God  bears  down 
The  scale  with  olden  bliss  heaped,  ruining  thee. 

\Exit.~] 
Hecuba. 

Lead  forth,  O  my  children,  the  stricken  in  years  from 
the  tent.  [60 

0  lead  her,  upbearing  the  steps  of  your  fellow-thrall 
Now,  O   ye  daughters  of  Troy,  but  of  old  your 

queen. 
Clasp  me,  uphold,  help  onward  the  eld-forspent, 

Laying  hold  of  my  wrinkled  hand,  lest  for  weakness 
I  fall  ; 
And,  sustained  by  a  curving  arm,  thereon  as  I  lean, 
I  will  hasten  onward  with  tottering  pace, 
Speeding  my  feet  in  a  laggard's  race. 
O  lightning-splendour  of  Zeus,  O  mirk  of  the  night, 

Why  quake  I  for  visions  in  slumber  that  haunt  me 
With  terrors,  with   phantoms  ?      O    Earth's  majestic 
might,  70 

Mother  of  dreams  that  hover  in  dusk- winged  flight, 

1  cry  to  the  vision  of  darkness  "  Avaunt  thee  !" — 
The  dream  of  my  son  who  was  sent  unto  Thrace  to  be 

saved  from  the  slaughter, 
The  dream  that  I  saw  of  Polyxena's  doom,  my  dear- 
loved  daughter, 
Which  I  saw,  which  I  knew,  which  abideth  to  daunt 
me. 

Q 


202  EURIPIDES. 


Gods  of  the  Underworld,  save  ye  my  son, 

Mine  house's  anchor,  its  only  one,  80 

By  the  friend  of  his  father  warded  well 

Where  the  snows  of  Thrace  veil  forest  and  fell  ! 

But  a  strange  new  stroke  draweth  near, 
And  a  strain  of  wailing  for  them  that  wail. 
Ah,  never  as  now  did  the  heart  in  me  quail 

With  the  thrilling  of  ceaseless  fear. 
O  that  Kassandra  I  might  but  descry 
To  arrede  me  my  dreams,  O  daughters  of  Troy, 
Or  Helenus,  god-taught  seer  ! 
For  a  dappled  fawn  I  beheld  which  a  wolf's  red  fangs 
were  tearing,  90 

Which  he   dragged  from   my  knees  whereto  she  had 
clung  in  her  piteous  despairing. 

This  terror  withal  on  my  spirit  is  come, 
That  the  ghost  of  the  mighty  Achilles  hath  risen,  and 
stood 
High  on  the  crest  of  his  earth -heaped  tomb  ; 
And  he  claimeth  a  guerdon  of  honour,  the  spilling  of 
blood, 
And  a  woe-stricken  Trojan  maiden's  doom. 

0  Gods,  I  am  suppliant  before  you  ! — in  any  wise  turn, 

I  implore  you, 

This  fate  from  the  child  of  my  womb  ! 

Enter  Chorus  of  Trojan  Captive  Women. 

Chorus. 

1  have  hasted  hitherward  ;  the  pavilions  of  my  lord,  100 

O  my  queen,  have  I  forsaken,  in  the  which  I  sojourn 
here, 


HECUBA.  203 


Whom  the  lot  hath  doomed  to  fall  unto  a  king,  a  thrall 
From  Ilium  chased,  the  quarry  of  Achaian  hunters' 
spear, — 

Not  for  lightening  of  thy  pain  ;  nay,  a  burden  have  I 
ta'en 

Of  heavy  tidings,  herald  of  sore  anguish  unto  thee, 
For  that  met  is  the  array  of  Achaia,  and  they  say 

That  thy  child  unto  Achilles  a  sacrifice  must  be.  no 

For  thou  knowest  how  in  sheen  of  golden  armour  seen 
He  stood  upon  his  tomb,  and  on  the  ocean-pacing 
ships 
Laid  a  spell,  that  none  hath  sailed, — yea,  though  the 
halliards  brailed 
The  sails  up  to  the  yards  ; — and  a  cry  rang  from  his 
lips  : 

"  Ho,  Danaans  !  whither  now,  leaving  unredeemed  your 
vow 
Of  honour   to   my   tomb,    and    my    glory    spurned 
away  ?  " 
Then  a  surge  of  high  contention  clashed  :  the  spear-host 
in  dissension  120 

Was  cleft,  some  crying,  "  Yield  his  tomb  the  victim  !  " 
—others,  "  Nay  !  " 

Now  the  King  was  fervent  there  that  thy  daughter  they 
should  spare, 
For  that  Agamemnon  loveth  thy  prophet-bacchanal. 
But  the  sons  of  Theseus  twain,1  Athens'  scions,  for  thy 
bane 
Pleaded  both,  yet   for  the  victim  did  their  vote  at 
variance  fall. 

1  Demophon  and  Akamas,  sons  of  Theseus  by  Phaedra. 

Q  2 


204  EURIPIDES. 


"  Ye   cannot   choose  but    crown    with    the    life-blood 
streaming  down 
Achilles'   grave!"   they  clamoured — "and,   for   this 
Kassandra's  bed, 
Shall  any  dare  prefer  to  Achilles'  prowess  her —       130 
A  concubine,  a  bondslave  ? — It  shall  never  be  !  "  they 
said. 

But  the  vehemence  of  speech,  each  contending  against 
each, 
Was   balanced,    as   it    were,    till  the  prater  subtle- 
souled, 
The  man  of  honied  tongue,  the  truckler  to  the  throng, 
Laertes'  spawn,  'gan  fashion  the  host  unto  his  mould  : 

"  We  may  not  thrust  aside  like  an  outcast  wretch,"  he 
cried, 
"  The  bravest  Danaan  heart  and  the  stoutest  Danaan 
hand, 
All  to  spare  our  hands  the  stain  of  the  blood  of  bond- 
maid slain, 
Neither  suffer  that  a  voice  from  the  ranks  of  them 
that  stand 

In  the  presence  of  Hell's  Queen  should  with  scoffing 
bitter-keen 
Cry, '  Thankless  from  the  plains  of  Troy  the  Danaans 
have  sped,  140 

Thankless  unto  Danaan   kin   whose  graves  are  thick 
therein, 
Who  died  to  save  their  brethren — the  soon -forgotten 
dead  !  '  " 

And   Odysseus  draweth  near — even  now  shall  he  be 
here 


HECUBA.  205 


From  thy  breast  to  rend  thy  darling,  from  thine  age- 
enfeebled  grasp. 
Hie  thee  to  the  temples  now  :  haste,  before  the  altars 
bow : 
Crouch  low  to  Agamemnon,  his  knees  in  suppliance 
clasp. 

Lift  up  thy  voice  and  cry  to  the  Gods  that  sit  on  high  : 
Let  the  Nether-dwellers  hear  it  through  their  dark- 
ness ringing  wild. 
For,  except  they  turn  and  spare,  and  thy  prevalence  of 
prayer  1 50 

Redeem  thee  from  bereavement  of  thy  ruin-stricken 
child, 

Thou  must  surely  live  to  gaze  where  a  maiden  on  her 
face 
On   a    grave-mound    lieth    slaughtered,    while    the 
darkly-gleaming  tide 
Welleth,    welleth   from    the   neck   which    the    golden 
mockeries  deck, 
And  all   her  body  crimsons  in  the  bubbling  horror 
dyed. 

Hecuba. 

Woe  for  mine  anguish  !  what  outcry  availeth 

To  thrill  forth  its  agony-throes  ? 
What  wailing  its  fulness  of  torment  outwaileth — 
Wretched  eld — bitter  bondage  Avhere  heart  and  flesh 

faileth  ? 

Ah  me  for  my  woes  ! 

What  champion  is  left  me  ? — what  sons  to  defend 
me  ?■ —  160 

What  city  remains  to  me  ?     Gone 


2o6  EURIPIDES. 


Are  my  lord  and  my  sons  !     Whither  now  shall  I 

wend  me  ? 
Whither  flee  ? — Is  there  God — is  there  fiend  shall 

befriend  me  ? 

Alone — alone  ! 

Daughters  of  Troy — O  ye  heralds  of  ruin,  ye  heralds  of 
ruin  ! — 
What  profits  my  life  any  more,  whom  your  words 
have  undone,  have  undone  ? 
Now   unto   yonder  pavilion,   to   tell  to  my  child   her 
undoing,  170 

Lead,  O  ye  wretchedest  feet,  lead  ye  the  eld-stricken 
one ! 

O  daughter,  O  child  of  a  mother  most  wretched,  forth 
faring,  forth  faring, 
Come  from  the  tent,   O   hearken   the  voice  of  thy 
mother's  word, 
To  the  end  thou  mayst  know  what  a  rumour  of  awful 
despairing,  despairing, 
Concerning  the  life  of  thee,  my  beloved,  but  now 
have  I  heard  ! 

Enter  Polyxena. 

Polyxena. 

O  mother,  my  mother,  what  meaneth  thy  crying  ? 

What  strange  dread  thing 

Is  this  that  thou  heraldest 
That  hath  scared  me,  like  to  a  bird  forth-flying         180 
On  startled  wing 

Out  of  the  peace  of  her  nest  ? 

Hecuba. 
Alas  !  woe's  me,  my  daughter  ! 


HECUBA.  207 


POLYXENA. 

What  word  of  ill-boding  is  thine  ?    From  thy  preluding 
ills  I  divine. 

Hecuba. 

Ah  me,  life  doomed  unto  slaughter  ! 

Polyxena. 

Tell  it  out,  tell  it  out,  neither  hide  o'erlong  ; 

For  mine  heart,  my  mother,  is  heavy  with  dread 
For  the  tidings  that  come  in  thy  moan 

Hecuba. 
O  child,  O  child  of  the  grief-distraught ! 

Polyxena. 
Ah,  what  is  the  message  to  me  thou  has  brought  ? 

Hecuba. 

Death  :  for  the  Argive  warrior-throng 

Are  in  one  mind  set,  that  thy  blood  be  shed  190 

On  the  grave  of  Peleus'  son. 

Polyxena. 

Ah  me,  my  mother,  how  can  thy  tongue 
Speak  out  the  horror  ? — Let  all  be  said  : 
O  mother  mine,  say  on. 

Hecuba. 

O  child,  I  have  heard  it,  the  shame  and  the  wrong, 
Of  the  Argive  vote,  of  the  doom  forth  sped, 
Of  the  hope  of  thy  life  gone— gone  ! 


2oS  EURIPIDES. 


POLYXENA. 

O  stricken  of  anguish  beyond  all  other  ! 
O  filled  with  affliction  of  desolate  days  ! 

What  tempest,  what  tempest  of  outrage  and  shame, 
Too  loathly  to  look  on,  too  awful  to  name,        [200 
Hath  a  fiend  uproused,  that  on  thee  it  came, 
That  thy  woeful  child  by  her  woeful  mother 
Nevermore  down  thraldom's  paths  shall  pace  ! 

For  me,  like  a  youngling  mountain -pastured, 
Like  a  child  of  the  herd,  shalt  thou  see  torn  far, 
In  woe  from  thy  woeful  embraces  torn, 
And,  with  throat  by  the  steel  of  the  altar  shorn, 
Down  to  the  underworld  darkness  borne, 
In  the  Land  Unseen  to  lie,  overmastered 
Of  misery,  there  where  the  death-stricken  are.       210 

For  thee,  for  the  dark  days  closing  around  thee, 
Mother,  with  uttermost  wailings  I  cry  : 
But  for  this,  the  life  that  I  now  must  lack, 
For  all  the  ruin  thereof  and  the  wrack, 
I  wail  not,  I,  as  I  gaze  aback  : — 
O  nay,  but  a  happier  lot  hath  found  me, 
Forasmuch  as  to  me  it  is  given  to  die. 

Chorus. 

But  lo,  Odysseus  comes  with  hurrying  foot, 
To  tell  thee,  Hecuba,  the  new  decree, 

Enter  Odysseus. 

Odysseus. 

Lady,  thou  know'st,  I  trow,  the  host's  resolve, 

And  the  vote  cast,  yet  will  I  tell  it  thee  : 

The  Achaians  will  to  slay  Polyxena  220 


HECUBA.  209 


Thy  child,  upon  Achilles*  grave-mound's  height. 

Me  they  appoint  to  usher  thitherward 

And  bring  the  maid  :  the  president  and  priest 

Of  sacrifice  Achilles'  son  shall  be. 

Know'st  thou  thy  part  then  ? — be  not  torn  away       225 

Perforce,  nor  brave  me  to  the  strife  of  hands  ; 

But  know  thy  might,  thine  imminence  of  ills. 

Wise  is  it  even  mid  ills  to  hearken  reason. 

Hecuba. 

Woe  !     A  sore  trial  is  at  hand,  meseems, 

Burdened  with  groanings,  and  fulfilled  of  tears.         230 

I  died  not  there  where  well  might  I  have  died  ; 

Nor  Zeus  destroyed,  but  holdeth  me  in  life 

Xo  see — O  wretch  ! — ills  more  than  ills  o'erpast. 

Yet,  if  the  bond  may  question  of  the  free 

Things  that  should  vex  them  not,  nor  gall  the  heart, 

Then  fits  it  that  thou  be  the  questioned  now,  [235 

And  that  I  ask,  and  hearken  thy  reply. 

Odysseus. 
So  be  it :  ask,  I  grudge  not  the  delay. 

Hecuba. 

Rememberest  thou  thy  coming  unto  Troy 

A  spy,  in  rags  vile-vestured  ;  from  thine  eyes  240 

Trickled  adown  thy  cheeks  the  gouts  of  gore  ? 

Odysseus. 
I  do,  for  deep  it  sank  into  mine  heart. 

Hecuba. 
And  Helen  knew  thee,  and  told  none  save  me  ? 


aio  EURIPIDES. 


Odysseus. 
I  call  to  mind  :  mid  peril  grim  I  fell. 

Hecuba. 
And  to  my  knees  didst  cling,  wast  lowly  then  ?  245 

Odysseus. 
With  grasp  of  death  closed  on  thy  robes  mine  hand. 

Hecuba. 
Ay,  and  what  saidst  thou — thou  my  bondman  then  ? 

Odysseus. 
Words — words  full  many  found  I,  death  to  'scape. 

Hecuba. 
I  saved  thee— saved  thee, — sent  thee  forth  the  land  ? 

Odysseus. 
Ay,  thanks  to  thee,  I  see  the  sun's  light  now.  250 

Hecuba. 

Art  thou  not  caitiff  proved  then  by  these  plots, 

Who  wast  by  me  so  dealt  with  as  thou  sayest, 

Yet  dost  us  nought  good,  but  thine  utmost  ill  ? 

A  thankless  spawn,  all  ye  that  grasp  at  honour 

By  babbling  to  the  mob  ! — let  me  not  know  you,      255 

W7ho  injure  friends,  and  nothing  reck  thereof, 

So  ye  may  something  say  to  please  the  rabble  ! 

What  crafty  wiliness  imagined  ye 

This,  on  my  child  to  pass  your  murder-vote  ? 

Was't  duty  drew  them  on  to  human  slaughter  260 


HECUBA.  211 


Upon  a  grave  more  meet  for  oxen  slain  ? 

Or  doth  Achilles,  fain,  to  requite  with  death 

His  slayers,  justly  aim  death's  shaft  at  her  ? 

Now  never  aught  of  harm  wrought  she  to  him. 

Helen  should  he  demand,  his  tomb's  lit  victim  :         265 

'Twas  she  to  Troy  that  drew  him,  and  destroyed. 

But  if  some  chosen  captive  needs  must  die, 

In  beauty  peerless,  not  to  us  points  this  ; 

For  Tyndareus'  daughter  matchless  is  in  form, 

And  was  found  wronging  him  no  less  than  we.  270 

This  plea  against  his  "  justice"  I  array. 

But  what  return  thou  ow'st  me,  on  my  claim, 

Hear — thou  didst  touch  mine  hand,  as  thou  dost  own, 

And  wrinkled  cheek,  low  cowering  at  my  feet. 

Lo,  in  my  turn  thine  hand,  thy  beard,  1  touch,  275 

That  grace  of  old  reclaiming,  now  thy  suppliant. 

Not  from  mine  arms  tear  thou  my  child  away, 

Nor  slay  ye  her  :  suffice  the  already  dead. 

In  her  I  joy,  in  her  forget  my  woes. 

For  many  a  lost  bliss  she  my  solace  is  : 

My  city  she,  nurse,  staff,  guide  for  my  feet. 

Not  tyrannously  the  strong  should  use  their  strength, 

Nor  they  which  prosper  think  to  prosper  aye. 

I  too  once  was,  but  now  am  I  no  more, 

And  all  my  weal  one  day  hath  reft  from  me.  285 

O,  by  thy  beard,  have  thou  respect  to  me  ! 

Pity  me  :  go  thou  to  Achaia's  host  ; 

Persuade  them  how  that  shame  it  is  to  slay 

Women,  whom  first  ye  slew  not,  when  ye  tore 

These  from  the  altars,  but  for  pity  spared.  290 

Lo,  the  same  law  is  stablished  among  you 

For  free  and  bond  as  touching  blood-shedding. 

Thine  high  repute,  how  ill  soe'er  thou  speak, 


2i2  EURIPIDES. 


Shall  sway  them  :  for  the  same  speech  carrieth  not  [295 
Like  weight  from  men  contemned  and  men  revered. 

Chorus. 

There  is  no  human  nature  so  relentless 

That,  hearkening  to  thy  groanings  and  thy  wails 

Long  lengthened  out,  would  not  let  fall  the  tear. 

Odysseus. 

Receive  instruction,  Hecuba,  nor  him 

For  wrath  count  foe,  who  wisely  counselleth.  300 

Thy  life,  through  whom  I  found  deliverance, 

Ready  am  I  to  save ;   I  stand  thereto. 

But  what  to  all  I  said,  I  unsay  not — 

That  now,  Troy  taken,  we  should  yield  thy  child, 

At  our  great  champion's  claim,  for  sacrifice.  305 

For  of  this  cometh  weakness  in  most  states, 

That,  though  a  man  be  brave  and  patriot-souled, 

No  guerdon  gains  he  more  than  baser  men. 

But  we,  we  deem  Achilles  honour-worthy, 

Who  died  for  Hellas  nobly  as  man  may.  310 

Were  this  not  shame  then,  as  a  friend  to  treat 

Him  living,  but  no  more  when  he  is  gone  ? 

Yea,  what  will  one  say  then,  if  once  again 

The  host  must  gather  for  the  strife  with  foes. 

"  Fight  shall  we,"  will  they  cry,  "  or  cling  to  life,     315 

Beholding  how  unhonoured  go  the  dead  ?  ' 

Yea,  for  myself,  how  scant  soe'er  in  life 

My  fare  for  daily  need,  this  should  suffice  : 

Yet  fain  would  I  my  tomb  were  reverence-crowned — 

Mine  ;  for  no  fleeting  gratitude  is  this.  320 

But,  if  thou  plain  of  hardship,  hear  mine  answer  : 

Yv'ith  us  there  be  grey  matrons,  aged  sires, 


HECUBA.  213 


Not  any  whit  less  wretched  than  art  thou, 

And  brides  of  noblest  bridegrooms  left  forlorn, 

Whose  corpses  yonder  dust  of  Ida  shrouds.  325 

Endure  this  :  we,  if  err  we  do  to  honour 

The  brave,  content  will  stand  convict  of  folly. 

But  ye  barbarians,  neither  count  as  friends 

Your  friends,  nor  render  your  heroic  dead 

Homage,  that  Hellas  so  may  prosperous  rise,  330 

And  your  reward  may  match  your  policy. 

Chorus. 

Woe  !     What  a  curse  is  thraldom's  nature,  aye 
Enduring  wrong  by  strong  constraint  o'erborne  ! 

Hecuba. 

My  daughter,  wasted  are  my  words  in  air, 

Flung  vainly  forth  my  pleadings  for  thy  life.  335 

If  thou  canst  aught  prevail  beyond  thy  mother, 

Be  instant  ;  as  with  nightingale's  sad  throat 

Moan,  moan,  that  thou  be  not  bereft  of  life. 

Fall  piteously  at  this  Odysseus'  knee  : 

Melt  him.     A  plea  thou  hast — he  too  hath  babes  ;  340 

Well  may  he  so  compassionate  thy  lot. 

Polyxena. 

I  see,  Odysseus,  how  thou  hid'st  thine  hand 

Beneath  thy  vesture,  how  thou  turn'st  away 

Thy  face,  lest  I  should  touch  thy  beard.     Fear  not : 

From  Zeus  safe  art  thou,  from  the  Suppliant's  Champion. 

I  will  go  with  thee,  both  for  that  I  must,  [345 

And  that  I  long  to  die.     And,  were  I  loth, 

A  coward  girl  life-craving  were  I  proved. 

For,  wherefore  should  I  live,  whose  sire  was  king 

Of  all  the  Phrygians  ?     Such  was  my  life's  dawn  :  350 


2 14  EURIPIDES. 


Thereafter  was  I  nurtured  mid  bright  hopes, 

A  bride  for  kings,  for  whose  hand  rivalry 

Ran  high,  whose  hall  and  hearth  should  hail  me  queen. 

And  I — ah  me  ! — was  Lady  of  the  Dames 

Of  Ida,  cynosure  amidst  the  maidens,  355 

Peer  of  the  Gods — except  that  man  must  die  :— 

And  now  a  slave  !     The  name  alone  constrains  me 

To  long  for  death,  so  strange  it  is  to  me. 

More—haply  upon  brutal-hearted  lords 

I  might  light,  one  that  would  for  silver  buy  me, —    360 

Sister  of  Hector  and  of  many  a  chief, — 

Force  me  to  grind  the  quern  his  halls  within, 

And  make  me  sweep  his  dwelling,  stand  before 

The  loom,  while  days  of  bitterness  drag  on. 

And,  somewhere  bought,  some  bondslave  shall  defile 

My  couch,  accounted  once  a  prize  for  princes.  [365 

Never  ! — free  light  mine  eyes  shall  last  behold  : 

To  Death  my  body  will  I  dedicate. 

Lead  on,  Odysseus,  lead  me  to  my  doom  ; 

For  I  see  no  assurance,  nor  in  hope,  370 

No,  nor  in  day-dreams,  of  good  days  to  be. 

Mother,  do  thou  in  no  wise  hinder  me 

By  word  or  deed  ;  but  thou  consent  with  me 

Unto  my  death,  ere  shame  unmeet  befall. 

For  whoso  is  not  wont  to  taste  of  ills  375 

Chafes,  while  he  bears  upon  his  neck  the  yoke, 

And  death  for  him  were  happier  far  than  life  ; 

For  life  ignoble  is  but  crushing  toil. 

Chorus. 

Strange  is  the  impress,  clear-stamped  upon  men, 

Of  gentle  birth,  and  aye  the  noble  name  380 

Higher  aspires  in  them  that  worthily  bear  it. 


HECUBA.  215 


Hecuba. 

My  daughter,  nobly  said  :  yet  anguish  cleaves 

Unto  that  "  nobly."     But  if  Peleus'  son 

Must  gain  this  grace,  and  ye  must  flee  reproach, 

Odysseus,  slay  not  her  in  any  wise  ;  385 

But  me,  lead  me  unto  Achilles'  pyre  : 

Stab  me,  spare  not  :  'twas  I  gave  Paris  birth 

Who  with  his  shafts  smote  Peleus'  son  and  slew. 

Odysseus. 

Not  thee,  grey  mother,  did  Achilles'  ghost 

Require  the  Achaian  men  to  slay,  but  her.  390 

Hecuba. 

Yet  ye — at  least  me  with  my  daughter  slay  : 
Then  twice  so  deep  a  draught  of  blood  shall  sink 
To  earth  and  to  the  dead  who  claimeth  this. 

Odysseus. 

Thy  daughter's  death  sufficeth  :   death  on  death 
Must  not  be  heaped.  Would  God  we  owed  not  this  !  395 

Hecuba. 
I  must — I  must  die  where  my  daughter  dies  ! 

Odysseus. 
Must  ? — I  knew  not  that  I  had  found  a  master  ! 

Hecuba. 
As  ivy  clings  to  oak  will  I  clasp  her. 

Odysseus. 
Not  if  thou  heed  a  wiser  than  thyself. 


:i6  EURIPIDES. 


Hecuba. 
Consent  I  will  not  to  let  go  my  child.  400 

Odysseus. 
Nor  I  will  hence  depart  and  leave  her  here. 

Polyxena. 

Mother,  heed  me  :  and  thou,  Laertes'  son, 
O  bear  with  parents  which  have  cause  to  rage. 
Mother,  poor  mother,  strive  not  with  the  strong. 
Wouldst  thou  be  earthward  hurled,    and  wound  thy 

flesh,  405 

Thine  aged  flesh,  with  violence  thrust  away  ? — 
Be  hustled  shamefully,  by  young  strong  arms 
Haled  ? — This  shouldst   thou.     Nay,   'tis  not   worthy 

thee. 
But  mother,  darling  mother,  give  thine  hand, 
Thy  dear,  dear  hand,  and  lay  thy  cheek  to  mine  :     410 
Since  never  more,  but  this  last  time  of  all 
Shall  I  behold  the  sun's  beam  and  his  orb. 
Receive  of  all  my  greetings  this  the  last  : — 
O  mother — breast  that  bare  me — I  pass  deathward. 

Hecuba. 
O  daughter,  I  shall  yet  live  on  in  bondage  !  415 

Polyxena. 
Bridegroom  nor  bridal ! — nought  of  all  my  due  ! 

Hecuba. 
Piteous  thy  plight,  my  child,  and  wretched  I. 


HECUBA.  217 


POLYXENA. 

There  shall  1  lie  in  Hades,  far  from  thee. 

Hecuba. 
Ah  me,  what  shall  I  do  ? — where  end  my  life  ? 

POLYXENA. 

To  die  a  slave,  whose  father  was  free-born  !  420 

Hecuba. 
In  fifty  sons  nor  part  nor  lot  have  I  ! 

Polyxena. 
What  shall  I  tell  to  Hector  and  thy  lord  ? 

Hecuba. 
Report  me  of  all  women  wretchedest. 

Polyxena. 
O  bosom,  breasts  that  sweetly  nurtured  me  ! 

Hecuba. 
Woe  is  thee,  daughter,  for  thy  fate  untimely  !  425 

Polyxena. 
Mother,  farewell  :   Kassandra,  fare  thee  well. 

Hecuba. 
Others  fare  well — not  for  thy  mother  this. 

Polyxena. 
Mid  Thracians  lives  my  brother  Polydorus. 


2i8  EURIPIDES. 


Hecuba. 
If  he  doth  live.     I  doubt  :  so  dark  is  all. 

POLYXENA. 

He  lives,  and  he  shall  close  thy  dying  eyes.  430 

Hecuba. 
I — I  have  died  ere  dying,  through  my  woes. 

Polyxena. 

Muffle  mine  head,  Odysseus,  and  lead  on. 

For,  ere  ye  slay  me,  hath  my  mother's  moan 

Melted  mine  heart,  and  mine  is  melting  hers. 

O  Light  ! — for  yet  on  thy  name  may  I  call —  435 

Yet  all  my  share  in  thee  is  that  scant  space 

Hence  to  the  sword-edge  and  Achilles'  pyre. 

[Exeunt  Odysseus  and  Polyxena. 

Hecuba. 

Ah  me  !   I  swoon — beneath  me  fail  my  limbs  ! 
O  daughter,  touch  thy  mother — reach  thine  hand — 
Give  it,  nor  childless  leave  me  ! — Friends — undone  ! — 
Oh  thus  to  see  that  sister  of  Zeus'  sons,  [440 

Helen  the  Spartan  ! — for  by  her  bright  eyes 
In  shameful  fall  she  brought  down  prosperous  Troy.1 

[Swoons. 


1  These  three  lines,  in  which  the  spirit  overcomes  the 
flesh  in  a  fierce  rally  of  the  failing  powers,  that  the  swoon- 
ing mother  may  concentrate  her  burning  sense  of  wrong, 
her  impotent  longing  for  vengeance,  in  a  curse  upon  the 
author  of  her  woes,  are  so  true  to  human  nature,  so  appro- 
priate to  the  character  of  Hecuba,  that  it  seems  strange 
that  commentators  should  have  proposed  to  omit  them  as 


HECUBA.  219 


Chorus.1 

(Sir.  1) 
O  breeze,  O  breeze,  over  sea-ways  racing, 

Who  onward  waftest  the  ocean-pacing 

Fleet-flying  keels  o'er  the  mere  dark-swelling, 
Whitherward  wilt  thou  bear  me,  the  sorrow-laden  ? 
From  what  slave-mart  shall  the  captive  maiden 

Pass  into  what  strange  master's  dwelling  ? 
To  a  Dorian  haven  ? — or  where,  overstreaming         450 
Fat  Phthia-land's  meads,  laugh  loveliest-gleaming 

Babe- waters  from  founts  of  Apidanus  welling  ? 

(Ant.  1) 
Or,  to  misery  borne  by  the  oars  brine-sweeping, 
In  the  island-halls  through  days  of  weeping 

Shall  we  dwell,  where  the  first-born  palm,  ascending 
From  the  earth,  with  the  bay  twined,  glorifying 
With  enshrining  frondage  the  couch  where  lying 

Dear  Leto  attained  to  her  travail's  ending,  460 

"feeble  and  unnatural."  It  is  a  significant,  touch  that 
Hecuba  can  imagine  for  the  author  of  her  sufferings  no 
sterner  retribution  than  even  such  sufferings  :— "O  daughter 
of  Babylon,  who  art  to  be  destroyed,  happy  shall  he  be  that 
rewardeth  thee  as  thou  hast  served  »s."  c.f.  also  11.  941-943 
of  this  play. 

1  This  has  been  cited  as  one  of  the  so-called  inappropriate 
and  irrelevant  chorus-songs  of  Euripides.  But  why 
should  the  poet,  after  bringing  the  situation  to  a  climax  in 
the  pathos  of  the  daughter's  farewell,  in  the  agony  of  the 
mother's  bereavement,  proceed  to  water  his  wine  by  obvious 
moralizings,  or  by  commonplaces  of  commiseration  ? 
When  to  add  words  of  direct  comment  on  a  perfect  situa- 
tion would  be  "  to  gild  refined  gold,"  we  may  trust 
Euripides'  artistic  sense  not  to  err.  But  that  their  fellow- 
captives,  in  view  of  what  had  befallen  these,  should  be  led 
to  forecast  their  own  fate,  was  (a)  appropriate,  for  the  theme 
had  been  already  suggested  by  the  words  of  Polyxena,  11. 
359-364;  (b)  natural,  if  Homer  was  natural  in  II.  xix.  301-2. 

R  2 


220  EURIPIDES. 


There  chanting  of  Artemis'  bow  all-golden, 
And  the  brows  with  the  frontlet  of  gold  enfolden, 
With  the  Delian  maidens  our  voices  blending  ? 

(Sir.  2) 
Or  in  Pallas*s  Town  to  the  car  all-glorious 

Shall  I  yoke  the  steeds  on  the  saffron -glowing1 
Veil  of  Athene,  where  flush  victorious 

The  garlands  that  cunningest  fingers  are  throwing 
In  manifold  hues  on  its  folds  wide-flowing, —         470 
Or  the  brood  of  the  Titans  whom  lightnings,  that 

fell 
Flame- wrapt  from  Kronion,  in  long  sleep  quell  ? 

(Ant.  2) 
Woe  for  our  babes,  for  our  fathers  hoary  ! 

Woe  for  our  country,  mid  smoke  and  smoulder 
Crashing  to  ruin,  and  all  her  glory 

Spear-spoiled  ! — and  an  alien  land  shall  behold  her 
Bond  who  was  free  ;  for  that  Asia's  shoulder       [480  ■ 
Is  bowed  under  Europe's  yoke,  and  I  dwell, 
An  exile  from  home,  in  a  dungeon  of  hell. 

Enter  Talthybius. 

Talthybius. 

Where  shall  I  find  her  that  of  late  was  queen 

Of  Ilium,  Hecuba,  ye  maids  of  Troy  ?  485 

Chorus. 

Lo  there,  anigh  thee,  on  the  ground  outstretched, 
Talthybius,  lies  she  muffled  in  her  robes. 

1  i.e.,  Embroider  thereon  the  chariot  and  horses  of 
Athene,  bearing  the  Goddess  to  battle  against  the  Giants. 
The  allusion  is  to  the  great  saffron-dyed  mantle  which  was 
carried,  outspread  like  a  sail,  in  solemn  procession  through 
the  streets  of  Athens  to  the  temple  on  the  Acropolis,  every 
fourth  year,  at  the  Great  Panathenaic  Festival. 


HECUBA.  221 


Talthybius. 


What  shall  I  say,  Zeus  ? — that  thou  look'st  on  men  ? 

Or  that  this  fancy  false  we  vainly  hold 

For  nought,  who  deem  there  is  a  race  of  Gods,         490 

While  chance  controlleth  all  things  among  men  ? 

This — was  she  not  the  wealthy  Phrygians'  queen  ? 

This — was  she  not  all-prosperous  Priam's  wife  ? 

And  now  her  city  is  all  spear-o'erthrown  ; 

Herself  a  slave,  old,  childless,  on  the  earth  495 

Lieth,  her  hapless  head  with  dust  defiled. 

Ah,  old  am  I,  yet  be  it  mine  to  die 

Ere  into  any  shameful  lot  I  fall  ! 

Arise,  ill-starred,  and  from  the  earth  uplift 

Thy  body  and  thine  head  all  snow-besprent.  500 

Hecuba. 

Ha,  who  art  thou  that  lettest  not  my  frame 
Rest  ? — why  disturb  my  grief,  whoe'er  thou  be  ? 

Talthybius. 

Talthybius  I,  the  Danaans'  minister, 
Of  Agamemnon  sent,  O  queen,  for  thee. 

Hecuba. 

Friend,  friend,  art  come  because  the  Achaians  will  505 
To  slay  me  too  ? — How  sweet  thy  tidings  were  ! 
Haste  we — make  speed — O  ancient,  lead  me  on. 

Talthybius. 

Lady,  that  thou  mayst  bury  thy  dead  child 

I  come  in  quest  of  thee  ;  and  sent  am  I 

Of  Atreus'  two  sons  and  the  Achaian  folk.  510 


222  EURIPIDES. 


Hecuba. 

Woe  ! — what   wouldst   say  ?      Not   as  to   one  death- 
doomed 
Cam'st  thou  to  us,  but  all  to  publish  ills  ? 
Child,  thou  hast  perished,  from  thy  mother  torn  ! 
Childless,  as  touching  thee,  am  I — ah  wretch  ! — 
How  did  ye  slay  her  ? — how  ? — with  reverence  meet, 
Or  with  brute  outrage,  as  men  slay  a  foe,  [515 

Ancient  ?     Tell  on,  though  all  unsweet  thy  tale. 

Talthybius. 

Twofold  tear-tribute  wouldst  thou  win  from  me 

In  pity  for  thy  child.     Mine  eyes  shall  weep 

The  tale,  as  by  the  grave  when  she  was  dying.         520 

There  met  was  all  Achaia's  warrior-host 

Thronged  at  the  grave  to  see  thy  daughter  slain. 

Then  took  Achilles'  son  Polyxena's  hand, 

And  on  the  mound's  height  set  her  :   I  stood  by. 

And  followed  of  the  Achaians  chosen  youths  525 

Whose  hands  should  curb  the  strugglings  of  thy  lamb. 

Then  taking  'twixt  his  hands  a  chalice  brimmed, 

Pure  gold,  Achilles'  son  to  his  dead  sire 

Drink-offerings  poured,  and  signed  me  to  proclaim 

Siience  unto  the  whole  Achaian  host.  530 

By  him  I  stood,  and  in  the  midst  thus  cried  : 

"  Silence,  Achaians  !     Hushed  be  all  the  host  ! 

Peace  ! — not  a  word  !  " — so  breathless  stilled  the  folk. 

Then  spake  the  son  of  Peleus  :  "  Father  mine, 

Accept  from  me  these  drops  propitiatory,  535 

Ghost-raising.     Draw  thou  nigh  to  drink  pure  blood 

Dark-welling  from  a  maid.     We  give  it  thee, 

The  host  and  I.     Gracious  to  us  be  thou  : 


HECUBA.  323 


Vouchsafe  us  to  cast  loose  the  sterns  and  curbs 

Of  these  ships,  kindly  home-return  to  win  540 

From  Troy,  and  all  to  reach  our  fatherland." 

So  spake  he  ;  in  that  prayer  joined  all  the  host  ; 

Then  grasped  his  golden-plated  falchion's  hilt, 

Drew  from  the  sheath,  and  to  those  chosen  youths 

Of  Argos'  war-host  signed  to  seize  the  maid.  545 

But  she,  being  ware  thereof,  spake  forth  this  speech  : 

"  O  Argives,  ye  which  laid  my  city  low, 

Free-willed  I  die  :  on  my  flesh  let  no  man 

Lay  hand  :  my  neck  unflinching  will  I  yield. 

But,  by  the  Gods,  let  me  stand  free,  the  while  550 

Ye  slay,  that  I  may  die  free  ;  for  I  shame 

Slave  to  be  called  in  Hades,  who  am  royal." 

"  Yea  !  "  like  a  great  sea  roared  the  host  :  the  King 

Spake  to  the  youths  to  let  the  maiden  go. 

And  they,  soon  as  they  heard  that  last  behest  555 

Of  him  of  chiefest  might,  drew  back  their  hands. 

And  she,  when  this  she  heard,  her  masters'  word, 

Her  vesture  grasped,  and  from  the  shoulder's  height 

Rent  it  adown  her  side,  down  to  the  waist, 

And  bosom  showed  and  breasts,  as  of  a  statue,         560 

Most  fair ;  and,  bowing  to  the  earth  her  knee, 

A  word,  of  all  words  most  heroic,  spake1 : 

"  Lo  here,  O  youth,  if  thou  art  fain  to  strike 

My  breast,  strike  home  :  but  if  beneath  my  neck 

Thou  wouidest,  here  my  throat  is  bared  to  thee."  .565 

And  he,  loth  and  yet  fain,  for  ruth  of  her, 

Cleaves  with  the  steel  the  channels  of  the  breath  : 

Forth  gushed  the  life-springs:  but  she,  even  in  death. 

Took  chiefest  thought  decorously  to  fall, 

1  But  the  Scholiast  interprets — 

"  She  spake  a  word,  of  all  most  pitiful :  " 


224  EURIPIDES. 


Hiding  what  hidden  from  men's  eyes  should  be.       570 
But  when  she  had  spent  her  breath  'neath  that  death- 
stroke, 
Each  Argive  'gan  his  task — no  man  the  same  : 
But  some  upon  the  dead  were  strawing  leaves 
Out  of  their  hands,  and  some  heap  high  the  pyre, 
Bringing  pine-billets  thither  :  whoso  bare  not  575 

Heard  such  and  such  rebukes  of  him  that  bare  : 
"  Dost  stand  still,  basest  heart,  with  nought  in  hand — 
Robe  for  the  maiden,  neither  ornament  ? 
Nought  wilt  thou  give  to  one  in  courage  matchless, 
Noblest  of  soul  ?  " 

Such  is  the  tale  I  tell  580 

Of  thy  dead  child.     Most  blest  in  motherhood 
I  count  thee  of  all  women,  and  most  hapless. 

Chorus. 

Dread  bale  on  Priam's  line  and  city  hath  poured 
Its  lava-flood  : — 'tis  heaven's  resistless  doom. 

Hecuba. 

Daughter,  I  know  not  on  what  ills  to  look,  585 

So  many  throng  me  :  if  to  this  I  turn, 

That  hindereth  me  :  thence  summoneth  me  again 

Another  grief,  on-ushering  ills  on  ills. 

And  now  I  cannot  from  my  soul  blot  out 

Thine  agony,  that  I  should  wail  it  not.  590 

Yet  hast  thou  barred  the  worst,  proclaimed  to  me 

So  noble.     Lo,  how  strange,  that  evil  soil 

Heaven-blest  with  seasons  fair,  bears  goodly  crops, 

While  the  good,  if  it  faileth  of  its  dues, 

Gives  evil  fruit  :  but  always  among  men  595 

The  caitiff  nothing  else  than  evil  is, 


HECUBA.  225 


The  noble,  noble  ;  nor  'neath  fortune's  stress 

Marreth  his  nature,  but  is  good  alway. 

By  blood,  or  nurture,  is  the  difference  made  ? 

Sooth,  gentle  nurture  bringeth  lessoning  600 

In  nobleness  ;  and  whoso  learns  this  well 

By  honour's  touchstone  knoweth  baseness  too  : — 

Ah,  unavailing  arrows  of  the  mind1  ! 

But  go  thou,  to  the  Argives  this  proclaim, 

That  none  my  daughter  touch,  but  that  they  keep   605 

The  crowd  thence  :  in  a  war-array  untold 

Lawless  the  mob  is,  and  the  shipmen's  license 

Outraveneth  flame.     'Tis  sin  if  one  sin  not.2 

[Exit  Talthy bins. 
But,  ancient  handmaid,  take  a  vessel  thou, 
And  dip,  and  of  the  sea-brine  hither  bring,  610 

That  with  the  last  bath  I  may  wash  my  child, — 
The  bride  unwedded,  maid  a  maid  no  more,3 — 
And  lay  her  out — as  meet  is,  how  can  I  ? 
Yet  as  I  may  ;  for  lo,  what  plight  is  mine  ! 
Jewels  from  fellow-captives  will  I  gather  615 

Which  dwell  my  neighbour-thralls  these  tents  within, 
If  haply  any,  to  our  lords  unknown, 
Hath  any  stolen  treasure  of  her  home. 
O  stately  halls,  O  home  so  happy  once  ! 
O  rich  in  fair  abundance,  goodliest  offspring,  620 

Priam  ! — and  I,  a  grey  head  crowned  with  sons  ! 
How  are  we  brought  to  nought,  of  olden  pride 
Stripped  bare !     And  lo,  we  men  are  puffed  up, 

1  No   philosophic    moralizing   can    avail  to  assuage   my 
sorrow. 

2  "  They  think  it  strange  that  ye  run  not  with  them  into 
the  same  excess  of  riot."     (1  Pet.  iv.,  4.) 

3  As  being  united  to  Achilles  in  death. 


zz6  EURIPIDES. 


One  of  us  for  the  riches  of  his  house, 

And  one  for  honour  in  the  mouths  of  men  !  625 

These  things  be  nought.     All  vain  the  heart's  devisings, 

The  vauntings  of  the  tongue  !     Most  blest  is  he 

To  whom  no  ill  befalls  as  days  wear  on. 


Chorus. 


My  doom  of  disaster  was  written, 

The  doom  of  mine  anguish  was  sealed,  630 

When  of  Paris  the  pine-shafts  were  smitten 

Upon  Ida,  that  earthward  they  reeled, 
To  ride  over  ridges  surf-whitened 

Till  the  bride-bed  of  Helen  was  won, 
Woman  fairest  of  all  that  be  lightened 
By  the  gold  of  the  sun. 

(Ant.) 
For  battle-toils,  yea,  desolations 

Yet  sorer  around  us  close  ; 
And  the  folly  of  one  is  the  nation's  640 

Destruction  ;  of  alien  foes 
Cometh  ruin  by  Simois'  waters. 

So  judged  is  the  doom  that  was  given 
When  on  Ida  the  strife  of  the  Daughters 
Of  the  Blessed  was  striven, 

(Epode) 
For  battle,  for  murder,  for  ruin 

Of  mine  halls  : — by  Eurotas  is  moan,  650 

Where  with  tears  for  their  homes'  undoing 

The  maidens  Laconian  groan, 
Where  rendeth  her  tresses  hoary 

The  mother  for  sons  that  are  dead, 
And  her  cheeks  with  woe-furrows  are  gory, 
And  her  fingers  are  red. 


(St,:) 


HECUBA.  zzj 


Enter  Handmaid,  with  bearers  carrying  a  covered  corpse. 

Handmaid. 

Women,  O  where  is  Hecuba,  sorrow's  queen, 

Who  passeth  every  man,  all  womankind, 

In  woes  ?     No  man  shall  take  away  her  crown.         660 

Chorus. 

What  now,  O  hapless  voice  of  evil-boding  ? 
Shall  they  ne'er  sleep,  thy  publishings  of  grief  ? 

Handmaid. 

To  Hecuba  I  bring  this  pang :  mid  woes 
Not  easily  may  mortal  lips  speak  fair. 

Chorus. 

Lo  where  she  cometh  from  beneath  the  roofs  :  665 

In  season  for  thy  tale  appeareth  she. 

Handmaid. 

O  all-afflicted,  more  than  lips  can  say  ! 

Queen,  thou  art  slain — thou  seest  the  light  no  more ! 

Unchilded,  widowed,  cityless — all-destroyed  ! 

Hecuba. 

No  news  this  :  'tis  but  taunting  me  who  knew.         670 
But  wherefore  com'st  thou  bringing  me  this  corpse, 
Polyxena's,  whose  burial-rites,  'twas  told, 
By  all  Achaia's  host  were  being  sped  ? 

Handmaid. 

She  nothing  knows  :  Polyxena — ah  me  ! — 

Still  wails  she,  and  the  new  woes  graspeth  not.         675 


228  EURIPIDES. 


Hecuba. 

O  hapless  I  ! — not — not  the  bacchant  head 
Of  prophetess  Kassandra  bring'st  thou  hither  ? 

Handmaid. 

Thou  nam'st  the  living  :   but  the  dead — this  dead, 
Bewailest  not, — look,  the  dead  form  is  bared  ! 

[Uncovers  the  corpse. 
Seems  it  not  strange — worse  than  all  boding  fears  ?  680 

Hecuba. 

Ah  me,  my  son  ! — I  see  Polydorus  dead, 
Whom  in  his  halls  I  deemed  the  Thracian  warded. 
O  Avretch  !  it  is  my  death — I  am  no  more  ! 
O  my  child,  O  my  child  ! 

Mine  anguish  shall  thrill  685 

Through  a  wail  shrilling  wild 
In  the  ears  of  me  still 
Which   pealed   there  but    now  from    the  throat  of  a 
demon,  a  herald  of  ill. 

Handmaid. 
Didst  thou  then  know  thy  son's  doom,  hapless  one  ? 

Hecuba. 

Beyond,  beyond  belief,  new  woes  I  see. 

Ills  upon  ills  throng  one  after  other  :  690 

Never  day  shall  pass  by  without  tear,  without  sigh, 
nor  mine  anguish  refrain. 

Chorus. 
Dread,  O  dread  evils,  hapless  queen,  we  suffer. 


HECUBA.  229 

Hecuba. 

O  child,  O  child  of  a  grief-stricken  mother  ! 
By  what  fate  didst  thou  die  ? — in  what  doom  dost  thou 
lie  ? — of  what  man  wast  thou  slain  ? 

Handmaid. 

I  know  not  :  on  the  sea-strand  found  I  him. 

Hecuba. 

Cast  up  by  the  tide,  or  struck  down  by  the  spear  in  a 
blood-reddened  hand 

On  the  smooth-levelled  sand  ?  700 

Handmaid. 

The  outsea  surge  in-breaking  flung  him  up. 

Hecuba. 

Woe's  me,  I  discern  it,  the  vision  that  blasted  my  sight ! 
Neither  flitted  unheeded  that  black-winged  phantom  of 

night, 
Which  I  saw,  which  revealed  that  my  son  was  no  more 

of  the  light. 

Chorus. 

Who  slew  him  ?     Canst  thou,  dream-arreder,  tell  ? 

Hecuba. 

'Twas  my  friend,  'twas  my  guest,  'twas  the  Thracian 
chariot-lord  710 

To  whose  charge  his  grey  father  had  given  him  to  hide 
and  to  ward. 

Chorus. 

Oh,  what  wouldst  say  ? — slew  him  to  keep  the  gold  ? 


23o  EURIPIDES. 


Hfxuoa. 

O  horror  unspeakable,  nameless,  beyond  all  wonder ! — 
Impious,  unbearable  ! — Where  are  they,  friendship 
and  truth  ? 
O  accursed  of  men,  lo,  how  hast  thou  carved  asunder 
His   flesh  ! — how    thy   knife,   when   my    child's   limbs 
quivered  thereunder, 
Hath  slashed  him  and  mangled,  and  thou  wast  un- 
melted  of  ruth  !  720 

Chorus. 

0  hapless,  how  a  God,  whose  hand  on  thee 
Is  heavy,  above  all  mortals  heaps  thee  pain  ! 

But  lo,  I  see  our  master  towering  nigh,  [725 

Agamemnon  :  friends,  henceforth  hold  we  our  peace. 

Enter  Agamemnon. 

Agamemnon. 

Why  stay'st  thou,  Hecuba,  thy  child  to  entomb 

According  to  Talthybius'  word  to  me 

That  of  the  Argives  none  should  touch  thy  daughter  ? 

Wherefore  we  let  her  be,  and  touch  her  not. 

Yet  loiterest  thou,  that  wonder  stirreth  me.  730 

1  come  to  speed  thee  hence  ;  for  all  things  there 
Are  well  wrought — if  herein  may  aught  be  well. 
Ha,  who  is  this  that  by  the  tents  I  see  ? 
What  Trojan  dead  ? — No  Argive  this,  the  robes 
That  shroud  the  body  make  report  to  me.  735 

Hecuba  (aside).1 
Hapless  ! — myself  I  name  in  naming  thee — 

1   c.f.  Hen.   VI,  Part  1.  Act  v.  iii.  for  a   closely   similar 
series  of  asides. 


HECUBA.  2ji 


0  Hecuba,  what  shall  I  do  ? — or  fall 

At  the  king's  feet,  or  silent  bear  mine  ills  ? 

Agamemnon. 

Wherefore  on  me  dost  turn  thy  back,  and  mourn, 
Nor  tellest  what  is  done,  and  who  is  this  ?  740 

Hecuba  (aside). 

But  if,  a  slave  and  foe  accounting  me, 

He  thrust  me  from  his  knees,  'twere  pang  on  pang. 

Agamemnon. 

No  prophet  born  am  I,  to  track  the  path 
Of  these  thy  musings,  if  I  hear  them  not. 

Hecuba  (aside). 

Lo,  surely  am  I  counting  this  man's  heart  745 

O'ermuch  my  foe,  who  is  no  foe  at  all. 

Agamemnon. 

Sooth,  if  thou  wilt  that  nought  hereof  I  know, 
At  one  we  are  :   I  care  not,  I,  to  hear. 

Hecuba  (aside). 

1  cannot,  save  with  help  of  him,  avenge 

My  children — wherefore  do  I  dally  thus  ?  750 

I  must  needs  venture,  or  to  win  or  lose  : — 
Agamemnon,  I  beseech  thee  by  thy  knees, 
And  by  thy  beard,  and  thy  victorious  hand — 

Agamemnon. 

What  matter  seekest  thou  ?  Wouldst  have  thy  days 
Free  henceforth  ?  Sooth,  thy  boon  is  lightly  won.    755 


232  EURIPIDES. 


Hecuba. 

No — no  !  Avenge  me  of  mine  adversary, 
And  I  will  welcome  lifelong  bondage  then. 

Agamemnon. 
But  to  what  championship  dost  summon  me  ? 

Hecuba. 

To  nought  of  all  whereof  thou  dreamest,  king.        [760 
Seest  thou  this  corpse,  for  which  my  tears  rain  down  ? 

Agamemnon. 
I  see, — yet  what  shall  come  I  cannot  tell. 

Hecuba. 
Him  once  I  bare,  and  carried  'neath  my  zone. 

Agamemnon. 
One  of  thy  sons  is  this,  O  sorrow-crushed  ? 

Hecuba. 
Nay,  not  of  Priam's  sons  by  Ilium  slain. 

Agamemnon. 
How  ?  didst  thou  bear  another  more  than  these  ?     765 

Hecuba. 
Yea — to  my  grief,  meseems  :  thou  seest  him  here. 

Agamemnon. 
Yet  where  was  he  what  time  the  city  fell  ? 


HECUBA.  jjj 


I  [ecuba. 
Dreading  his  death  his  father  sent  him  thence. 

Agamemnon. 

And  whither  drew  him  from  the  rest  apart  ? 

Hecuba. 

Unto  this  land,  where  dead  hath  he  been  found.        770 

Agamemnon. 
To  Polymestor,  ruler  of  the  land  ? 

Hecuba. 

Yea — sent  in  charge  of  thrice-accursed  gold. 

Agamemnon. 
And  of  whom  slain,  and  lighting  on  what  doom  ? 

Hecuba. 
Of  whom  save  one  ? — that  Thracian  friend  slew  him. 

Agamemnon. 
O  wretch  ! — for  that  he  lusted  for  the  gold  ?  775 

Hecuba. 
Even  so,  when  Phrygia's  fall  was  known  of  him. 

Agamemnon. 

Where  found'st  thou  him  ? — or  who  hath  brought  thy 
dead  ? 

Hecuba. 

She  there  :  upon  the  strand  she  chanced  on  him. 

s 


234  EURIPIDES. 


Agamemnon. 
Seeking  him,  or  on  other  task  employed  ? 

Hecuba. 
Sea-brine  she  sought  to  lave  Polyxena.  780 

Agamemnon. 
So  then  this  guest-friend  slew  and  cast  him  forth. 

Hecuba. 
Yea,  on  the  sea  to  drift,  his  flesh  thus  hacked. 

Agamemnon. 
O  woe  is  thee  for  thine  unmeasured  pains  ! 

Hecuba. 
'Tis  death — there  is  no  deeper  depth  of  woe. 

Agamemnon. 
Alas,  was  woman  e'er  so  fortune-crost  ?  785 

Hecuba. 

None,  except  thou  wouldst  name  Misfortune's  self. 

But  for  what  cause  I  bow  thy  knees  to  clasp, 

Hear  : — if  my  righteous  due  my  sufferings  seem 

To  thee,  I  am  content  :  if  not,  do  thou 

Avenge  me  on  that  impious,  impious  friend,  790 

Who  neither  feared  the  powers  beneath  the  earth, 

Nor  those  on  high,  but  wrought  most  impious  deed, — 

Who  ofttimes  at  my  table  ate  and  drank, 

For  welcome  foremost  in  my  count  of  friends, 

Having  all  dues,  yea,  all  his  need  forestalled,1 —       795 

1  Another  interpretation — 

"  Yet  scheming  this  the  while  !  " 


HECUBA.  235 


Slew  him,  nor  in  his  thoughts  of  murder  found 

Room  for  a  grave,  but  cast  him  mid  the  sea. 

And  I — a  slave  I  may  be,  haply  weak  ; 

Yet  are  the  Gods  strong,  and  their  ruler  strong, 

Even  Law  ;  for  by  this  Law  we  know  Gods  are,      800 

And  live,  and  make  division  of  wrong  and  right  : 

And  if  this  at  thy  bar  be  disannulled, 

And  they  shall  render  not  account  which  slay 

Guests,  or  dare  rifle  the  Gods'  holy  things, 

Then  among  men  is  there  no  righteousness.  S05 

This  count  then  shameful  ;  have  respect  to  me  ; 

Pity  me  : — like  a  painter  so  draw  back,1 

Scan  me,  pore  on  my  portraiture  of  woes. 

A  queen  was  I,  time  was,  but  now  thy  slave  ; 

Crowned  with  fair  sons  once,  childless  now  and  old,   810 

Cityless,  lone,  of  mortals  wretchedest. 

Woe  for  me  ! — whither  wouldst  withdraw  thy  foot  ? 

Meseems  I  shall  not  speed — O  hapless  I  ! 

Wherefore,  O  wherefore,  at  all  other  lore 

Toil  men,  as  needeth,  and  make  eager  quest,  815 

Yet  Suasion,  the  unrivalled  queen  of  men, 

Nor  price  we  pay,  nor  make  ado  to  learn  her 

Unto  perfection,  so  a  man  might  sway 

His  fellows  as  he  would,  and  win  his  ends  ? 

How  then  shall  any  hope  good  days  henceforth  ?       820 

1  This  transition  will  not  appear  abrupt  and  artificial  if  we 
suppose  that  Agamemnon,  apprehensive  of  the  obligation 
thrust  upon  him,  makes  a  movement  to  draw  back,  which 
Hecuba,  with  the  quick  wit  of  desperation,  converts  to  a 
simile  which  arrests  him  till  1.  812,  when  she  is  driven  to 
make  a  more  direct  appeal  to  his  sense  of  honour.  Note, 
that  she  uses  just  such  words  as  a  Greek  painter  might  have 
used  in  pointing  out  to  a  patron  the  merits  of  his  work — 

Loov,  Kavaufyqcrov  01    t^et  KaAa. 


s36  EURIPIDES. 


So  many  sons — none  left  me  any  more  ! 

Myself  mid  shame  a  spear-thrall  ruin-sped  ; — 

Yon  smoke  o*er  Troy  upsoaring  in  my  sight  ! 

Yet — yet — 'twere  unavailing  plea  perchance 

To  cast  Love's  shield  before  me — yet  be  it  said  :       825 

Lo,  at  thy  very  side  my  child  is  couched, 

Kassandra,  whom  the  Phrygians  called  the  Inspired  :— 

Those  nights  of  love,  hath  their  memorial  perished  ? 

Or  for  the  lovingkindness  of  the  couch 

What  thank  shall  my  child  have,  or  1  for  her  ?         830 

For  of  the  darkness  and  the  night's  love-spells 

Cometh  on  men  the  chiefest  claim  for  thank. 

Hearken  now,  hearken  :  seest  thou  this  dead  boy  ? 

Doing  him  right,  to  thine  own  marriage-kin 

Shalt  thou  do  right.     One  plea  more  lack  I  yet  : —  835 

O  that  I  had  a  voice  in  these  mine  arms 

And  hands  and  hair  and  pacings  of  my  feet, 

By  art  of  Daedalus  lent,  or  of  a  God, 

That  all  together  to  thy  knees  might  cling 

Weeping,  and  pressing  home  pleas  manifold  !  840 

O  my  lord,  mightiest  light  to  Hellas'  sons, 

Hearken,  O  lend  thine  hand  to  avenge  the  aged ; 

What  though  a  thing  of  nought  she  be,  yet  hear  ! 

For  'tis  the  good  man's  part  to  champion  right, 

And  everywhere  and  aye  to  smite  the  wrong.  845 

Chorus. 

Strange,  strange,  how  all  cross-chances  hap  to  men  ! 
These  laws  shift  landmarks  even  of  friendship's  ties,1 

1  The  laws  of  right  and  wrong,  and  the  obligation  to 
avenge  the  blood  of  kin,  compel  Hecuba  to  ally  herself  with 
Agamemnon,  her  late  enemy,  against  Polymestor,  her  late 
friend. 


HECUBA. 

Turning  to  friends  the  bitterest  of  foes, 
Setting  at  enmity  the  erstwhile  loving. 

Agamemnon. 

I  am  stirred  to  pity,  Hecuba,  both  of  thee,  8^ 

Thy  son,  thy  fortune,  and  thy  suppliant  hand  ; 

And  for  the  Gods'  and  justice'  sake  were  fain 

Thine  impious  guest  should  taste  for  this  thy  vengeance, 

So  means  were  found  thy  cause  to  speed,  while  I 

Seem  not  unto  the  host  to  plot  this  death  855 

For  Thracia's  king  for  thy  Kassandra's  sake. 

For  herein  is  mine  heart  disquieted  : — 

This  very  man  the  host  account  their  friend, 

The  dead  their  foe  :  that  dear  he  is  to  thee 

Is  nought  to  them,  nor  part  have  these  in  him.         860 

Wherefore  take  thought :  in  me  thou  hast  one  fain 

To  share  thy  toil,  and  swift  to  lend  thee  aid, 

But  slow  to  face  the  Achaians'  murmurings. 

Hecuba. 

Ah,  among  mortals  is  there  no  man  free  ! 

To  lucre  or  to  fortune  is  he  slave  :  865 

The  city's  rabble  or  the  laws'  impeachment 

Constrains  him  into  paths  his  soul  abhors. 

But  since  thou  fear'st,  dost  overrate  the  crowd, 

Even  I  will  set  thee  free  from  this  thy  dread. 

Be  privy  thou,  what  ill  soe'er  1  plot  870 

For  my  son's  slayer,  but  share  not  the  deed. 

If  tumult  mid  the  Achaians  rise,  or  cry 

Of  rescue,  when  the  Thracian  feels  my  vengeance, 

Thou  check  them,  not  in  seeming  for  my  sake. 

For  all  else,  fear  not  :   1  will  shape  all  well.  875 


JIDES. 
*8 


JAMEMNON. 

.lo  ?  Wouldst  in  thy  wrinkled  hand 

1  yon  barbarian  slay  ? — 

*     .  'i  deed,  or  with  what  help  ? 

thee?  whence  wilt  win  thee  friends  ? 
V 

Hecuba. 
;st  of  Trojan  women  hide.  880 

Agamemnon. 
es  meanest  thou,  Greek  hunters'  prey  ? 

Hecuba. 
By  these  will  I  avenge  me  on  my  slayer. 

Agamemnon. 
How  ? — women  gain  the  mastery  over  men  ? 

Hecuba. 
Mighty  are  numbers  :  joined  with  craft,  resistless. 

Agamemnon. 
Ay,  mighty,  yet  misprize  I  womankind.  885 

Hecuba. 

What  ?  did  not  women  slay  Aigyptus'  sons  ? — 
The  males  of  Lemnos  wholly  extirpate  ? 
Yet  be  it  so  :  forbear  to  reason  this. 
But  to  this  woman  give  thou  through  the  host 
Safe  passage.  [890 

(To  a  servant)  Thou,  draw  nigh  our  Thracian  guest, 
Say,  "  Hecuba,  late  Queen  of  Ilium, 


HECUBA.  2J9 


Calls  thee  on  thy  behoof  no  less  than  hers, 
Thy  sons  withal ;  for  these  must  also  hear 
Her  words."     The  burial  of  Polyxena 
Late-slaughtered,  Agamemnon,  thou  delay  :  895 

So  sister  joined  with  brother  in  one  flame, 
A  mother's  double  grief,  shall  be  entombed. 

Agamemnon. 

So  shall  it  be  :  yet,  might  the  host  but  sail, 

No  power  had  I  to  grant  this  grace  to  thee  : 

But,  seeing  God  sends  no  fair-following  winds,  900 

Needs  must  we  tarry  watching  idle  sails. 

Now  fair  befall :  for  all  men's  weal  is  this, — 

Each  several  man's,  and  for  the  state, — that  ill 

Betide  the  bad,  prosperity  the  good. 

[Exit  Agamemnon. 

Chorus. 

(Sir.  1) 

O  my  fatherland,  Ilium,  thou  art  named  no  more 

Mid  burgs  unspoiled, 
Such  a  battle-cloud  lightening  spears  enshrouds  thee  o'er, 

All  round  thee  coiled  !  [910 

Thou  art  piteously  shorn  of  thy  brows'  tower-diadem, 

And  smirched  with  stain 
Of  the  reek ;   and  thy  streetways — my  feet  shall  not 
tread  them, 

Ah  me,  again  ! 

(A  lit.  1) 
At  the  midnight  my  doom  lighted  on  me,  when  sleep  shed 

O'er  eyes  sweet  rain, 
When  from  sacrifice-dance  and  from  hushed  songs  on 
his  bed 

My  lord  had  lain, 


24o  EURIPIDES. 


And  the  spear  on  the  wall  was  uphung,  for  watchman's 

ken  920 

Saw  near  nor  far 

Overtrampling  the  Ilian  plains  those  sea-borne  men, 
That  host  of  war. 

{Str.  2) 
I  was  ranging  the  braids  of  mine  hair  'neath  soft  snood- 
fold  : 

On  mine  eyes  thrown 

Were  the  rays  from  the  limitless1  sheen,  the  mirror- 
gold, 

Ere  I  sank  down 
To  my  rest  on  the  couch  ;— but  a  tumult's  tempest- 
blast 

Swept  up  the  street, 
And  a  battle-cry  thundered — "Ye  sons  of  Greeks,  on 
fast  !  930 

Be  the  castles  of  Troy  overthrown,  that  home  at  last 
May  hail  your  feet  !  " 

{Ant.  2) 
From  my  dear  bed,  my  lost  bed,  I  sprang,  like  Dorian 
maid 

But  mantle-veiled, 
And  to  Artemis'  altar  I  clung — woe's  me,  1  prayed 

In  vain,  and  wailed. 
And  my  lord  I  beheld  lying  dead ;  and  I  was  borne 

O'er  deep  salt  sea, 
Looking  back  upon  Troy,  by  the  ship  from  Ilium  torn 
As  she  sped  on  the  Hellas-ward  path  :  then  woe-forlorn 
I  swooned, — ah  me  ! —  [940 

1  The  Greek  word,  for  which  I  cannot  find  any  English 
equivalent  in  this  sense,  expresses  that  apparent  absence 
of  any  bounding  surface  in  a  perfect  mirror,  which  has 
sometimes  betrayed  the  unwary  into  walking  through  such. 


HECUBA.  241 


(Epode) 
Upon  Helen  the  sister  of  Zeus*  sons  hurling  back, 
And  on  Paris,  fell  shepherd  of  Ida,  curses  black, 

Who  from  mine  home 
By  their  bridal   had  reft  me — 'twas  bridal   none,  but 
wrack  950 

Devil-wrought  : — to  her  fatherland  home  o'er  yon  sea- 
track 

Ne'er  may  she  come  ! 

Enter  Polymestor  with  his  two  little  sons  attended  by  a 
guard  of  Thracian  spearmen. 

Polymestor. 

Priam  of  men  most  dear  ! — and  dearest  thou, 

0  Hecuba,  I  weep  beholding  thee, 

Thy  city,  and  thine  offspring  slain  so  late.  955 

Nought  is  there  man  may  trust,  nor  high  repute, 

Nor  hope  that  weal  shall  not  be  turned  to  woe  : 

But  the  Gods  all  confound,  hurled  forth  and  back, 

Turmoiling  them,  that  we  through  ignorance 

May  worship  them  : — what  skills  it  to  make  moan    960 

For  this,  outrunning  evils  none  the  more  ? 

But  if  mine  absence  thou  dost  chide,  forbear  ; 

For  in  the  mid-Thrace  tracts  afar  was  I 

When  thou  cam'st  hither :  soon  as  1  returned, 

At  point  was  I  to  hasten  forth  mine  home  ;  965 

When  lo,  for  this  same  end  thine  handmaid  came 

Telling  a  tale  whose  tidings  winged  mine  haste. 

Hecuba. 

1  shame  to  look  thee  in  the  face,  who  lie, 
O  Polymestor,  in  such  depth  of  ills. 


242  EU IV  TIDES. 


^Thou  sawest  me  in  weal  :   shame's  thrall  I  am,  970 

Found  in  such  plight  wherein  I  am  this  day. 

I  cannot  look  on  thee  with  eyes  undrooped. 

Yet  count  it  not  as  evil-will  to  thee, 

Polymestor  ;  therebeside  is  custom's  bar 

That  women  look  not  in  the  eyes  of  men.  975 

Polymestor. 

No  marvel  : — but  what  need  hast  thou  of  me  ? 

For  what  cause  from  mine  home  hast  sped  my  feet  ? 

Hecuba. 

A  secret  of  mine  own  I  fain  would  tell 

To  thee  and  thine.     I  pray  thee,  bid  thy  guards 

Aloof  from  these  pavilions  to  withdraw.  980 

Polymestor. 

Depart  ye,  for  this  solitude  is  safe.         [Exeunt  guards. 

My  friend  art  thou,  well-willed  to  me  this  host 

Achaian.     Now  behoves  thee  to  declare 

Wherein  the  prosperous  must  render  help 

To  friends  afflicted  :  lo,  prepared  am  I.  985 

Hecuba. 

First,  of  the  son  whom  in  thine  halls  thou  hast, 
Polydorus,  of  mine  hands,  and  of  his  sire's — 
Liveth  he  ? — 1  will  ask  thee  then  the  rest. 

Polymestor. 
Surely  :  as  touching  him  thy  lot  is  fair. 

Hecuba. 
Dear  friend,  how  well  thou  speak'st  and  worthy  thee !  990 


< 


HECUBA.  243 

POLYMESTu.. 

Prithee,  what  next  art  fain  to  learn  of  me  ■ 

I  [ecuba. 
If  me,  his  mother,  he  remembereth  ? 

POLYMESTOR. 

Yea — fain  had  come  to  thee  in  secret  hither. 

Hecuba. 
Is  the  gold  safe,  wherewith  from  Troy  he  came  ? 

POLYMESTOR. 

Safe — warded  in  mine  halls  in  any  wise.  995 

Hecuba. 
Safe  keep  it  :  covet  not  thy  neighbours'  goods. 

Polymestor. 
Nay,  lady  :  joy  be  mine  of  that  I  have  ! 

Hecuba. 
Know'st  what  I  fain  would  tell  thee  and  thy  sons  ? 

Polymestor. 
I  know  not :    this  thy  word  shall  signify. 

Hecuba. 
Be  it  sweet  to  thee  as  thou  to  me  art  dear !  1000 

Polymestor. 
But  what  imports  my  sons  and  me  to  know  ? 


244  EURIPIDES. 


Hecuba. 
.  <——..  -"ancient  vaults  of  gold  of  Priam's  line. 

POLYMESTOR. 

This  is  it  thou  art  fain  to  tell  thy  son  ? 

Hecuba. 
Yea,  by  thy  mouth  :  thou  art  a  righteous  man. 

Polymestor. 
What  needeth  then  the  presence  of  my  sons  ?  1005 

Hecuba. 
Better  they  knew,  if  haply  thou  shouldst  die. 

Polymestor. 
Well  hast  thou  said  :  yea.  'twere  the  wiser  way. 

Hecuba. 
Dost  know  where  stood  Athene's  Trojan  fane  ? 

Polymestor. 
There  ? — is  the  gold  there  ? — and  the  token,  what  ? 

Hecuba. 
A  black  rock  from  the  earth's  face  jutting  forth.      1010 

Polymestor. 
Hast  aught  beside  to  tell  me  of  that  hoard  ? 

Hecuba. 

Some  jewels  I  brought  forth  with  me — wouldst  keep 
these  ? 


HECUBA.  245 


POLYMESTOR. 

Where  ? — where  ? — beneath  thy  raiment,  or  in  hiding  ? 

Hecuba. 
In  yon  tents,  safe  beneath  a  heap  of  spoils. 

Poi.ymestor. 
Safe  ? — there  ? — Achaian  ships  empale  us  round.    1015 

Hecuba. 
Inviolate  are  the  captive  women's  tents. 

POLYMESTOR. 

Within  is  all  safe  ?     Be  they  void  of  men  ? 

Hecuba. 

Within  is  no  Achaian,  only  we. 

Enter  the  tents, — for  fain  the  Argives  are 

To  unmoor  the  ships  for  homeward  flight  from  Troy,- 

[1020 
That,  all  well  done,  thou  mayst  with  thy  sons  fare 
To  where  thou  gav'st  a  home  unto  my  child. 

Hecuba  and  Polymestor  with  Children  enter  the  tent. 

Chorus. 

Not  yet  is  the  penalty  paid,  but  thy  time  is  at  hand, 

As  who  reeleth  adown  an  abyss  wherein  foothold  is 

none 

Slant-slipping,  from  sweet  life  hurled,  for  the  life 

thou  hast  ta'en.  [1029 

For  wherever  it  cometh  to  pass  that  the  rightful  demand 

Of  justice's  claim  and  the  laws  of  the  Gods  be  at  one, 

Then  is  ruinous  bane  for  the  sinner,  O  ruinous  bane  ! 


246  EURIPIDES. 


It  shall  mock  thee,  thy  wayfaring's  hope  ;  to  the  Unseen 
Land, 
To  the    place  of   the  dead  hath  it   drawn   thee,    O 
wretch  undone  ! 
By  the  hand  not  of  warriors,  thou  hero,  shalt  thou 
be  slain. 

POLYMESTOR    (witlun). 

Ah,  I  am  blinded  of  mine  eyes'  light — wretch  !  1035 

Chorus. 
Heard  ye  the  yell  of  yonder  Thracian,  friends  ? 

Polymestor   (within). 
Ah  mc,  my  children  ! — ah  the  awful  murder  ! 

Chorus. 
Friends,  strange  grim  work  is  wrought  in  yonder  tent. 

Polymestor  (within). 

Surely  by  swift  feet  shall  ye  not  escape  ! 

My  blows  shall  rive  this  dwelling's  inmost  parts  !     1040 

Chorus. 

Lo,  crasheth  there  swift  bolt  of  giant  hand. 
Shall  we  burst  in  ? — the  peril  summoneth  us 
To  help  of  Hecuba  and  the  Trojan  dames. 

Enter  Hecuba. 

Hecuba. 

Smite  on — spare  not — ay,  batter  down  the  doors  ! 
Ne'er  shalt  thou  set  bright  vision  in  thine  orbs,       1045 
Nor  living  see  thy  sons  whom  I  have  slain. 


HECUBA.  247 


Chorus. 

Hast  vanquished  ? — overcome  thy  Thracian  guest, 
Lady  ? — hast  done  the  deed  thou  threatenedst  ? 

Hecuba. 

Him  shalt  thou  straightway  see  before  the  tents, 
Blind,  pacing  with  blind  aimless-stumbling  feet,   1050 
And  his  two  children's  corpses,  whom  I  slew 
With  Trojan  heroines'  help  :  now  hath  he  paid  me 
The    vengeance-dues.     There  comes    he    forth,    thou 

seest. 
I  from  his  path  will  step  ;  the  seething  rage 
Of  yonder  Thracian  monster  will  I  shun.  1055 

Enter  Polymestor. 

POLYMESTOR. 

Ah  me,  whitherward  shall  I  go  ? — where  stand  ? 

Where  find  me  a  mooring-place  ? 
Must  I  prowl  on  their  track  with  foot  and  with  hand 
As  a  mountain-beast  should  pace  ? 
Or  to  this  side  or  that  shall  I  turn  me,  for  vengeance 
pursuing  1060 

The  slaughterous  hags  of  Troy  which  have  wrought 
mine  undoing  ? 

Foul  daughters  of  Phrygia,  murderesses 
Accursed,  in  what  deep-hidden  recesses 

Are  ye  cowering  in  flight  ? 
O  couldst  thou  but  heal  these  eye-pits  gory — 

0  couldst  thou  but  heal  the  blind,  and  restore  me, 

O  Sun,  thy  light  ! 
Hist — hist — their  stealthy  footfalls  creep — 

1  hear  them — whither  shall  this  foot  leap,     1070 
That  their  flesh  and  their  bones  I  may  gorge,  and  may 

slake  me 


248  EURIPIDES. 


With  their  blood,  and  a  banquet  of  wild  beasts  make  me, 

Requiting  their  outrage  well 
With   grimmer  revenge  ? — Woe  !    where  am    I 

borne 
Forsaking  my  fenceless  babes  to  be  torn 

Of  the  bacchanals  of  hell, 
Butchered  and  cast  away  for  the  dogs'  blood-boultered 
prey 

On  a  desolate  mountain-fell  ? 
Ah,  where  shall  I  stand  ? — whither  go  ? — where 

rest  ?  [1080 

As  a  ship  furls  sail  that  hath  havenward  pressed, 

I  would  dart  into  that  death-haunted  lair, 
I  would  shroud  my  babes  in  my  linen  vest, 

I  would  guard  them  there  ! 

Chorus. 

Wretch  !  wreaked  on  thee  are  ills  intolerable  : 
Foul  deeds  thou  didst,  and  awful  penalty 
A  God  hath  laid  on  thee  with  heavy  hand. 

POLYMESTOR. 

What  ho  !  spear-brandishers,  nation  arrayed  in  warrior's 

weed  ! 
Thracians  possessed  of  the  War-god,  lords  of  the  gallant 
steed  !  1090 

What  ho,  ye  Achaians  ! — Atreus'  seed  ! 
Rescue  !   Rescue  !   I  raise  the  cry. 
O  come,  in  the  name  of  the  Gods  draw  nigh  ! 
Hears  any  man  ? — wherefore  delay  ? — will  no  man  help 
me  nor  heed  ? 

Of  women  undone,  destroyed,  am  I — 
The  women  of  Troy's  captivity. 


HECUBA.  249 


Horrors    are    wrought  on  me — horrors  !     Woe  for  the 
felon  deed  ! 

Whitherward   shall    I    turn  me  ?    Whither- 
ward fare  ? 
Shall  I  leap  as  on  wings  to  the  height  of  the  heaven, 
to  the  mansions  of  air,  1100 

To  Orion  or  Sirius,  fearful-gleaming 
With  the  burning  flames  from  his  eyes  out- 
streaming, 
Or    plunge    to   the  blackness  of  darkness,   to  Hades' 
gorge  in  despair  ? 

Chorus. 

§mall  blame,  if  he  which  suffereth  heavier  woes 
Than  man  may  bear,  should  flee  his  wretched  life. 


Enter  Agamemnon. 


'a 


Agamemnon. 


Hearing  a  shout  I  came  ;  for  in  no  whispers 

The  mountain-rock's  child  Echo  through  the  host    1 1 10 

Cried,  waking  tumult.     Knew  we  not  the  towers 

Of  Phrygia  by  the  spear  of  Greeks  had  fallen, 

No  little  panic  had  this  clangour  roused. 

POLYMESTOR. 

Dear  friend — for,  Agamemnon,  'tis  thy  voice 

I  hear  and  know — see'st  thou  what  I  endure  ?         XII5 

Agamemnon. 

Ha,  wretched  Polymestor,  who  hath  marred  thee  ? 
Who  dashed  with  blood  thine  eyes,  and  blinded  thee  ? — 
Slew  these  thy  sons  ?     Sooth,  against  thee  and  thine 
Grim  was  his  fury,  whosoe'er  it  was. 


250  EURIPIDES. 


POLYMESTOR. 

Hecuba,  with  the  captive  woman-throng,  1120 

Destroyed  me — nay,  destroyed  not — O,  far  worse  ! 

Agamemnon. 

What  say'st  thou  ? — Thine  the  deed,  as  he  hath  said  ? 
Thou,  Hecuba,  dare  this  thing  impossible  ! 

POLYMESTOR. 

Ha  !  what  say'st  thou  ? — and  is  she  nigh  at  hand  ? 
Tell  where  is  she,  that  I  may  in  mine  hands  1125 

Clutch  her  and  rend,  and  bathe  her  flesh  in  blood. 

Agamemnon  (holding  him  back). 
Ho  thou,  what  ails  thee  ? 

Polymestor. 

By  the  Gods  I  pray  thee, 
Unhand  me — loose  my  frenzied  hand  on  her  ! 

Agamemnon. 

Forbear  :  cast  out  the  savage  from  thine  heart. 
Speak,  let  me  hear  first  thee,  then  her,  and  judge  11 30 
Justly  for  what  cause  thus  thou  sufferest. 

Polymestor. 

Yea,  I  will  speak.     'Twas  Priam's  youngest  son 
Polydorus,  Hecuba's  child — from  Troy  to  me 
Him  his  sire  sent  to  nurture  in  mine  halls, 
Misdoubting,  ye  may  guess,  the  fall  of  Troy.  1035 

Him  slew  I.     For  what  cause  I  slew  him,  hear  : 
Mark  how  I  dealt  well,  wisely,  prudently  : — 


HECUBA.  251 


I  feared  their  son  might,  left  alive  thy  foe, 
Gather  Troy's  remnant  and  repeople  her, 
And,  hearing  how  a  Priamid  lived,  Achaia  1140 

To  Phrygia-land  again  should  bring  her  host  ; 
Then  should  they  trample  down  these  plains  of  Thrace 
In  foray,  and  the  ills  that  wasted  us 
But  now,  O  king,  should  on  Troy's  neighbours  fall. 
And  Hecuba,  being  ware  of  her  son's  death,  1145 

With  this  tale  lured  me,  that  she  would  reveal 
Hid  treasuries  of  Priam's  line  in  Troy 
Of  gold.     Me  only  with  my  sons  she  leads 
Within  the  tents,  that  none  beside  might  know. 
Bowing  the  knee  there  sat  I  in  their  midst  ;  1150 

While,  on  my  left  hand  some,  some  on  the  right, 
As  by  a  friend,  forsooth,  Troy's  daughters  sat 
Many  :  the  web  of  our  Edonian  loom 
Praised  they,  uplifting  to  the  light  my  cloak  ; 
And  some  my  Thracian  lance  admiring  took,  1155 

And  stripped  me  so  alike  of  spear  and  shield. 
As  many  as  were  mothers,  loud  in  praise 
Dandled  my  babes,  that  from  their  sire  afar 
They  might  be  borne,  from  hand  to  hand  passed  on. 
Then,  after    such    smooth    speech, — couldst  thou   be- 
lieve?—  1 1 60 
Suddenly  snatching  daggers  from  their  robes, 
They  stab  my  sons  ;  and  others  all  as  one 
In  foemen's  fashion  gripped  mine  hands  and  feet, 
And  held  :  and,  when  I  fain  would  aid  my  sons, 
If  I  essayed  to  raise  my  face,  by  the  hair  1165 
They  held  me  down  :  if  I  would  move  mine  hands, 
For  the  host  of  women,  wretch  !   I  nought  prevailed. 
And  last — O  outrage  than  all  outrage  worse  ! — 
A  hideous  deed  they  wrought  :  for  of  mine  eyes 


252  EURIPIDES. 


These  wretched  eyeballs — grasping  their  brooch-pins — 

[1170 
They  stab,  they  flood  with  gore.     Then  through  the 

tents 
Fleeing  they  went.     Up  from  the  earth  I  leapt, 
And  like  a  wild  beast  chased  the  blood-stained  hounds, 
Groping  o'er  all  the  wall,  like  tracking  huntsman, 
Smiting  and  battering.     All  for  my  zeal's  sake        11 75 
For  thee,  I  suffered  this,  who  slew  thy  foe, 
Agamemnon.     Wherefore  needeth  many  words  ? 
Whoso  erenow  hath  spoken  ill  of  women, 
Or  speaketh  now,  or  shall  hereafter  speak, 
All  this  in  one  word  will  I  close  and  say  : —  11 80 

Nor  sea  nor  land  doth  nurture  such  a  breed : 
He  knoweth,  who  hath  converse  with  them  most. 

Chorus. 

Be  nowise  reckless,  nor,  for  thine  own  ills, 

Include  in  this  thy  curse  all  womankind. 

For  some,  yea  many  of  us,  deserve  not  blame, 1       1185 

Though  some  by  vice  of  blood  count  midst  the  bad. 

Hecuba. 

Agamemnon,  never  should  this  thing  have  been, 
That  words  with  men  should  more  avail  than  deeds, 
But  good  deeds  should  with  reasonings  good  be  paired, 

1  I  venture  to  propose  ovk  for  tier  in  1185.  In  a  copy  from 
a  cursive  MS.,  especially  one  like  Harl.  5724,  in  which  the 
contracted  ei  and  ou  are  so  similar,  eta'  would  be  more  likely 
to  have  crept  in  for  ovk,  than  twv  for  /xr]  (1186),  as  suggested 
by  Paley  ;  and  the  Chorus  would  be  more  likely  to  claim  that 
the  majority  of  their  sisters  were  good,  than  that  they  were 
bad. 


HECUBA.  253 


And  caitiff  deed  be  ranged  by  baseless  plea,  1 190 

And  none  avail  to  gloze  injustice  o'er. 

There  be  whose  craft  such  art  hath  perfected  ; 

Yet  cannot  they  be  cunning  to  the  end  : 

Foully  they  perish  :  never  one  hath  'scaped. 

Such  prelude  hath  my  speech  as  touching  thee.       1195 

Now  with  plea  answering  plea  to  him  I  turn  : — 

To  spare  the  Greeks,  say'st  thou,  a  twice-toiled  task, 

For  Agamemnon's  sake  thou  slew'st  my  son. 

Villain  of  villains,  when,  when  could  thy  race, 

Thy  brute  race,  be  a  friend  unto  the  Greeks  ?  1200 

Never.     And,  prithee,  whence  this  fervent  zeal 

To  serve  his  cause  ? — didst  look  to  wed  his  daughter  ? 

Art  of  his  kin  ? — Or  what  thy  private  end  ? 

Or  were  they  like  to  sail  again  and  waste  [I2°5 

Thy  crops  ?  Whom  think'st  thou  to  convince  hereby  ? 

That  gold — hadst  thou  the  will  to  tell  the  truth — 

Murdered  my  son  :  that,  and  thy  greed  of  gain. 

For,  hearken  :  why,  when  all  went  well  with  Troy, 

When  yet  her  ramparts  girt  the  city  round, 

And  Priam  lived,  and  triumphed  Hector's  spear,    1210 

Why  not  then,  if  thou  fain  wouldst  earn  kings'  thanks, 

When  in  mine  halls  ye  had  my  son  and  fostered, 

Slay  him,  or  living  bring  him  to  the  Greeks  ? 

But,  soon  as  in  the  light  we  walked  no  more, 

And  the  smoke's  token  proved  our  town  the  foe's,  1215 

Thou  slew'st  the  guest  that  came  unto  thine  hearth. 

Nay  more,  hear  now  how  thou  art  villain  proved  : 

Thou  oughtest,  if  thou  wert  the  Achaians'  friend, 

Have  brought  the  gold  thou  dar'st  not  call  thine  own, 

But  for  him  held  in  trust,  to  these  impoverished     1220 

And  long  time  exiled  from  their  fatherland. 

But  thou  not  yet  canst  ope  thine  heart  to  unclose 


jj54  EURIPIDES. 


Thy  grip  ;  thy  miser-clutch  keeps  it  at  home. 

Yet  hadst  thou,  as  behoved  thee,  reared  my  son 

And  saved  alive,  thine  had  been  fair  renown.  1225 

For  in  adversity  the  good  are  friends 

Most  true  :  prosperity  hath  friends  unsought. 

Hadst  thou  lacked  money,  and  his  lot  been  fair, 

A  treasury  deep  my  son  had  been  to  thee  : 

But  now  thou  hast  not  him  unto  thy  friend  ;  1230 

Gone  is  the  gold's  avail,  thy  sons  are  gone, — 

And  this  thy  plight  !  Now  unto  thee  I  say, 

Agamemnon,  if  thou  help  him,  base  thou  showest. 

The  godless,  false  to  whom  he  owed  fair  faith, 

The  impious  host  unrighteous  shalt  thou  comfort.  1235 

Thou  joyest  in  the  wicked,  shall  we  say, 

If  such  thou  be — but  on  my  lords  I  rail  not. 


Chorus. 

Lo,  how  the  good  cause  giveth  evermore 
To  men  occasion  for  good  argument. 

Agamemnon. 

It  likes  me  not  to  judge  on  others'  wrongs  ;  1240 

Yet  needs  I  must,  for  shame  it  were  to  take 

This  cause  into  mine  hands,  and  then  thrust  by. 

But, — wouldst  thou  know  my  thought, — not  for  my  sake, 

Nor  the  Achaians',  didst  thou  slay  thy  guest, 

But  even  to  keep  that  gold  within  thine  halls.  1245 

In  this  ill  plight  thou  speak'st  to  serve  thine  ends. 

Haply  with  you  guest-murder  is  as  nought, 

But  to  us  which  be  Greeks  foul  shame  is  this. 

How  can  1  uncondemned  adjudge  thee  guiltless  ? 

I  cannot.     Forasmuch  as  thou  hast  dared  1250 

To  do  foul  deeds,  even  drain  thy  bitter  cup. 


HECUBA.  255 


POLYMESTOR. 

Woe's  me  ! — by  a  woman-slave  o'ercome,  meseems, 
'Neath  vengeance  of  the  viler  must  1  bow  ! 

Hecuba. 
Is  it  not  just,  if  thou  hast  vileness  wrought  ? 

POLYMESTOR. 

Woe  for  my  babes  and  for  mine  eyes  ! — ah  wretch  !  1255 

Hecuba. 
Griev'st  thou  ?— and  I  ? — dost  deem  my  son's  loss  sweet  ? 

POLYMESTOR. 

Thou  joyest  triumphing  over  me,  thou  fiend  ! 

Hecuba. 
Should  I  not  joy  for  vengeance  upon  thee  ? 

POLYMESTOR. 

Ah,  soon  thou  shalt  not,  when  the  outsea  surge — 

Hecuba. 
Shall  bear  me  to  the  coasts  of  Hellas-land  ?  1260 

POLYMESTOR. 

Nay,  but  shall  whelm  thee  fallen  from  the  mast. 

Hecuba. 
Yea  ? — forced  of  whom  to  take  the  leap  of  death  ? 


256  EURIPIDES. 


POLYMESTOR. 

Thyself  shalt  climb  the  ship's  mast  with  thy  feet. 

Hecuba. 
So  ? — and  with  shoulders  winged,  or  in  what  guise  ? 

POLVMESTOR. 

A  dog  with  fire-red  eyes  shalt  thou  become.  1265 

Hecuba. 
How  know'st  thou  of  the  changing  of  my  shape  ? 

POLYMESTOR. 

This  Dionysus  told,  the  Thracian  seer. 

Hecuba. 
But  nought  foretold  to  thee  of  these  thine  ills  ? 

POLYMESTOR. 

Nay  ;  else  with  guile  thou  ne'er  hadst  trapped  me  thus. 

Hecuba. 
There  shall  I  die,  or  live  my  full  life  out  ?  1270 

POLYMESTOR. 

Die  shalt  thou  :  and  thy  grave  shall  bear  a  name — 

Hecuba. 
Accordant  to  my  shape  ? — or  what  wilt  say  ? 

POLYMESTOR. 

The  wretched  Dog's  Grave,  sign  to  seafarers. 


HECUBA.  257 


Hecuba. 
Nought  reck  I,  seeing  thou  hast  felt  my  vengeance. 

POLYMESTOR. 

Yea,  and  thy  child  Kassandra  too  must  die.  1275 

Hecuba. 
A  scorn  and  spitting ! — back  on  thee  I  hurl  it. 

POLYMESTOR. 

Slay  her  shall  this  king's  wife,  a  houseward  grim. 

Hecuba. 
Never  so  mad  may  Tyndareus'  daughter  be  ! 

Polymestor. 
Yea — slay  him  too,  upswinging  high  the  axe. 

Agamemnon. 
Ho,  fellow,  ravest  thou  ?     Dost  court  thy  bane  ?     1280 

Polymestor. 
Slay  on  :  a  bath  of  blood  in  Argos  waits  thee. 

Agamemnon. 
Haste,  henchmen,  hale  him  from  my  sight  perforce. 

Polymestor. 

Art  g-dled  to  hear  ? 

Agamemnon. 

Set  curb  upon  his  mouth  ! 

u 


258  EURIPIDES. 


POLYMESTOR. 

Ay,  gag  :  my  say  is  said. 

Agamemnon. 

Make  speed,  make  speed, 
And  on  some  desert  island  cast  him  forth,  1285 

Seeing  his  bold  mouth's  insolence  passeth  thus. 
Hecuba,  hapless,  fare  thou  on,  entomb 
Thy  corpses  twain.     Draw  near,  ye  dames  of  Troy, 
To  your  lords'  tents,  for  1  discern  a  breeze 
Upspringing,  home  to  waft  us,  even  now.  1290 

Fair  voyage  be  ours  to  Hellas,  fair  the  plight 
Wherein,  from  these  toils  freed,  we  find  our  homes. 

Chorus. 

To  the  tents,  O  friends,  to  the  haven  fare  ; 
The  yoke  of  thraldom  our  necks  must  bear. 
Fate  knows  not  pity,  fate  will  not  spare.  1295 

[Exeunt  omnes. 


ION, 


ARGUMENT. 

In  the  days  when  Erechtheus  ruled  over  Athens,  Apollo 
wrought  violence  to  the  king's  young  daughter  Kreusa. 
And  she,  having  born  a  sou,  left  him,  by  reason  of  her 
fear  and  shame,  in  the  cave  wherein  the  God  had  humbled 
her.  But  Apollo  cared  for  him,  and  caused  the  babe  to 
be  brought  to  Delphi,  even  to  his  temple.  Therein  was 
the  child  nurtured,  and  ministered  in  the  courts  of  the 
God's  house.  And  in  process  of  time  Erechtheus  died, 
and  left  no  son  nor  daughter  save  Kreusa,  and  evil  days 
came  upon  Athens,  that  she  7vas  hard  bestead  in  war. 
Then  Xuthus,  a  chief  of  the  Achaian  folk,  fought  for 
her,  and  prevailed  against  her  Eubceau  enemies,  and  for 
guerdon  of  victory  received  the  princess  Kreusa  to  wife, 
and  so  became  king-consort  in  Athens.  But  to  these 
twain  was  no  child  born  ;  so,  after  many  years,  they 
journeyed  to  Delphi  to  enquire  of  the  oracle  of  Apollo 
touching  issue.  And  there  the  God  ordered  all  things 
so  that  the  lost  was  found,  and  an  heir  was  given  to 
the  royal  house  of  Athens.  Yet,  through  the  blind 
haste  of  mortals,  and  their  little  faith,  was  the  son  well- 
nigh  slain  by  the  mother,  and  the  mother  by  the  son. 


DRAMATIS    PERSONVE. 

Hermes,  the  messenger  of  the  Gods. 

Ion,  son  of  Apollo  and  Kreusa. 

Kreusa,  Queen  of  Athens,  Daughter  of  Erechtheus,  and  wife  of 

Xuthus. 
Xuthus,  an  Achaian  chief,  king-consort  of  Athens. 
Old  Servant,  {of  Erechtheus  formerly,  then  of  Kreusa). 
Servant  (of  Xuthus). 
Pythia,  the  Prophetess  of  the  temple. 
Athene,  Patron-goddess  of  Athens. 
Chorus,  consisting  of  Handmaids  attendant  on  Kreusa. 
Attendants,  priests,  guards,  and  Delphian  citizens. 
Scene  : — At    Delphi,   in    the   fore-court   of    the   temple   of 

Pythian  Apollo,  who  is  called  also  Phcebus,  and  Loxias. 

The  great  altar  of  sacrifice  stands  in  the  centre. 


( 


ION. 


Enter  Hermes. 

Hermes. 

Atlas,  whose  brazen  shoulders  wear  the  base 

Of  heaven,  the  ancient  home  of  Gods,  begat 

Of  a  certain  Goddess1  Maia,  which  bare  me, 

Hermes,  to  Zeus  most  high,  heaven's  messenger. 

Now  to  this  Delphian  land  I  come,  where  Phoebus      5 

Hath  at  earth's  navel  his  prophetic  seat 

Revealing  things  that  are  and  things  to  be. 

There  is  a  famous  city  of  the  Greeks, 

Named  Burg  of  Pallas  of  the  Golden  Spear. 

There  Phcebus  forced  Erechtheus'  child  Kreusa  10 

Where  the  north-facing  rocks,  beneath  the  Mount 

Of  Pallas  in  the  Athenian  land,  are  called 

The  Long  Cliffs  by  the  lords  of  Attica. 

Nought  knew  her  sire — for  this  was  Phcebus'  will — 

The  burden  'neath  her  heart ;  but  in  due  time  15 

She  travailed  in  his  halls  ;  and  brought  the  babe 

Unto  the  selfsame  cave  wherein  the  God 

Had  humbled  her,  and  left  it  there  to  die 

In  the  fair-rounded  hollow  of  an  ark, 

1  Pleione,  daughter  of  Ocean. 


264  EURIPIDES. 


Still  keeping  the  tradition  of  her  race  20 

And  earth-born  Erichthonius,1  by  whom 

Zeus'  Daughter  set  for  warders  of  his  life 

Two  serpents,  ere  to  the  Agraulid  maids 

She  gave  the  babe  to  nurse.     For  this  cause  there 

The  Erechtheids  use  to  hang  about  their  babes  25 

Serpents  of  gold.     Yea,  broidery  from  her  robe 

She  tied  to  her  babe,  and  left  him,  as  for  death. 

Then  did  my  brother  Phoebus  ask  me  this  : 

"  Go,  brother,  to  the  earth-born  folk  of  Athens 

The  glorious, — for  thou  know'st  Athene's  burg, —      30 

And  from  the  rock-cleft  take  a  babe  new-born, 

With  cradle  and  with  swaddling-bands  withal, 

And  bear  to  Delphi,  to  mine  oracle, 

And  set  him  at  my  temple's  entering-in. 

All  else  be  mine  :  for  this — that  thou  mayst  know,—    35 

Is  my  son."     For  a  grace  to  Loxias 

My  brother,  took  1  up  the  woven  ark, 

And  bare,  and  on  the  basement  of  this  fane 

I  set  him,  opening  first  the  cradle's  lid 

With-woven,  that  the  boy  might  so  be  seen.  40 

And,  as  the  sun  drove  forth  his  chariot,  passed 

A  priestess  into  the  prophetic  shrine, 

Who,  casting  eyes  upon  the  wordless  babe, 

Marvelled  that  any  Delphian  maid  should  dare 

1  Erichthonius  was  the  son  of  Earth.  Athene  placed  the 
newborn  babe,  with  two  serpents,  in  a  chest,  which  she 
delivered  to  the  daughters  of  Agraulus,  wife  of  Kekrops, 
forbidding  them  to  open  it.  They  disobeyed,  and,  at  the 
sight  of  the  serpents,  became  mad  through  terror,  and  leapt 
to  their  death  down  the  cliffs  of  the  Acropolis  (see  11.  265-274). 
After  death  they  haunted  the  spot,  dancing  upon  the  cliffs 
brink  beneath  the  moon,  while  Pan  piped  to  them  from  his 
cave  far  below.     See  Chorus-song,  11.  491-502. 


ION.  265 

Into  the  God's  house  fling  her  child  of  shame,  45 

And  o'er  the  holy  pale  in  zeal  had  thrust  ; 

But  pity  banished  cruelty  :  yea,  the  God 

Wrought  that  the  boy  be  not  cast  forth  his  fane. 

So  took  she  him  and  nursed,  nor  knew  the  sire 

Was  Phoebus,  nor  the  reckling's  mother  knew  ;  50 

Nor  knows  the  boy  who  brought  him  into  life. 

So  did  the  youngling  round  the  altars  sport 

That  fed  him.     When  to  manhood  waxed  his  frame, 

The  Delphians  made  him  treasurer  of  the  God, 

And  steward  of  all  trust ;  and  in  the  fane  55 

He  liveth  to  this  day  a  hallowed  life. 

But  she,  Kreusa,  that  had  born  the  lad, 

Was  wed  to  Xuthus,  by  such  hap  as  this  : — 

A  surge  of  war  'twixt  Athens  rose  and  them 

That  in  Eubcea  hold  Chalkidikr,  60 

Wherein  triumphant  toiled  that  chieftain's  spear, 

And  won  Kreusa  for  his  guerdon  bride  ; 

An  alien  he,  of  Aiolus  sprung  and  Zeus, 

Achaian  born  :  but  after  wedded  years 

He  and  his  wife  be  childless.     For  this  cause  65 

To  this  shrine  of  Apollo  have  they  come, 

Yearning  for  seed.     Now  Loxias  guides  their  fate 

To  this,  nor  hath  forgotten,  as  might  seem. 

He  shall  give  Xuthus,  when  he  entereth, 

His  own  child,  saying  to  him,  "  Lo,  thy  son,"  70 

That  the  lad,  coming  home,  made  known  may  be 

Unto  Kreusa,  Loxias'  deed  abide 

Unknown,  and  so  the  child  may  have  his  right. 

And  Ion  shall  he  cause  him  to  be  called 

Through  Greece,  the  founder  of  an  Asian  realm.        75 

Now  to  yon  hollow  bay-embowered  I  go 

To  watch  how  destiny  dealeth  with  the  lad. 

w 


266  EURIPIDES. 


For  yonder  see  I  Loxias'  child  come  forth 

To  make  the  temple-portals  gay  with  boughs 

Of  bay.     And  by  the  name  that  he  shall  bear,  80 

Ion,  do  I  first  name  him  of  the  Gods.  [Exit. 

Enter  Ion,  followed  by  a  throng  of  Delphian  worshippers. 

Ion. 

Lo,  yonder  the  Sun-god  is  turning  to  earthward  his 
splendour-blazing 

Chariot  of  light ; 
And  the  stars  from  the  firmament  flee  from  the  fiery 
arrows  chasing, 

To  the  sacred  night  : 
And  the  crests  of  Parnassus  untrodden  are  flaming  and 

flushed,  as  with  yearning 
Of   welcome  to   far-flashing  wheels  with  the  glory  of 
daylight  returning 

To  mortal  sight. 
To  the  roof-ridge  of  Phoebus  the  fume  of  the  incense  of 
Araby  burning 

As  a  bird  taketh  flight.  90 

On   the   tripod   most    holy  is   seated  the    Delphian 

Maiden 
Chanting  to  children  of  Hellas  the  wild  cries,  laden 

With  doom,  from  the  lips  of  Apollo  that  ring. 
Delphians,  Phcebus's  priesthood-train, 

Unto  Castaly's  silvery-swirling  spring 
Pass  ye,  and  cleanse  with  the  pure  spray-rain 
Your  bodies,  or  ever  ye  enter  his  fane. 
Set  a  watch  on  the  door  of  your  lips  ;  be  there  heard 
Nothing  but  good  in  the  secret  word 
That  ye  murmur  to  them  whose  hearts  be  stirred  100 


ION.  267 

To  seek  to  his  shrine,  that  they  seek  not  in  vain. 
And  I  in  the  toil  that  is  mine — mine  now, 
And  from  childhood  up, — with  the  bay's  young  bough, 
And  with  wreathed  garlands  holy,  will  cleanse 

The  portals  of  Phoebus  ;  with  dews  from  the  spring 
Will  I  sprinkle  his  pavement,  and  chase  far  thence 

With  the  shaft  from  the  string 
The  flocks  of  the  birds  :  the  defilers  shall  flee 

From  his  offerings  holy.     Nor  mother  is  mine 
Neither  father  :  his  temple  hath  nurtured  me,       no 
And  I  serve  his  shrine. 

(Str.) 
Come,  branch  in  thy  freshness  yet  blowing, 
God's  minister,  loveliest  bay, 
Over  the  altar-steps  glide. 
In  the  gardens  immortal,  beside 
His  temple,  hath  burgeoned  thy  pride, 
Where  the  sacred  waters  are  flowing 
Through  a  veil  of  the  myrtle  spray, 
A  fountain  that  leapeth  aye 

O'er  thy  tresses  divine  to  pour.  120 

I  wave  thee  o'er  Phoebus'  floor 
As  the  sun's  wing  soars  sudden-glowing. 
Such  service  is  mine  each  day. 
O  Healer,  O  Healer-king, 
Let  blessing  on  blessing  upring 
Unto  Leto's  Son  as  I  sing. 

(Ant.) 
'Tis  my  glory,  the  service  I  render 
In  thy  portals,  O  Phoebus,  to  thee  ! 

I  honour  thy  prophet-shrine.  130 

Proud  labour  is  mine — it  is  thine  ! 
I  am  thrall  to  the  Gods  divine  : 

w  ; 


268  EURIPIDES. 


Not  to  men,  but  Immortals,  I  tender 
My  bondage  ;  'tis  glorious  and  free  : 
Never  faintness  shall  fall  upon  me. 
For  my  father  thee,  Phoebus,  I  praise, 
Who  hast  nurtured  me  all  my  days  : 
My  begetter,  mine  help,  my  defender 
This  temple's  Phoebus  shall  be. 

O  Healer,  O  Healer-king,  140 

Let  blessing  on  blessing  upring 
Unto  Leto's  Son  as  I  sing. 

But — for  now  from  the  toil  I  refrain 

Of  the  bay-boughs  softly  trailing, — 
From  the  pitchers  of  gold  shall  I  rain 
The  drops  from  the  breast  unfailing 
Of  the  earth  that  spring 
Where  the  foambell-ring 
Round  Castaly's  fount  goeth  sailing. 
It  rains,  it  rains  from  my  fingers  fast, 
From  the  hands  of  the  undented  wide-cast.        150 

0  that  to  Phoebus  for  ever  so 

1  might  render  service,  nor  respite  know, 
Except  unto  happier  lot  I  go  ! 

Flights  of  birds  are  seen  approaching. 

Ho  there,  ho  there  ! 
Even  now  are  they  flocking,  the  fowl  of  the  air, 
On  Parnassus  forsaking  each  crag-hung  lair. 
Touch  not,  I  warn  ye,  the  temple's  coping, 
Nor  the  roofs  with  the  glistering  gold  slant-sloping. 
Ha,  my  bow  shall  o'ertake  thee  again  from  afar, 
Zeus'  herald,  whose  talons  victorious  war 

On  the  birds  that  strongest  are.  160 


ION.  269 

Lo,  yonder  the  pinion-oars  come  rowing 

Of  another,  a  swan,  to  the  altar  : — away  ! 
Speed  hence  thy  feet  in  the  dawn  rose-glowing  ; 

Else  Phcebus's  lyre,  that  accordeth  its  lay 
To  thy  notes,  from  death  shall  redeem  not  thee. 

Waft  onward  thy  wings  of  snow  : 
Light  down  on  the  Delian  mere  oversea, 

Lest  the  blood-rush  choke,  if  thou  do  not  so, 
Thy  sweet  throat's  melody. 

Ha,  what  new  fowl  cometh  hitherward  winging  ?      170 
Under  our  coping  fain  would  he  build 
A  nest  for  his  young  from  the  stubble-field  ? 
It  shall  hold  thee  aloof,  my  bow's  fierce  singing  ! 
Wilt  thou  heed  not  ? — Away,  let  thy  nurslings  hide 
Where  the  swirl?  of  Alpheius  coil  and  slide, 

Or  mid  Isthmian  glens  and  groves, 
That  the  offerings  undefiled  may  abide, 
And  the  temples  that  Phoebus  loves. 

Loth  were  I  to  slaughter  such  as  ye, 

Which  bear  unto  mortals  the  augury  180 

Of  the  Gods  :  but  a  burden  is  laid  upon  me  : 

I  am  Phoebus'  thrall,  and  I  will  not  refrain 

My  service  to  them  that  my  life  sustain. 

Enter  Chorus  of  Kreusas  Handmaids.      They  move  to 

right  and  left,  admiring  the  sculptures  on  the  walls  of 

the  temple.     Members  of  Chorus  chant  in  turn  : — 


Chorus  i. 

Not  in  Athens  alone  then,  the  city  divine, 
Stand  courts  of  the  Gods,  with  line  on  line 
Of  stately  columns  ;  nor  service  is  thine 
There  only,  O  Highway-king. 


(Str.) 


270  EURIPIDES. 


Lo  here,  how  in  Loxias'  holy  place 

The  Son  of  Latona  hath  splendour  and  grace 

Of  a  twofold-gleaming  temple-face. 

Chorus  2. 

Ah,  look  thou,  behold  this  thing —  190 

How  with  golden  scimitar  Zeus'  Son  here 
Slayeth  the  hydra  of  Lerna's  mere : 

Dear,  one  glance  hitherward  fling  ! 


Chorus  i. 
I  see  it  : — but  lo,  where  another  anigfi 


(Ant.) 


Is  uplifting  a  flame-wrapped  torch  on  high  ! 
Who  is  it — who  ?     On  my  broidery 

Is  the  hero's  story  told  ? — 
Is  it  not  Iolaiis,  the  warrior  there, 
Who  had  part  in  the  dread  emprise,  and  a  share 
In  the  burdens  that  Zeus's  scion  bare  ?  200 

Chorus  3. 

Lo,  lo,  this  other  behold 
Who  rideth  a  winged  horse,  dealing  death 
To  a  dragon  that  vomiteth  fiery  breath, 

A  monster  of  shape  threefold. 

Chorus  i. 

O  yea,  mine  eyes  turn  swiftly  on  all  ...  . 
But  O,  see  there  on  the  marble  wall 
The  battle-rout  of  the  giant-horde  ! 

Chorus  4. 
Yea,  friends,  we  be  gazing  thitherward. 


ION.  271 

Chorus  5. 

Dost  mark  who  there  on  the  stricken  field 

O'er  Enkeladus  waveth  her  gorgon-shield  ?  210 

Chorus  6. 
Pallas,  my  Goddess  ! — I  see  her  stand  ! 

Chorus  7. 

Lo,  lo,  where  the  bolt  flame-flashing 
Gleameth  in  Zeus'  far-hurling  hand 

In  resistless  rush  down-crashing 


->  • 


Chorus  8. 

I  see  : — upon  Mimas  his  foe  is  the  brand 
With  its  blasting  wildfire  dashing. 

Chorus  9. 

And  the  earth-born  there — no  battle-wand 
Is  the  ivy-encircled  thyrsus-rod 
That  slays  him,  of  Bromius,  Reveller-god. 

Chorus   10  (addressing  Ion). 

Sir, — thou  by  the  fane, — I  would  speak  unto  thee  : 

Prithee  say,  if  with  bare  feet  lawful  it  is  220 

That  the  threshold  we  pass  of  the  sanctuary. 

Ion. 
Nay,  strangers,  forefended  is  this. 

Chorus  ii. 
Yet  haply  a  thing  I  would  learn  wouldst  thou  show  ? 


272  EURIPIDES. 


Ion. 
What  is  this  that  thou  cravest  to  know  ? 

Chorus  ii. 

Is  it  so,  that  the  wails  of  Phoebus  rise 
Even  there,  where  Earth's  mid-navel  lies  ? 

Ion. 

Yea :  and  with  wreaths  is  it  hung,  and  watched  by  the 
Gorgon-eyes. 

Chorus  12. 
Ay,  rumour  hath  published  it  so. 

Ion. 

If  a  cake  ye  have  cast  on  the  forecourt's  altar- fire, 
And  if  there  be  aught  that  of  Phoebus  ye  fain  would 

enquire, 
Draw  nigh  to  the  altar-steps  : — into  the  inner  fane 
Pass  none,  but  with  bloodshed  of  sheep  for  the  sacrifice 

slain. 

Chorus  13. 

All  this  understand  I  aright  :  230 

We  would  trespass  on  nought  by  the  God's  law  hidden  : 
Enough  is  without  for  our  feast  of  sight. 

Ion. 
Let  your  eyes  gaze  on  upon  all  unforbidden. 

Chorus  14. 

Our  lady  had  given  us  leave, — "  Upon  all 

These  shrines,"  hath  she  said,  "  may  ye  gaze."' 


ION.  273 

Ion. 
And  the  servants  ye  name  you  of  what  lord's  hall  ? 

Chorus   15. 

In  Pallas's  dwelling-place 
Is  the  mansion  of  princes  that  nurtured  me  ; — 
But  of  whom  thou  enquirest,  lo,  here  is  she. 

Enter  Kreusa. 

Ion. 

High  birth  is  thine,  and  carriage  consonant 

Thereto,  O  lady,  whosoe'er  thou  be. 

For  in  a  man  ofttimes  may  one  discern, 

Marking  his  bearing,  strain  of  gentle  blood.  240 

Ha,  thou  dost  move  me  strangely  ! — down-dropt  eyes, 

And  noble  cheeks  all  wet  with  rain  of  tears, 

At  sight  of  Loxias'  pure  oracle  ! 

How  cam'st  thou,  lady,  'neath  such  load  of  care  ? 

Where  all  beside,  beholding  the  God's  shrines,         245 

Rejoice,  a  fountain  is  thine  eye  of  tears. 

Kreusa. 

Stranger,  I  count  it  not  discourtesy 

That  thou  shouldst  marvel  touching  these  my  tears. 

But,  looking  on  Apollo's  dwelling-place, 

I  tra.versed  o'er  an  ancient  memory's  track.  250 

Afar  my  thoughts  were,  and  my  body  here. 

Ah,  wrongs  of  women  ! — wrongful-reckless  deeds 

Of  Gods  !  For  justice  where  shall  we  make  suit, 

If  our  Lords'  tyranny  shall  ruin  us  ? 

Ion. 
Lady,  for  what  veiled  grief  art  thou  cast  down  ?       255 


274  EURIPIDES. 


Kreusa. 

Nought :   I  have  sped  my  shaft :  as  touching  this, 
Nothing  I  say,  nor  thou  conjecture  aught. 

Ion. 

Who  art  thou  ?     What  thy  country  ?     Of  what  sire 
Wert  born  ?     What  name  is  meet  we  name  thee  by  ? 

Kreusa. 

Kreusa  I,  of  King  Erechtheus  born  ;  260 

The  Athenian  city  is  my  fatherland. 

Ion. 

O  dweller  in  a  glorious  burg,  and  sprung 
Of  noble  sires  ! — blest  I  account  thee,  lady. 

Kreusa. 
Thus  far,  nor  farther,  stranger,  goes  my  weal. 

Ion. 
Ah,  is  it  true,  the  legend  told  to  men —  265 

Kreusa. 
What  wouldst  thou,  stranger,  ask  ?   I  fain  would  learn. 

Ion. 
That  from  the  earth  thy  father's  grandsire  sprang  ? 

Kreusa. 
Yea,  Erichthonius  : — me  his  birth  avails  not. 

Ion. 
And  did  Athene  take  him  forth  the  earth  ? 


ION.  ^75 

Kreusa. 
Yea,  in  her  maiden  arms  :  no  mother  she.  270 

Ion. 
And  gave  it,  as  the  pictured  legend  tells — 

Kreusa. 
To  Kekrops'  daughters  to  be  nursed  unseen. 

Ion. 
The  maids  unsealed,  I  heard.  Athene's  ark. 

Kreusa. 

Dashing  the  rocks  with  blood  for  this  they  died. 

Ion. 
Ah,  so 

And  this — true  is  it,  or  an  idle  tale  ? —  275 

Kreusa. 
What  wouldst  thou  ask  ?     My  leisure  serveth  me. 

Ion. 
Thy  sisters  did  thy  sire  Erechtheus  slay  ? 

Kreusa. 
He  sacrificed  his  daughters  for  his  land. 

Ion. 
How  wast  thou  only  of  thy  sisters  saved  ? 

Kreusa. 
A  babe  new-born  in  mother's  arms  was  I.  280 


276  EURIPIDES. 


Ion. 
And  did  earth  yawning  verily  hide  thy  sire  ? 

Kreusa. 
The  Sea-god's  trident  smote  him  and  destroyed. 

Ion. 
The  Long  Cliffs — is  a  place  so  named  therein  ? 

Kreusa. 
Why  dost  ask  this  ? — thou  wak'st  a  memory. 

Ion.  [285 

Doth  Phoebus  honour  them,  and  Pythian  lightnings  P1 

Kreusa. 
Honour  them,  quotha  !     O  to  have  seen  them  never ! 

Ion. 
What  ? — hatest  thou  the  God's  haunt  well-beloved  ? 

Kreusa. 
Nought. — I  and  that  cave  know  a  deed  of  shame. 

Ion. 
And  what  Athenian,  lady,  is  thy  lord  ? 

1  Near  the  Long  Cliffs  was  an  altar  of  "  Zeus  the 
Lightning-lord."  From  this  the  priests  kept  watch  on  three 
days  and  three  nights  of  three  months  in  the  year,  looking 
north-west  towards  the  gap  between  the  border-ranges  of 
Cithsron  and  Parnes,  where  lay  the  village  of  Harma.  If 
lightnings  were  at  such  seasons  observed  in  that  quarter, 
they  were  regarded  as  a  token  from  Apollo,  and  an  embassy 
was  sent  to  Delphi. 


ION.  277 

Kreusa. 

No  citizen.     An  outland  alien.  290 

Ion, 
Who  ? — sooth,  of  princely  birth  must  he  have  been. 

Kreusa. 
Xuthus,  the  seed  of  Aiolus  and  Zeus. 

Ion. 
How  might  an  alien  win  thee,  native-born  ? 

Kreusa. 
A  neighbour  state,  Euboea,  Athens  hath  ; — 

Ion. 
Sundered  by  watery  marches,  as  they  tell.  295 

Kreusa. 
This  smote  he,  spear-ally  of  Kekrops'  sons. 

Ion. 
Their  war-aid  : — and  thereafter  won  thine  hand  ? 

Kreusa. 
His  dower  of  battle,  guerdon  of  his  spear. 

Ion. 
With  thy  lord  com'st  thou  hither,  or  alone  ? 

Kreusa. 
With  him.     He  lingereth  at  Trophonius'  cave.         300 


278  EURIPIDES. 


Ion. 
To  gaze  thereon,  or  for  an  oracle  ? 

Kreusa. 
One  thing  of  him  and  Phcebus  would  he  learn. 

Ion. 
For  increase  of  the  land,  or  sons,  come  ye  ? 

Kreusa. 
Childless  we  are,  who  have  been  wedded  long. 

Ion. 
Never  hast  thou  born  issue,  barren  all  ?  305 

Kreusa. 
Phcebus  doth  know  what  childlessness  is  mine. 

Ion. 
Blest  in  all  else,  sad  heart,  unblest  in  this  ! 

Kreusa. 
And  who  art  thou  ? — Blessed  the  womb  that  bare  thee  ! 

Ion. 
Lady,  the  God's  thrall  I  am  called,  and  am. 

Kreusa. 
The  city's  offering  ? — or  of  some  one  sold  ?  310 

Ion. 
1  know  but  this — I  am  called  Loxias'  thrall. 


ION. 


-'79 


Kreusa. 
I  then  in  turn,  O  stranger,  pity  thee. 

Ion. 
As  one  that  never  sire  nor  mother  knew. 

Kreusa. 
Dwellest  thou  in  this  temple,  or  a  house  ? 

Ion. 
The  God's  wide  halls  be  mine  when  I  would  sleep.  315 

Kreusa. 
A  child,  or  stripling,  cam'st  thou  to  the  fane  ? 

Ion. 
A  babe  was  I,  say  they  who  best  should  know. 

Kreusa. 
And  who  of  Delphi's  daughters  gave  thee  suck  ? 

Ion. 
Never  I  knew  the  breast.     Mine  only  nurse — 

Kreusa.  [320 

Who,  child  of  sorrow  ? — How  my  wound  finds  thine  !' 

Ion. 
Was  Phoebus'  priestess  :  her  I  count  my  mother. 

"  Searching  of  thy  wound 
I  have  by  hard  adventure  found  mine  own." 

As  You  I. ike  It,  ii.  4. 


2So  EURIPIDES. 


Kreusa. 

How  nurtured  hast  thou  come  to  man's  estate  ? 

Ion. 
The  altars  fed  me  :  each  chance  stranger  gave. 

Kreusa. 
Woe  is  thy  mother,  who  she  be  soe'er.- 

ION. 

I  am  record  haply  of  a  woman's  wrong.  325 

Kreusa. 
And  hast  thou  wealth  ? — for  rich  is  thine  attire. 

Ion. 
Of  Him  is  mine  adorning,  whom  I  serve. 

Kreusa. 
But  on  thy  birth's  track  hast  thou  never  pressed  ? 

Ion. 
Ah,  lady,  clue  hereunto  have  I  none. 

Kreusa.  [330 

(Sighs.)   There's  one  was  even  as  thy  mother  wronged. 

2  The  interruption  to  the  sequence  of  thought  in  the  lines 
which  follow  has  given  rise  to  various  suggestions  for  their 
re-arrangement,  e.g.  by  placing  324-5  after  328-9.  Doubtless 
this  would  be  a  more  logical  arrangement,  yet  perhaps  less 
womanlike  than  Kreusa's  recurring,  after  a  breathing-space, 
as  it  were,  of  unimportant  query,  to  that  feature  in  his 
history  which  really  interests  her,  and  so  deeply  that  she 
cannot  trust  her  self-command  to  follow  it  continuously. 


ION.  281 

Ion. 
Who? — would  she  share  my  burden,  glad  were  I. 

Kreusa. 
For  her  sake  came  I,  while  delays  my  lord. 

Ion. 
And  what  thy  quest  ? — Lady,  mine  help  is  thine. 

Kreusa. 
Craving  a  secret  oracle  of  Phcebus. 

Ion. 
Speak  it :  myself  will  undertake  for  thee.  335 

Kreusa. 
Hear  then  the  story  : — but  ashamed  am  I. 

Ion. 
Shame  shall  not  help  thy  strait, — a  deedless  Goddess ! 

Kreusa. 
She  saith — my  friend — that  Phcebus  humbled  her. 

Ion. 
Phcebus  ! — a  woman  ! — Stranger,  say  not  so. 

Kreusa. 
And  the  God's  child  she  bare,  nor  knew  her  sire.      340 

Ion. 
Never  ! — a  man's  crime  this,  and  hers  the  shame. 

x 


28a  EURIPIDES 


Kreusa. 
No  ! — herself  saith.     She  hath  suffered  griefs  beside. 

Ion. 
Suffered  ? — for  what  sin  wrought — this  bride  of  heaven  ? 

Kreusa. 
The  son  she  bare  she  cast  forth  from  her  halls. 

Ion. 
Where  is  her  cast-out  child  ?     Doth  he  see  light  ?    345 

Kreusa. 
None  knows.     For  this  I  seek  the  oracle. 

Ion. 
But,  if  he  be  no  more,  how  perished  he  ? 

Kreusa. 
Wild  beasts,  she  troweth,  slew  the  hapless  babe. 

Ion. 
And  by  what  token  knew  she  this  had  been  ? 

Kreusa. 
She  came  where  she  had  left  him,  and  found  not.     350 

Ion. 
And  blood-gouts — were  there  any  on  the  track  ? 

Kreusa. 
Nay,  saith  she :  yet  she  traversed  oft  the  ground. 


ION.  283 

Ion. 
How  long  the  time  since  this  child's  taking-off  ? 

Kreusa. 
Living,  he  had  had  the  measure  of  thy  years. 

Ion. 
And  hath  she  born  no  offspring  after  this  ?  355 

Kreusa. 
Still  the  God  wrongs  her  :  childless  grief  is  hers. 

Ion. 
What  if  in  secret  Phoebus  fostereth  him  ? 

Kreusa. 
Unjust ! — alone  to  enjoy  what  he  should  share. 

Ion. 
Ah  me  !  her  heart-strings  are  attuned  to  mine  ! 

Kreusa. 
For  thee  yearns  some  sad  mother  too,  I  ween.  360 

Ion. 
Ah,  wake  not  thou  mine  half- forgotten  grief. 

Kreusa. 
I  am  dumb  :  whereof  I  question  thee,  say  on. 

Ion. 
Seest  thou  where  lies  the  weakness  of  thy  plea  ? 

x  2 


284  EURIPIDES. 


Kreusa. 
Ah,  hapless  one,  wherein  is  she  not  weak  ! 

Ion. 
How  should  the  God  reveal  that  he  would  hide  ?      365 

Kreusa. 
Why  then  on  Greece's  tripod  sitteth  he  ? 

Ion. 
His  shame  the  deed  is.     Question  not  of  him. 

Kreusa. 

O  yea,  the  sufferer  in  her  lot  may  pine  ! 

Ion. 

There's  none  will  ask  the  God  of  this  for  thee. 

For,  in  his  own  halls  were  he  villain  proved,  370 

Vengeance  on  him  who  brought  thee  that  response 

Would  Phoebus  justly  wreak.     Ah  lady,  go  : 

We  must  not  seek  his  shrine  to  flout  the  God. 

For  lo,  what  height  of  folly  should  we  reach 

If  in  the  Gods'  despite  we  wrest  their  will,  375 

By  sacrifice  of  sheep  on  altars,  or 

By  flight  of  birds,  to  tell  what  they  would  veil. 

Could  we  of  force  wring  aught  from  Gods  full  loth, 

Profitless  blessings,  lady,  should  we  grasp  ; 

But  what  they  give  free- willed  are  boons  indeed.      380 

Chorus. 

Strange  chances  many  on  many  mortals  fall, 
And  manifold  their  forms.     Ye  scarce  shall  find 
One  happy  lot  in  all  the  life  of  men. 


ION.  S85 


Kreusa. 


0  Phcebus,  there  and  here  unjust  art  thou 

Unto  the  absent  one  whose  plea  is  here.  385 

Thou  shouldst   have  saved  thine  own,   yet  didst   not 

save  ; 
Nor  heeds  the  Seer  the  mother's  questioning, 
That,  if  her  babe  live  not,  his  tomb  may  rise, 
Or,  if  he  live,  that  she  may  see  his  face. 
Yet  must  I  let  this  be,  if  by  the  God  390 

1  am  barred  from  learning  that  which  I  desire. 
But,  stranger, — for  I  see  my  princely  lord, 
Xuthus,  anigh  us  yonder,  who  hath  left 
Trophonius'  crypt, — of  this  that  we  have  said 

Speak  to  my  lord  nought,  lest  I  get  me  shame  yj$ 

For  handling  secrets,  and  the  tale  fall  out 

Not  after  our  unravelling  thereof. 

For  woman's  lot  as  touching  men  is  hard  ; 

And,  since  the  good  are  with  the  bad  confused, 

Hated  we  are  : — ill-starred  we  are  from  birth.  400 

Enter  Xuthus. 

Xuthus. 

First,  to  the  God  the  firstfruits  of  my  greetings  : 

All  hail  to  him,  and  hail  to  thee,  my  wife. 

Hath  my  late-lingering  thrilled  thee  with  dismay  ? 

Kreusa. 

Nay,  'tis  but  care  that  meets  thee.     Tell  to  me 

What  answer  from  Trophonius  bringest  thou,  405 

How  we  shall  have  joint  issue,  thou  and  I  ? 

Xuthus. 
He  took  not  on  him  to  forestall  the  word 


286  EURIPIDES. 


Of  Phcebus.     This  he  said — nor  thou  nor  I 
Childless  shall  wend  home  from  the  oracle. 

Kreusa. 

Queen,  Phoebus'  mother,  grant  our  home-return       410 
Prosperous  :  all  our  dealings  heretofore 
Touching  thy  son,  to  happier  issue  fall  ! 

XUTHUS. 

This  shall  be.     Who  speaks  to  the  God  for  men  ? 

Ion. 

Without,  I  ;  others  for  the  things  within, 

Stranger,  which  nigh  unto  the  tripod  sit,  415 

The  Delphian  lords,  in  order  of  their  lot. 

XUTHUS. 

'Tis  well :.  now  know  I  all  I  sought  to  know. 

I  will  pass  in  ;  for,  as  I  hear  it  told, 

To  strangers  of  the  forecourt  hath  there  chanced 

An  open  oracle.     I  would  fain  this  day —  420 

This  day  fair-omened — gain  the  God's  response. 

Thou  to  the  bay-crowned  altars  bear  the  boughs, 

My  wife,  and  pray  the  Gods  that  I  may  win 

Promise  of  fair  sons  from  Apollo's  fane. 

Kreusa. 

Yea,  this  shall  be.  [Exit  Xuthus  to  inner  Temple. 

If  Loxias  consent  425 

Now  at  the  last  to  atone  for  olden  wrongs, 
Not  utterly  should  he  become  my  friend, 
Yet,  as  a  God's,  will  I  accept  his  pleasure.  [Exit. 


ION  287 


Ion. 


Why  doth  this  stranger  rail  upon  the  God 
In  riddles  of  dark  sayings  evermore  ?  430 

For  love  of  her  for  whom  she  seeks  the  shrine  ? 
Or  keeping  back  a  thing  she  must  not  speak  ? — 
But  with  Erechtheus'  daughter  what  have  I 
To  do  ?  She  is  nought  to  me.     But  I  will  go 
Unto  the  lavers  with  the  golden  ewers  435 

To  pour  in  water-dews.     Yet  must  I  plead1 
With  Phoebus — what  ails  him  ?   He  ravisheth 
Maids,  and  forsakes  :  begetteth  babes  by  stealth 
And  heeds  not,  though  they  die.     Do  thou  not  so  ! 
Being  strong,  be  righteous.     For  what  man  soe'er  440 
Transgresseth,  the  Gods  visit  this  on  him. 
How  were  it  just  then  that  ye  should  enact 
For  men  laws,  and  yourselves  work  lawlessness  ? 
For  if — it  could  not  be,  yet  put  it  so — 
Ye  should  pay  mulct  to  men  for  lawless  lust,2  445 

Thou,  the  Sea-king,  and  Zeus  the  lord  of  heaven, 
Paying  for  wrongs  should  make  your  temples  void. 
For,  following  pleasure  past  all  wisdom's  bounds, 
Ye  work  unrighteousness.     Unjust  it  were 
To  call  men  vile,  if  we  but  imitate  450 

The  sins  of  Gods  : — they  are  vile  which  teach  us  this. 

Exit. 

1  "  The  freedom  of  this  remark  is  scarcely  in  keeping  with 
previous  indications  of  Ion's  attitude  towards  the  God." 
(Bayfield)  Does  it  not  rather  well  display  that  "  perfect  love 
which  casteth  out  fear."  ?  Compare  Moses'  expostulation 
with  God,  in  Numbers  xiv,  15,  16. 

2  The  fine  for  violence  to  a  virgin  was,  by  Solon's  law.-,,  a 
thousand  drachmas. 


2SS  EURIPIDES. 


Chorus. 

(Str.) 
My  Queen,  at  whose  birth-tide  was  given 
Of  the  Lady  of  Travail-pang 

No  help,  hear,  Pallas,  my  prayer, 
Whom  the  crown  of  a  God's  head  bare 
By  Prometheus  the  Titan  riven 

When  the  Daughter  of  Zeus  forth  sprang. 

Come,  Victory-queen,  to  the  dwelling 
Pythian,  speeding  thy  wing 

From  Olympus'  chambers  of  gold 
To  the  streets  that  the  World's  Heart  hold,  460 
Where  the  bodings  of  Phoebus  are  told, — 
Yea,  brought  to  pass  in  the  telling, — 
At  the  tripod  that  dances  enring. 

Thou  also,  Latona's  Daughter, — 
Two  Goddesses,  maidens  twain, 
Phoebus' s  sisters  divine, 
With  us  interceding  O  join, 
That  Erechtheus'  ancient  line 
Through  bodings  clear-lucid  as  water  470 

Fair  offspring  at  last  may  attain. 


For  a  fountain  is  this  ever-welling 
Of  happiness  passing  the  lot 

Of  mortals,  when  stalwart  and  tall 
Shines  fair  in  a  father's  hall 
The  presence  of  sons,  foretelling 
A  line  that  shall  perish  not ; 

Sons,  that,  when  death  bringeth  severance, 
Shall  receive  to  pass  on  to  their  seed 


(Ant.) 


'£ 


■ION. 


289 


The  wealth  that  their  sires'  hands  hold  : 
Yea,  by  these  be  our  sorrows  consoled, 
And  a  joy  within  joy  they  enfold, 
And  their  spear  flasheth  light  of  deliverance1 
In  the  hour  of  the  fatherland's  need. 

Ah,  far  above  golden  treasure 

Or  than  princely  halls  do  I  praise 

Dear  children  to  cherish — mine  own  ! 
Mine  horror  were  life  all  lone  : 
Who  loveth  it,  wit  hath  he  none  : 
But  give  to  me  substance  in  measure, 
And  children  to  brighten  my  days  ! 


480 


490 
(Epode) 


O  haunts  of  Pan's  abiding, 
O  sentinel  rock  down-gazing 

On  the  Long-cliff  caves  dim-glimmering, 
Where,  with  shadowy  feet  in  the  dance  soft-sliding, 
Agraulus'  daughters  three  go  pacing 

O'er  the  lawns  by  Athene's  fane  dew-shimmering 
In  moonlight,  while  upward  floats 
A  weird  strain  rising  and  falling, 
Wild  witchery-wafting  notes,  500 

O  Pan,  from  thy  pipes  that  are  calling 
Out  of  thy  sunless  grots  !- 

Ah;  a  maid-mother  there  most  woe-forlorn 
Cast  Phoebus's  child  for  a  banquet  gory — 

Bitter  outrage's  fruit ! — by  the  birds  to  be  torn 
And  the  beasts.     Nor  in  woven  web  nor  in  story 
Ever  heard  I  of  happiness  blent  with  the  glory 
Of  Gods'  seed  woman-born. 

1  aiyXav  (Herwerden)  vice  uXkixv 
-  See  note  to  1.  21. 


2g2  EURIP^.^S. 


/  Ion. 

Ion. 

Bower-maidens,  ye  which  keeping  watch  the  altar-steps 
beside  510 

Of  the  incense-clouded  fane,  your  master's  coming  forth 
abide, 

Say,  hath  Xuthus  left  by  this  the  holy  tripod  and  the 
shrine, 

Or  within  yet  lingering  asks  he  touching  that  long- 
childless  line  ? 

Chorus. 

In    the   temple   is    he,    stranger,    treads   not    yet    the 

threshold-stone. 
List,  a  sound  at  yonder  portal — through  the  porchway 

passeth  one  : —  515 

Lo,  where  now  he  cometh  forth — our  master,  plain  for 

eyes  to  see. 

Enter  Xuthus  :  attempts  to  embrace  Ion. 

Xuthus. 

Hail,  my  son  ! — for  fitting  prelude  this  is  of  my  speech 

to  thee. 

Ion. 

Hale  I  am  :  but  thou,  control  thee  ;  then  were  twain 
in  happy  case. 

Xuthus. 

Let  me  kiss  thine  hand,  and  let  me  fold  thy  form  in 

mine  embrace  ! 

Iox. 

Stranger,  hast  thy  wits  ? — or  is  thy  mind  distraught  by 
stroke  of  heaven  ?  520 


ION.  293 


- 


XUTHUS. 

Right  my  wit  is,  if  I   long  to  kiss  my  best-beloved 
regiven. 

Iox. 

Hold — hands  off! — the  temple-garlands  of  Apollo  rend 
not  thou  ! 

XUTHUS. 

Touch  thee  will  I  ! — No  man-stealer  ;  but  I  find  my 
darling  now. 

Ion   (starting  back,  and  fitting  an  arrow  to  his  bow). 

Wilt  not  hence,  or  ever  thou  receive  my  shaft  thy  ribs 

within  ? 

Xuthus. 

Wherefore  dost  thou  flee  me,  who  hast  learnt  to  know 
thy  nearest  kin  ?  525 

Ion. 

Nought    I    love   to   admonish   aliens   mannerless   and 
sense-bereft. 

Xuthus. 

Slay — then  burn  me  ;x  for  a  father's  heart  thine  arrow 
shall  have  cleft. 

Ion. 

Thou  my  father ! — Is  not  this  a  laughter-scoff  for  me 
to  hear  ? 

Xuthus. 

Nay,  the  eager-hurrying  word  shall  show  thee  all  my 
meaning  clear. 

1  It  being  the  sacred  duty  of  the  son  to  lay  the  father's 
corpse  upon  the  pyre. 


292  EURIPIDES. 


''  '  Ion. 

*  t\y,  and  what  wilt  tell  ? 

Xuthus. 
Thy  father  am  I,  and  thou  art  my  son.  530 

Ion. 
Who  the  voucher  ? 

Xuthus. 

Loxias,  who  reared  the  child  that  I  have  won. 
Ion. 
Thou  art  thine  own  witness. 

Xuthus. 
Nay,  the  God's  own  oracle  I  heard. 

Ion. 
Heardest  riddles  and  misreadest. 

Xuthus. 
Then  mine  ears  can  hear  no  word. 

Ion. 
What  was  this,  the  word  of  Phoebus  ? 

Xuthus. 
That  the  man  who  met  my  face — 

Ion. 
Met  thee — met  thee  ? 

Xuthus. 
As  I  came  from  out  Apollo's  holy  place —  535 


ION.  293 


Ion. 
Ay,  and  what  should  be  his  fate  ? 

Xuthus. 

My  true-begotten  son  is  this. 
Ion. 
Born  thy  son,  or  given  of  others  ? 

XUTHUS. 

Given — and  born  from  me  he  is.1 
Ion. 
So  on  me  thy  foot  first  stumbled  ? 

Xuthus. 

Yea,  my  son,  on  none  beside. 
Ion. 
Ay.  and  whence  this  happy  chance  ? 

Xuthus. 
We  marvel  both  it  should  betide. 
Ion. 
Ha,  what  mother  bare  me  to  thee  ? 

Xuthus. 
Sooth,  thereof  can  I  say  nought.    540 

1  There  may  be  oracular  ambiguity  here ;  ££  being  (like 
"  from  "  in  a  common  Shaksperian  usage)  susceptible  of  the 
sense  "  apart,  or  remote  from,"  as  in  the  oracle  given  to 
Odysseus  respecting  his  own  end,  Odys.  xi,  134.  c.f.  note 
on  1.  1546. 


294  EURIPIDES. 


Ion. 
Neither  Phoebus  told  ? 

Xuthus. 

For  joy  of  this  thing,  that  I  never  sought. 

Ion. 

Ah,  a  child  of  mother  Earth  ! 

Xuthus. 

Nay,  children  spring  not  from  the  sod. 

Ion. 
How  then  thine  am  I  ? 

Xuthus. 

I  know  not :   I  refer  it  to  the  God. 

Ion. 

Come,  to  other  reasonings  turn  we.1 

Xuthus. 

Better  so,  my  son,  in  sooth. 

Ion. 

Hadst  thou  ever  part  in  lawless  love  ? 

Xuthus. 

Mid  follies  of  my  youth.  545 
Ion. 
Ere  Erechtheus'  daughter  wed  thee  ? 

1  Ion's  incredulity  has  so  far  made  all  his  questions  and 
comments  bitterly  sarcastic  :  but  now,  impressed  by  Xuthus' 
unshaken  faith,  he  thinks  the  matter  worth  investigation. 


ION.  295 

XUTHUS. 

Since,  to  her  have  1  been  true. 
Ion. 
Haply  then  didst  thou  beget  me  ? 

XUTHUS. 

Time  is  consonant  thereto. 1 
Ion. 
Were  it  so,  how  came  I  hither  ? 

Xuthus. 

Nay,  I  cannot  fathom  it. 

Ion. 
Long  the  journey  for  a  babe  ! 

Xuthus. 

This  too  o'erpasseth  all  my  wit. 

Ion. 

Hast  thou  seen  ere  this  the  Pythian  Rock  ? 

Xuthus. 

At  Bacchus'  festal  rite.     550 

Ion. 
Lodging  with  a  Public  Host  ? 

Xuthus. 
Yea  ;  and  with  Delphian  girls  by  night — 

1  i.e.  Your  apparent  age  fits  the  supposition. 


2q6  EURIPIDES. 


Ion. 
Made  initiate— this  thy  meaning  P1 

Xuthus. 

They  were  maidens  Bacchanal.2 

Ion. 

Sober,  or  of  wine  o'ercome  ? 

Xuthus. 

Of  Bacchus'  joys  did  this  befall. 
Ion. 
This  is  my  begetting's  story  ! 

Xuthus. 

Fate,  my  son,  hath  found  it  out. 
Ion. 
Yet,  how  came  I  to  the  fane  ? 

Xuthus. 
The  maiden  cast  thee  forth,  I  doubt.  555 

Ion  (aside). 
So,  I  'scape  the  taint  of  serfdom — 3 

1  c.f.  "  Convey,  the  wise  it  call."  No  resident  of  Delphi 
could  affect  to  be  ignorant  of  the  excesses  veiled  under  the 
expression  "  Initiated  into  the  Orgiastic  Mysteries  of 
Bacchus." 

2  i.e.,  The  religious  license  (perhaps  obligation)  of  the 
occasion  furnishes  an  excuse,  if  not  a  justification. 

;)  As  none  but  free-born  Delphian  women  could  take  part 
in  the  "  Orgies."  But  the  "  temple-slaves  "  were  commonly 
bought  of  slave-dealers  :  hence  the  relief  to  Ion's  mind. 


ION.  297 

XUTHUS. 

Son,  thy  father  now  receive. 

Ion  (aside). 
'Tis  the  God  :  I  may  not  doubt  him — 

Xuthus. 

Yea,  'tis  wisdom  to  believe. 

Ion  (aside). 
What  thing  higher  can  I  wish  for — 

Xuthus. 
Now  thou  seest  clear  and  true. 

Ion  (aside). 
Than  the  fatherhood  of  Zeus  ? 

Xuthus. 

O  yea,  by  birth  is  this  thy  due.1 

Ion. 
Shall  I  clasp  him,  my  begetter  ? 

Xuthus. 
If  with  Phoebus  thou  comply.    560 

Ion. 
Hail  to  thee,  my  father  ! 

1  Xuthus  being  descended  from  Zeus.  But  this  is  an 
example  of  "  Tragic  Irony,"  wherein  a  speaker  "  speaks 
truer  than  he  knows  ;  "  Ion  being  in  reality  the  son  of  Apollo, 
son  of  Zeus. 


2<)*  EURIPIDES. 


XUTHUS. 

Joyfully  I  welcome  this  thy  cry. 

Ion, 
Hail  the  day  that  sees  our  meeting  ! 

Xuthus. 

Happy  man  it  maketh  me. 

Ion. 

Ah,  beloved  mother,  when  thy  visage  also  shall  I  see  ? 
More  than  ever  now  I  long  to  see  thee,  who  thou  be 

soe'er. 
Ah,  but  thou  perchance  art  dead,  and  all  in  vain  should 

be  my  prayer.  565 

Chorus. 

Ours  too  the  house's  happy  fortune  is  : 
Yet  fain  were  I  our  queen  were  also  blest 
With  offspring,  and  Erechtheus'  ancient  line. 

XUTHUS. 

My  son,  as  touching  thy  discovery 

The  God  spake  sooth,  and  so  joined  thee  and  me.    570 

Thou  hast  found  thy  dearest,  erst  to  thee  unknown. 

For  thy  just  yearning,  this  is  also  mine, 

That  thou  mayst  find  thy  mother,  O  my  son, 

And  I,  the  woman  of  whose  womb  thou  art. 

This  shall  we  find  forth  haply,  left  to  time.  575 

Now,  leave  the  God's  floor,  and  thine  homeless  state  : 

To  Athens  come,  with  thine  heart  even  as  mine. 

There  waiteth  thee  thy  father's  sceptred  bliss, 

And  much  wealth.     None  shall  cast  into  thy  teeth 


ION.  299 

One  of  these  taunts,  base  birth  or  poverty.  580 

High-born  art  thou,  a  mighty  man  of  wealth. 
Silent  ? — Now  wherefore  earthward  droops  thine  eye, 
And  thou  art  deep  in  thought,  and  from  thy  joy 
Art  changed,  and  strikest  dread  into  thy  sire  ? 

Ion. 

The  face  of  things  appeareth  not  the  same  5S5 

Far  off,  and  when  we  scan  them  nigh  at  hand. 

So  do  I  greet  with  gladness  this  my  lot 

Who  find  a  sire  :  howbeit  hear  what  burden 

Weighs  on  my  soul.     The  glorious  earth-born  state, 

Athens,  men  say,  hath  nought  of  alien  strain.  590 

I  shall  thrust  in,  stained  with  a  twofold  taint — 

An  outland  father,  and  my  bastard  self. 

And,  bearing  this  reproach,  nor  strong  in  friends, 

"  Nobody"  shall  be  called—"  Nobody's  Son." 

Then,  if  1  press  to  Athens'  highest  ranks,  595 

And  seek  a  name,  of  them  that  fail  shall  I 

Win  hate  :  with  climbers  aye  climbs  jealousy. 

And  noble  souls,  born  guides  of  men,  which  yet 

Are  silent,  meddling  not  with  things  of  state, 

To  them  shall  I  be  laughing-stock  and  fool,  600 

Who,  in  a  town  censorious,1  go  not  softly. 

Yea,  if  mid  men  of  mark,  which  helm  the  state, 

I  win  repute,  I  shall  be  hedged  in  more 

By  checking  votes.2     Thus  is  it  ever,  father  : 

They  which  sway  nations,  and  have  won  repute,      605 

To  young  ambitions  are  the  bitterest  foes. 

1  v.l.  <f>6f3ov  irXea,  "  suspicious." 

2  Shall  be  hampered  in  action  by  the  votes  of  the  people, 
which,  in  a  democratic  state  (for  Euripides  is  describing  the 
Athens^of  his  own  day),  may  check  him  at  every  turn. 

Y  2 


3oo  EURIPIDES. 


Then,  coming  to  a  strange  house,  alien  I, 

And  to  a  childless  lady,  who  hath  shared 

With  thee  her  sorrow  heretofore,  but  now 

Shall  bear  in  bitterness  her  reproach  alone,  610 

1  low  shall  I  not,  with  reason,  have  her  hate, 

When  by  thy  knee  I  stand,  she  on  thy  love 

Looketh  with  bitter  eyes  of  childlessness, — 

\\ "hen  thou  must  cast  me  off  and  cleave  to  her, 

Or  honour  me,  and  wreck  thine  household's  peace  ?  615 

How  oft  the  dagger  and  the  deadly  bowl 

Have  women  found  to  slay  their  lords  withal  ! 

Nay,  father,  more — 1  pity  this  thy  wife 

Who  grows  grey  childless.     'Tis  not  worthy  her,    [620 

Sprung  from  proud  sires — this  curse  of  childlessness. 

And  power — this  power  men  falsely  praise  so  oft, 

Winsome  its  face  is,  but  behind  the  veil 

Is  torment.     Who  is  happy,  fortunate  who, 

That,  fearing  violence,  glancing  aye  askance, 

Weareth  out  life  ?   Nay,  rather  would  I  live  625 

Happy-obscure,  than  be  exalted  prince, — 

One  who  must  joy  to  have  for  friends  the  vile, 

Who  hates  the  good,  and  ever  dreads  to  die. 

"  Ah,"  thou  wilt  say,  "  gold  overbears  all  this, 

And  wealth  is  sweet."     Would  I  clutch  lucre— groan 

Under  its  load,  with  curses  in  mine  ears  ?  [630 

Nay,  wealth  for  me  in  measure,  sorrowless. 

But,  father,  hear  what  blessings  here  were  mine  : — 

First,  leisure,  dearest  of  delights  to  men  : 

Friendly  the  folk  ;  no  villain  jostleth  me  635 

Out  of  the  path  :  it  galls  the  very  soul 

To  yield  the  pass,  and  vail  to  baser  men. 

My  life  was  prayer  to  Gods,  converse  with  men, 

Ministrant  unto  joy  and  not  to  grief, 


ION.  301 

Welcoming  coming,  speeding  parting  guests,  640 

A  new  face  smiling  still  on  faces  new. 

And  that  which  men,  though  loth,  must  ask  in  prayer, 

Uprightness,  use  and  nature  bred  in  me 

For  Phoebus'  service.     Thinking  on  all  this, 

Father,  I  more  esteem  things  hure  than  there.  645 

Mine  own  life  let  me  live.     Content  with  little 

Hath  charm  no  less  than  joy  in  great  estate. 

Chorus. 

Well  hast  thou  said,  so  be  that  those  I  love 
In  these  thy  words  may  find  their  happiness. 

Xuthus. 

Of  this  no  more  :  but  learn  to  bear  thy  fortune.        650 

For,  where  I  found  thee,  there  would  I  begin, 

By  making  thee  a  solemn  public  feast, 

And  thy  birth-sacrifice,1  not  offered  yet. 

Now  to  the  feast  as  my  guest  bringing  thee, 

I'll  make  thee  cheer  :  then  to  the  Athenians'  land    655 

Bring  thee  as  one  that  travelleth,  not  as  mine. 

For,  sooth,  I  have  no  heart  to  vex  my  wife 

With  mine  own  bliss,  while  she  is  childless  still. 

And  I  shall  find  a  time  to  bring  my  queen 

To  suffer  thee  to  take  my  sceptred  sway.  660 

Ion1  I  name  thee,  of  that  happy  chance 

In  that,  as  forth  Apollo's  shrine  I  came, 

First  lighted  I  on  thee.     Now  all  thy  friends 

To  this  glad  feast  of  sacrifice  gather  thou, 

To  bid,  as  leaving  Delphi  soon,  farewell.  665 

1  Customarily  offered  on  the  day  of  birth,  and  again  on 
the  fifth  day  after,  when  the  child  receiveth  its  name. 

1  "Iwv,  "  coming,"  because  met  at  his  coming  forth. 


3o2  EURIPIDES. 


You,  handmaids,  I  command,  speak  not  hereof. 
!  I  nth — if  ye  say  to  my  wife  anything  ! 

Ion. 

1  go  :  yet  to  my  fortune  one  thing  lacks  : 
For,  save  I  find  her  who  gave  life  to  me, 
My  life  is  naught.     If  one  prayer  be  vouchsafed,     670 
Of  Athens'  daughters  may  my  mother  be, 
That  by  my  mother  may  free  speech  be  mine. 
For,  if  a  stranger  pass  into  a  burg 
Of  pure  blood,  burgher  though  he  be  in  name, 
Bond  is  his  tongue,  and  he  hath  not  free  speech.  675 

[Exeunt. 
Chorus. 

(Sir.) 

O  vision  of  tears,  and  of  fierce  heart-burning 

Breaking  forth  into  shrieks  and  the  onrush  of  sighing,1 
When  my  lady  beholdeth  her  chieftain  returning 
In  glory  of  fatherhood — knoweth  that  yearning 

Of  childlessness  waiteth  her,  hunger  undying  !      680 
Seer-son  of  Latona,  what  strain  hast  thou  chanted  ? 

Whence  came  he,  the  waif  in  thy  temple-porch  lying  ? 
Thy  fosterling — yea,  but  a  mother  yet  wanted  ! 
And  the  oracle  stirreth  mine  heart  to  defying 
Of  its  tones  with  the  whisper  of  treachery  haunted. 
I  fear  whereunto  it  will  grow, 
This  fate  thou  hast  caused  us  to  know. 

Too  strange  for  my  credence  it  is.  690 

Child  fathered  of  fortune  and  treason  ! 
Child  alien  of  blood  ! — it  were  reason 
That  all  should  cry  yea  unto  this. 

1  Reading  dA.aA.ayas  (mvayfidTwv  t 


ION.  303 

(Ant.) 

Friends,  shall  I  bear  to  my  lady  the  story  ? 

Shall  I  speak  in  her  ear,  her  lord's  baseness  revealing  ? 
Whom  she  counted  her  all  and  in  all — heretofore  he 
Had  share  in  her  dreams  of  a  yet-coming  glory. 

Now  in  woe  is   she  whelmed,   but  his  heart  hath 
found  healing, 
That    he    flouts    the   dear    tresses   and    eld's   silver- 
strewing  !  700 
O  caitiff  and  outlander,  he  that  came  stealing 
On  the  wealth  of  a  house  he  saved  not  from  undoing  U — 
Who  would  cozen  my  lady  with  treacherous  dealing- 
False  one,  away  to  thy  ruin,  thy  ruin  ! 

O'er  the  consecrate  cake  he  shall  lay 

Mid  your  altar-flames,  Gods,  let  them  play 

Unavailingly  !2 — Ah  but  my  queen  710 

Shall  know  that  I  hold  her  the  dearer  ! 
Lo,  this  strange  feast  draweth  nearer 

When  the  sire's  strange  son  shall  be  seen. 

(Epode). 
Heights  of  Parnassus,  rock-ridges  upbearing 

The  watchtower  crags  and  the  cloudland  dome, 
Where  Bacchus,  uptossing  the  pines  flame-glaring, 

Leaps  mid  his  Bacchants  through  darkness  that  roam, 
May  never  yon  boy  to  my  city  come  faring  ! 

Be  his  birth-day  the  day  of  his  doom  !        720 


1  Xuthus,  though,  by  his  marriage  with  the  princess  of 
Athens,  he  came  into  possession  of  the  wealth  of  the  royal 
house  of  Erechtheus,  had  not,  by  perpetuating  the  race  of 
true-born  Erechtheids,  saved  that  house  from  extinction, 
since  Ion  was  so  far  known  only  as  the  son  of  an  alien 
father  and  of  an  (unknown)  alien  mother. 

2  i.e.,  May  the  birth-sacrifice  about  to  be  offered  be 
unblest. 


304  EURIPIDES. 


For  in  sooth  should  our  city  be  hard  bestead 
If  an  alien  host  to  her  hearths  shall  be  led. 
Suffice  us  Erechtheus,  the  kingly  head 
Of  the  Ancient  Home  ! 

Enter  Kreusa  and  Old  Servant,  climbing  the  ascent  to 

the  Temple. 

Kreusa. 

Thou  reverend  child-ward  of  my  sometime  sire         725 

Erechtheus,  while  he  walked  yet  in  the  light, 

Bear  up,  and  press  to  yon  God's  oracle, 

That  thou  mayst  share  my  joy,  if  Loxias  King 

One  boding-pledge  of  sons  hath  uttered  forth. 

'Tis  sweet  with  friends  to  share  prosperity  :  730 

And  if — which  God  forbid — if  ill  befall, 

'Tis  sweet  to  gaze  in  eyes  of  sympathy. 

Now  thine  old  loving  tendance  of  my  sire 

I,  though  thy  lady,  render  back  to  thee. 

Old  Servant. 

My  daughter,  spirit  worthy  of  noble  sires  735 

Thou  keepest,  and  thou  hast  not  put  to  shame 

Thine  old  forefathers,  children  of  the  soil. 

Draw,  draw  me  towards  the  shrines,  and  bring  me  on. 

Steep  is  the  god-ward  path  :  be  thou  physician 

Unto  mine  age,  and  help  my  toiling  limbs.  740 

Kreusa. 
Follow  :  take  heed  where  thou  dost  plant  thy  feet. 

Old  Servant. 
Lo  there  ! 
Slow  is  the  foot,  still  by  the  mind  outstripped. 


ION.  305 

Kreusa. 
Bear  up  thy  foot's  tread  with  the  groping  staff.1 

Old  Servant. 
Blind  guide  is  this  when  mine  eyes  serve  so  ill. 

Kreusa. 
Sooth  said  :  yet  yield  not  thou  to  weariness.  745 

Old  Servant. 
I  would  not,  but  my  lost  strength  1  command  not. 

Kreusa. 

Women,  which  do  leal  service  at  my  loom 
And  shuttle,  show  what  fortune  hath  my  lord 
Found  touching  issue,  for  which  cause  we  came. 
For,  if  ye  speak  good  tidings  unto  me,  750 

Your  queen  shall  not  forget  the  debt  of  joy. 

Chorus. 

Ah  fate  ! 

Old  Servant  (aside). 

No  happy-boding  prelude  of  their  speech  ! 

Chorus. 

Ah  hapless  ! 

Old  Servant  (aside). 

Ha,  sinks  mine  heart  for  my  lords'  oracle  ?  755 

1  Reading  iroSds  and  irept^epet.  If  7repi<£epr;,  we  might 
render  "  Prop  with  thy  staff  thy  foot's  uncertain  tread ; " 
referring  to  the  manner  in  which  the  foot  nervously  tries 
the  ground  round  about ;  its  inequalities  being  dimly  seen. 


3o6  EURIPIDES. 


Chorus. 
What  shall  we  do  when  death  is  in  the  path  ? 

Kreusa. 
What  means  this  strain,  and  wherefore  is  your  fear  ? 

Chorus. 
Speech  ? — silence  ? — what  is  it  that  we  should  do  ? 

Kreusa. 
Speak  :  something  ye  keep  back  that  toucheth  me. 

Chorus. 

Thou  shalt  be  told, — yea,  though  I  die  twice  over.  760 
'Tis  not  for  thee,  my  queen,  in  arms  to  fold 
Children,  nor  press  them  ever  to  thy  breast. 

Kreusa. 
Ah,  would  I  might  die  ! 

Old  Servant. 
Daughter — 

Kreusa. 

Ah  wretch  ! — ah  me  for  my  misery  !       [765 
I  have  gotten  sore  hurt,  my  friends :  what  is  life  unto  me  ? 

Old  Servant. 

Undone — thou  and  I  ! 
O  child  ! 

Kreusa. 

Ah  me,  ah  me  !  for  the  anguish-dart 
Hath  pierced  me  through,  and  hath  plunged  deep  into 
mine  heart. 


ION.  3°7 

Old  Servant. 
Nay,  moan  not  yet — 

Kreusa. 

But  wailings  the  soul  of  me  fill ! 

Old  Servant. 
Ere  we  shall  learn — 

Kreusa. 

What  tidings  remain  for  me  still  ?    770 

Old  Servant. 

If  in  the  same  calamity  our  lord 

Have  part,  or  thine  alone  misfortune  be. 

Chorus. 

Ancient,  to  him  hath  Loxias  given  a  son, 

And  private  joy  is  his,  unshared  of  her.  775 

Kreusa. 

Ah  sorrow  on  sorrow,  for  crown  of  sorrow,  and  woes 
for  my  sighing  ! 

Old  Servant. 

But  of  some  woman  must  he  yet  be  born, 

This  child  ? — or  did  the  God  proclaim  him  born  ? 

Chorus. 

Already  born — nay  more,  a  stripling  grown  780 

Doth  Loxias  give  him.     I  was  there,  and  heard. 

Kreusa. 

How  sayest  thou  ? — nameless,  unspeakable  things  in 
mine  ears  art  thou  crying — 


308  EURIPIDES. 


Old  Servant. 

And  mine.     But  how  works  out  the  oracle  ?  785 

More  clearly  tell  me  :  who  the  lad  is,  tell. 

Chorus. 

Whomso  thy  lord  should  first  meet  as  he  passed 
From  the  God's  fane,  the  God  gave  him  for  son. 

Kreusa. 

Ah  me  !  ah  me  ! — and  my  weird 
Of  barrenness,  barrenness  grippeth  my  life ! — desolation- 
oppressed  790 
Shall  I  live  on,  living  in  childless  halls ! 

Old  Servant. 

Who  was  the  child  foretold  ?  whom  met  he  first, 
Our  sad  queen's  lord  ?  How  saw  he  him,  and  where  ? 

Chorus. 

Rememberest  thou,  O  dear  my  queen,  the  youth 
That  swept  the  temple's  floor  ?  That  son  is  he.     795 

Kreusa. 

Oh  to  flee  on  the  wings  of  a  bird 
Through  the  ocean  of  air,  and  from  Hellas  afar  to  the 
stars  of  the  west  ! 

Such  pain  on  me,  friends,  such  anguish  falls  ! 

Old  Servant. 

And  what  name  hath  his  father  given  to  him  ?  800 

Know'st  thou  ?     Or  bideth  this  unfixed,  unsaid  ? 

Chorus. 
Ion,  since  he  was  first  to  meet  his  sire. 


ION.  3°9 

Old  Servant. 

His  mother,  who  ? 

Chorus. 

Thereof  can  I  say  nought. 
My  lady's  spouse  hath  stol'n — that  all  my  tale 
Be  known  of  thee — into  the  festal  tent,  805 

To  sacrifice  for  welcoming  and  birth, 
And  spread  a  public  feast  for  this  new  son. 

Old  Servant. 

Betrayed,  Queen,  are  we — for  thy  pain  is  mine — 

Of  this  thy  lord  ;  by  treason-stratagems 

Insulted  ;  from  Erechtheus'  palace-halls  810 

Cast  forth  !     And  this  I  say,  as  hating  not 

Thy  lord,  but  better  loving  thee  than  him, 

Who  came  a  stranger  to  thy  burg  and  home, 

Wedded  thee,  and  received  thine  heritage, 

And  of  another  woman  gat  him  sons  815 

Clandestine  :  this  "  clandestine  "  will  I  prove  : — 

Knowing  thee  barren,  he  was  not  content 

To  share  thy  fortune,  to  partake  thy  lot, 

But  took  a  slave  to  his  clandestine  bed, 

Begat  this  son,  from  Athens  sent  him,  gave  820 

Unto  some  Delphian's  fostering  :  for  concealment 

Was  he  reared  in  the  temple,  consecrate. 

So,  when  he  knew  the  stripling  fully  grown, 

He  drew  thee  hither  by  the  hope  of  sons. 

So,  not  the  God  hath  lied,  but  this  man  lied,  825 

Rearing  so  long  the  lad,  weaving  such  plots. 

Detected  here,  he  would  cast  it  on  the  God : 

But,  once  in  Athens,  he  would  set  her  crown 

Upon  him,  guarding  'gainst  the  chance  of  time. 


3io  EURIPIDES. 


But  this  new  name's  misdated  forgery  ! —  830 

Ion — set  eye  on  him  then  first,  forsooth  ! 

Chorus. 

Ah  me  !  how  evermore  I  loathe  the  knave 
That  plotteth  wrongs,  and  then  with  stratagem 
Tricks  forth  !   Be  mine  the  friend  of  simple  soul 
Yet  honest,  rather  than  the  craftier  villain.  835 

Old  Servant. 

And  a  worse  ill  than  all  this  must  thou  know, 

To  take  into  thine  house  for  lord  thereof 

A  slave's  brat,  motherless,  of  none  account ! 

'Twere  but  one  ill,  if  from  a  free-born  womb, 

With  thy  consent,  pleading  thy  barrenness,  840 

He  found  an  heir.     Or,  if  this  liked  thee  not, 

He  ought  to  have  sought  a  wife  of  Aiolus'  race. 

Now,  something  worthy  of  woman  must  thou  do — 

Or  grasp  the  sword,  or  by  some  wiliness 

Or  poison  slay  thine  husband  and  his  son,  845 

Or  ever  death  shall  come  from  them  to  thee. 

For,  if  thou  flinch,1  'tis  thou  shalt  lose  thy  life  : 

For,  when  two  foes  beneath  one  roof  be  met, 

This  one  or  that  one  must  the  victim  be. 

Willing  am  I  with  thee  to  share  this  work,  850 

To  enter  the  pavilion,  slay  the  lad 

Where  he  prepares  the  feast : — repaying  so 

My  lords  their  nurture,  let  me  die  or  live  ! 

There  is  but  one  thing  bringeth  shame  to  slaves, 

The  name  :  in  all  else  ne'er  a  slave  is  worse  855 

Than  free  men,  so  he  bear  an  upright  soul. 

1  Retaining  the   MS.  {x^creis,    vice   <rv   <j>eiaei,    "spare" 
(Badham). 


ION.  3" 

Chorus. 

I  too,  dear  mistress,  I  consent  to  share 
Thy  fate,  or  death,  or  honourable  life. 

Kreusa. 

O,  how  keep  silence,  my  soul  ? 

Yet  how  shall  I  dare  to  unroll  860 

Deeds  hidden  of  darkness,  and  cast  the  shame  behind 

me  ? 

Yet  what  thing  remaineth  to  fetter  me,  what  thing  to 

bind  me  ? 

With  whom  can  I  stand  in  virtue's  glorious  strife  ? 

Hath  not  mine  husband  a  traitor  been  shown  to  his 

wife  ? 
I  am  wholly  of  home  bereft,  of  my  children  bereft  : 

Of  the  hopes  unavailing  I  cherished  not  one  is  left, 

Who  dreamed  I  should  order  all  things  well, 

Yet  nought  of  that  bridal  of  horror  tell, 

Nought  of  the  birth  amid  tears  that  befell. 

Now  nay — by  the  palace  of  Zeus  star-brightened,     870 

By   the   watchtower    crag    where   my    Goddess's 

throne  is, 

By  the  holy  shore  of  the  mere  Tritonis 

Full-brimming  mid  Libya's  plain, 

Mine  outrage  no  more  will  I  hide,  that  lightened 

My  bosom  may  be  of  its  pain. 

Mine  eyes  are  a  fountain  of  tears  fast-welling, 

And  mine  heart  is  betrayed  and  anguish-riven, 

Betrayed  of  lovers  on  earth,  in  heaven  ! 

I  will  speak  it,  that  thankless  name  forth  telling, 

And  the  tale  of  the  traitor  to  love  shall  be  given.  880 

Lord  of  the  sevenfold  lyre,  who  attunest  the  voice  of  its 
strings, 


3i2  EURIPIDES. 


Under  whose  fingers  the  lifeless  awaketh,  the  melody 

sings 
From  the  horn-sherds  of  oxen,  the  chant  of  the  Muses 

in  sweetness  outrings — 

Child  of  Latona,  I  cry  to  the  Sun — I  will  publish  thy 

shame  ! 
Thou,  with  thy  tresses  a-shimmer  with  gold,  through 

the  flowers  as  I  came 
Plucking  the  crocuses,  heaping  my  veil  with  their  gold- 

litten  flame,  890 

Cam'st  on  me,  caughtest  the  poor  pallid  wrists  of  mine 

hands,  and  didst  hale 
Unto  thy  couch  in  the  cave, — "  Mother  !  mother  !  "  I 

shrieked  out  my  wail, — 
Wroughtest  the  pleasure  of  Kypris :  no  shame  made 

the  god-lover  quail. 

Wretched  I  bare  thee  a  child,  and   I  cast  him  with 

shuddering  throe 
Forth  on  thy  couch  where  thou  forcedst  thy  victim,  a 

bride-bed  of  woe.  900 

Lost — my  poor  baby  and  thine  !  for  the  eagles  devoured 

him  : — and  lo, 

Victory-songs  to  thy  lyre  dost  thou  chant ! — Ho,  I  call 

to  thee,  son 
Born  to  Latona,  Dispenser  of  Boding,  on  gold-gleaming 

throne 
Midmost  of  earth  who  art  sitting : — thine  ears  shall  be 

pierced  with  my  moan  !  910 

Ah,  ravisher-bridegroom  thou  ! 

What  ailed  thee  to  give  to  my  spouse — 


ION.  313 

Requiting  no  service,  I  trow  ! — 
A  son  to  be  heir  to  his  house  ? 
But  my  baby  and  thine,  O  heartless,  was  taken 

For  a  prey  of  the  eagles :  long  ere  now 
Were  the  swaddling-bands  of  his  mother  forsaken. 

Thy  Delos  doth  hate  thee,  thy  bay-boughs  abhor 

thee,  [920 

By  the  palm-tree  of  feathery  frondage  that  rose 

Where  in  sacred  travail  Latona  bore  thee 
In  Zeus's  garden-close.1 

Chorus. 

Ah  me,  what  mighty  treasure-house  is  opened 
Of  woes,  whereat  shall  each  and  all  shed  tears  ! 

Old  Servant. 

Ah  daughter,  gazing  on  thy  face  I  fill  925 

With  pity  :  yea,  my  mind  is  all  distraught. 
For,  while  one  surge  of  ills  yet  drowns  my  soul, 
High  rolls  astern  another  from  thy  words. 
For,  soon  as  thou  hadst  told  thy  present  ills, 
Thou  followedst  the  foul  track  of  other  woes.  930 

What  say'st  thou  ?     What  dost  lay  to  Loxias'  charge  ? 
What  child  hast  born  ?     In  Athens  where  didst  cast 

him 
To  gladden  a  living  grave  ? — tell  yet  again. 

Kreusa. 
Ancient,  I  blush  before  thee,  yet  will  tell. 

1  Reading  kottois  (Badham,  etc.)  vice  Ka^7rois,  "  Unto  Zeus 
for  the  fruit  of  her  throes." 


3i4  EURIPIDES. 


Old  Servant. 
To  weep  with  friends  that  weep,  full  well  I  know.    935 

Kreusa. 

Hear  then  : — the  Rocks  of  Kekrops  knowest  thou 
The  Long  Cliff  named  ?— the  northward-facing  cave  ? 

Old  Servant. 
I  know  :   Pan's  shrine  and  altars  stand  thereby. 

Kreusa. 
Even  there  I  agonized  in  that  dread  strife — 

Old  Servant. 
What  ? — lo,  how  start  my  tears  to  meet  thy  words  !   940 

Kreusa. 
With  Phoebus  linked  sore  loth  in  woeful  bridal. 

Old  Servant. 
Ah  daughter,  was  it  this  myself  had  marked  ? 

Kreusa. 
Had  marked  ? — If  sooth  thou  sayest,  I  will  tell. 

Old  Servant. 
Thy  secret  sighing  as  with  hidden  pain  ? 

Kreusa. 
Yea  ;  then  befell  the  ills  I  now  lay  bare.  945 

Old  Servant. 
And  how  didst  thou  conceal  Apollo's  rape  ? 


ION.  315 

Kreusa. 
I  travailed — bear  to  hear  my  tale,  old  friend  ! — 

Old  Servant. 
Who  tended  thee  ?  .  .  .  .  alone  in  trial's  hour  ! 

Kreusa. 
Alone  within  the  cave  that  saw  my  rape. 

Old  Servant.  [950 

And  the  boy,  where  ? — that  thou  no  more  be  childless. 

Kreusa. 
Dead  is  he,  ancient,— unto  beasts  cast  out. 

Old  Servant. 
Dead  ?— and  Apollo,  traitor  !  helped  thee  nought  ? 

Kreus\. 
Helped  not.     The  child  is  nursed  in  Hades'  halls. 

Old  Servant. 
Who  cast  him  forth?— Not  thou— O  never  thou  ! 

Kreusa. 
Even  I.     My  vesture  darkling  swaddled  him.  955 

Old  Servant. 
Nor  any  knew  the  exposing  of  the  child  ? 

Kreusa. 
None— Misery  and  Secrecy  alone. 

7.  i 


3i6  EURIPIDES. 

Old  Servant. 
How  couldst  thou  leave  thy  babe  within  the  cave  ? 

Kreusa. 
Ah  how  ? — O  pitiful  farewells  I  moaned  ! 

Old  Servant. 
Poor  heart  of  steel ! — O  God's  heart  harder  yet !       960 

Kreusa. 
Ah,  hadst  thou  seen  the  babe"s  hands  stretched  to  me  ! 

Old  Servant. 
Seeking  the  breast,  or  cradle  of  thine  arms  ? 

Kreusa. 
Where  he  lay  not,  and  so  had  wrong  of  me. 

Old  Servant. 
And  in  what  hope  didst  thou  cast  forth  the  babe  ? 

Kreusa. 
That  the  God  yet  would  save  him — his  own  child.    965 

Old  Servant. 
Ah  me,  what  tempest  wrecks  thine  house"s  weal  ! 

Kreusa. 
Why  dost  thou,  ancient,  veil  thine  head,  and  weep  ? 

Old  Servant. 
Seeing  calamity,  thy  sire's  and  thine. 


ION  317 

Kreusa. 
Tis  man's  lot  :  nought  continueth  at  one  stay. 

Old  Servant. 
Cling  we  no  more  to  wailings,  daughter,  now.  970 

Kreusa. 
What  must  I  do  ?■ — so  helpless  misery  is. 

Old  Servant. 
Avenge  thee  on  the  God  who  wronged  thee  first. 

Kreusa. 
How  ? — I,  a  mortal,  triumph  o'er  the  strong  ? 

Old  Servant. 
Set  thou  the  torch  to  Loxias'  holy  shrine. 

Kreusa. 
I  fear  :— even  now  I  have  enough  of  woes.  975 

Old  Servant. 
Then  dare  the  thing  thou  canst :  thine  husband  slay. 

Kreusa. 
I  cannot — for  old  love  and  loyalty's  sake. 

Old  Servant. 
The  boy,  at  least,  thus  foisted  upon  thee. 

Kreusa. 
How  ? — would  'twere  possible  !- — how  fain  would  I  ! 


3i8  EURIPIDES. 


Old  Servant. 
With  daggers  arm  the  servants  of  thy  train.  980 

Kreusa. 
I  will  go  straight : — but  when  to  strike  the  blow  ? 

Old  Servant. 
In  the  pavilion,  where  he  feasts  his  friends. 

Kreusa. 
Murder  in  public — and  weak  hearts  of  thralls  ! 

Old  Servant. 
Woe  !  thine  heart  fails.     Do  thine  own  plotting  now. 

Kreusa. 
Ha,  mine  is  secret  guile  and  triumph  sure.  985 

Old  Servant. 
Yea,  both  ? — then  will  1  be  thy  minister. 

Kreusa. 
Hear  then  : — thou  knowest  of  the  Earth-born  War  ? 

Old  Servant. 
Yea,  giants  stood  in  Phlegra  'gainst  the  Gods. 

Kreusa. 
There  Earth  brought  forth  the  Gorgon,  monster  dread— 

Old  Servant. 
To  help  her  sons,  and  press  the  Gods  full  hard  ?       990 


ION.  319 

Kreusa. 
Yea,  and  Zeus'  Daughter,  Goddess  Pallas,  slew  it. 

Old  Servant. 
What  was  the  fashion  of  its  grisly  form  ? 

Kreusa. 
A  breastplate  fenced  with  ring  on  ring  of  snakes. 

Old  Servant. 
Meseems  1  heard  this  legend  long  ago — 

Kreusa. 
How  on  her  breast  Athene  bore  its  skin.  995 

Old  Servant. 
Ay,  named  the  Aegis,  Pallas's  array  ? 

Kreusa. 

Of  Gods  named,  from  her  battle-eager1  charge. 

Old  Servant. 
But,  daughter,  how  shall  this  thing  harm  thy  foes  ? 

Kreusa. 
Knowest  thou  Erichthonius  ? — thou  must. 

Old  Servant.  [1000 

First  father  of  your  line,  whom  earth  brought  forth  ? 

1  Reading  rj$€v,  with  Paley,  vice  MSS.  rj\6tv. 


32Q  EURIPIDES. 


K  RE  USA. 

To  him  gave  Pallas  in  his  hour  of  birth — 

Old  Servant. 
W  hat  ? — thy  word  falters  in  the  utterance. 

Kreusa. 
Two  drops  of  blood — of  that  same  Gorgon's  blood. 

Old  Servant. 

What  power  have  they  upon  the  life  of  man  ? 

Kreusa. 
For  death  one,  one  for  healing  of  disease.  1005 

Old  Servant. 
And  hung  them  on  the  child — wherein  enclosed  ? 

Kreusa. 
A  golden  clasp.     He  gave  it  to  my  sire. 

Old  Servant. 
And,  when  Erechtheus  died,  to  thee  it  passed  ? 

Kreusa. 
Yea  ;   and  I  bear  it  ever  on  my  wrist. 

Old  Servant. 
How  is  the  Goddess'  gift  twofold  ordained  ?  1010 

Kreusa. 
Each  drop  that  welled  forth  from  the  hollow  vein — 


ION.  321 

Old  Servant. 
To  what  serves  this  ?     What  virtue  beareth  it  ? 

Kreusa. 
Averts  diseases,  fostereth  the  life. 

Old  Servant. 
The  second  thou  hast  named — what  doeth  it  ? 

Kreusa. 
Slayeth  :  'tis  venom  of  the  Gorgon's  snakes.  1015 

Old  Servant. 
Mingled  in  one,  or  several,  dost  thou  bear  it  ? 

Kreusa. 
Several :  good  with  evil  blendeth  not. 

Old  Servant. 
O  child,  O  darling,  thou  hast  all  thy  need  ! 

Kreusa. 
Hereby  the  lad  shall  die,  the  slayer  thou. 

Old  Servant.  [1020 

Where  ? — by  what  deed  ?     Thou  tell,  and  I  will  dare. 

Kreusa. 
In  Athens,  when  he  cometh  to  mine  home. 

Old  Servant. 
Thou  say'st  not  well. — Nay,  thou  didst  blame  my  rede.! 

1  In  answer  to  her  movement  of  impatience  at  his  criticism 
of  her  plan. 


322  EURIPIDES. 


Kreusa. 
Ha,  doth  thine  heart's  misgiving  jump  w  ith  mine  ? 

Old  Servant. 
Thou  shouldst  be  murderess  held,  though  innocent. 

Kreusa. 
Even  so — the  old  tale  of  stepdame's  jealousy.  1025 

Old  Servant. 
Here  slay  him — now  :   so  shall  avail  denial. 

Kreusa. 
At  least  I  shall  the  sooner  taste  that  joy. 

Old  Servant. 
Nor  thy  lord  know  thy  knowledge  of  his  secret. 

Kreusa. 

Know'st  then  thy  part  ?   Receive  thou  from  mine  hand 
Athene's  golden  vial,  wrought  of  old.  1030 

Go  where  my  lord  holds  this  false  sacrifice  ; 
And,  in  the  banquet's  pause,  when  men  will  pour 
Wine  to  the  Gods,  this  have  thou  neath  thy  robes, 
And  swiftly  drop  into  the  stripling's  cup,— 
That  for  his  drinking,  not  the  general  bowl, — l        1035 
Even  his  who  seeks  to  lord  it  o'er  mine  house. 


1  There  is  no  sufficient  reason  for  omitting  this  line,  in 
which  the  natural  tenderness  of  the  woman  breaks  out. 
Contrast  the  wholesale  slaughter  hinted  at  by  the  suitors  in 
Odyssey  ii.  330  ;  and  compare  Brutus's  answer  to  the 
question,  "  Shall  no  man  else  be  touched  but  only  Caesar  ?  " 
Jul.  Ccts.  ii.  1. 


[ON.  323 

If  once  it  pass  his  lips,  ne'er  shall  he  come 
To  glorious  Athens  :  here  shall  he  stay — dead. 

Old  Servant. 

Unto  thine  host's  house  now  withdraw  thy  foot ; 

And  1  through  mine  appointed  task  will  toil.  1040 

Come,  aged  foot,  for  deeds  must  thou  grow  young, 

Though  this  be  not  by  time  vouchsafed  to  thee. 

On,  with  thy  mistress  on,  against  the  foe  ! 

Help  her  to  slay  and  cast  him  forth  her  home. 

Fair  faith  ? — O  yea,  fair  faith  for  fortune  fair  :  1045 

But,  when  ye  would  wreak  vengeance  on  your  foes, 

There  is  no  law  that  lieth  in  the  path. 

[Exeunt  Kreusa  and  Old  Servant. 

Chorus. 

(Str.  1) 

Goddess  of  Highways,  Demeter's  Daughter, 

Queen  of  the  nightmare  darkness-ranger, 
Guide  thou  the  hand  that  for  noontide  slaughter   1050 
Shall  fill  up  the  chalice,  my  lady's  avenger, 
Which  beareth  the  venom-gouts  that  fell 
From  the  neck  of  the  Gorgon,  the  fiend  of  hell, 
My  lady's  greeting-gift  to  the  stranger 
That  usurpeth  Erechtheus'  royal  sway, 
That  an  alien  of  alien  strain  in  our  Athens  never  may 
reign,  [1060 

But  the  noble  Erechthei'ds — none  save  they  ! 

(Ant.  1) 
But — the  death  unaccomplished  ? — the  deed  unabetted 

1  Hekate,  (here,  as  elsewhere,  identified  with  Persephone,) 
goddess  of  sorcery  and  secret  poisoning  (and  so  invoked  by 
Medea,  394-6).  She  haunted  places  where  roads  crossed  each 
other,  and  at  night  sent  up  demons  and  phantoms  from  Hades. 


324  EURIPIDES. 


Of  the  hour,  and  my  mistress's  purposes  ended, 
And  the  hopes  that  upbore  her  ?—  remains  the  sword 
whetted  ; 
Remaineth  the  neck  in  the  death-noose  suspended  ; 
And,  I))'  agony  ending  the  agony-strife, 
Shall  she  pass  to  the  life  beyond  this  life. 
For  never  this  queen  from  kings  descended     [1070 
Shall  endure  that  the  splendour-light  of  her  eyne, 
No,  not  while  she  liveth,  should  fall  on  the  shame  of 
the  ancient  hall 

Ruled  bv  the  upstart  of  alien  line. 

(Str.  2) 
Shame  for  the  God  oft-chanted1 

In  hymns,  if  he,'2 
Beside  the  fountains  haunted 

Of  dances,  see 
With  eyes  long  held  from  sleep 
That  Twentieth  Dawn  upleap, 
See  the  torch-river's  sweep,  ere  darkness  flee, 

When  dances  heaven  star-glancing:; 
Adoringly, 

1  Dionysus,  or  Bacchus,  who,  in  the  Eleusinian  Mysteries 
here  referred  to,  was  worshipped  along  with  Demeter  and 
Persephone.  The  20th  of  the  month  Boedromion  (about 
beginning  of  October)  was  the  great  day  of  the  feast,  and 
was  ushered  in  by  a  vast  torch-light  procession  (of  30,000 
persons  sometimes)  conducting  with  dances  the  statue  of 
Bacchus  along  the  sacred  road.  In  this  procession  those 
newly  initiated  into  the  mysteries,  and  who  had  kept  vigil  in 
the  temple  the  night  before,  joined. 

-  Ion,  whose  presence,  as  that  of  an  alien  by  blood,  would 
be  profanation,  yet  whose  initiation  could,  as  a  matter  of 
policy,  not  be  avoided. 

3  The  very  elements  were  said  to  unite  in  this  dauce- 
worship  of  the  Mighty  Mother  and  her  Daughter. 


ION.  325 

When  the  white  moon  is  dancing,  1080 

And  'neath  the  sea 
The  Nereids"  dance  enrings 
The  eternal  river-springs, 
And  their  full  chorus  sings  Persephone 

Gold-crowned,  and  our  Earth-mother 

Awful  is  she  ! — 
Shall  he  press  in,  that  other, 

To  sovranty  ? 

Shall  not  his  hopes  be  foiled  ? — 

Where  kings  and  heroes  toiled. 

Shall  that  proud  realm  be  spoiled,  a  vagrant's 

fee7 

(Ant.  2) 

Mark — ye  whose  strains  of  slander  1090 

Scourge  evermore 
Woman  in  song,  and  brand  her 

Wanton  and  whore, — 
How  high  in  virtue's  place 
We  pass  men's  lawless  race, 
Nor  spit  in  viper-lays  your  venom-store  ; 

But  let  the  Muse  of  taunting 

On  men's  heads  pour 
Her  indignation,  chanting 

Her  treason-lore ; 
Sing  of  the  outraged  maid  ; 
Tell  of  the  wife  betrayed 

Of  him   who   hath   displayed    his  false    heart's 
core, — 

This  son  of  Zeus,1  who  flouted  1 100 

A  queen's  heart,  sore 

Xuthus,  descended  through  Aiolus  from  Zeus. 


326  EURIPIDES. 


With  childless  hunger,  scouted 

Troth-plight  of  yore  : 
Her  right  aside  he  thrust, 
And  mocked  a  nation's  trust 
For  one  that  to  his  lust  this  bastard  bore  ! 

Enter  Servant  in  Jiaste. 

Servant. 

Where,  damsels,  shall  I  light  upon  our  mistress, 
Erechtheus'  daughter  ?     All  throughout  the  town 
Seeking  her  have  I  ranged,  and  find  her  not. 

Chorus. 

What  is  it,  fellow-thrall  ?     What  hot-foot  haste 
Possesseth  thee  ?     What  tidings  bearest  thou  ?       mo 

Servant. 

We  are  hunted  !     Yea,  the  rulers  of  the  land 
Are  seeking  her,  that  she  may  die  by  stoning. 

Chorus. 

Ah  me  !  wrhat  say'st  thou  ?     Are  we  taken  then 
Plotting  the  secret  murder  of  yon  lad  ? 

Servant. 
Yea,  thou  wilt  share  the  doom — nor  thou  the  last.  1115 

Chorus. 
How  were  the  hidden  stratagems  laid  bare  ? 

Servant. 

The  assay  of  right  to  vanquish  wrong  the  God 
Discovered  ;  for  he  would  not  be  defiled.1 

1  i.e.  by  a  murder  within  the  temple-precincts. 


ION.  527 


Chorus. 


How  ? — I  beseech  thee  suppliant,  tell  it  out. 

For,  knowing  all,  if  1  indeed  must  die,  1120 

Death  should  be  easier — yea,  or  sweeter  life. 

Servant. 

Soon  as  Kreusa's  lord  had  left  the  fane 

Of  Phoebus,  taking  his  new  son  with  him, 

For  that  thanksgiving-feast  and  sacrifice, 

To  where  the  Wine-god*s  Bacchic  fire  leaps  up       11 25 

Went  Xuthus,  to  make  wet  with  victims'  blood 

Dionysus'  twin  rocks  for  the  son  new-found  ; 

And  spake,  "  Abide  now,  son,  and  set  thou  up 

A  wide-embracing  tent  by  craftsmen's  toil. 

If  sacrificing  to  the  Birth -gods  long  n  30 

I  tarry,  feast  thy  friends  assembled  there." 

So  took  the  calves  and  went.     And  now  the  youth 

The  unwalled  pavilion's  compass  solemnly 

With  tall  masts  reared,  and  fenced  with  heed  therefrom 

The  javelins  of  the  sun,  his  midnoon  flame,  1135 

And  in  like  wise  the  beams  of  dying  day. 

A  hundred  feet  he  meted  out  foursquare, — 

Having  for  compass  of  its  space  within 

Ten  thousand,  as  the  cunning  craftsmen  say, — l 


1  The  commentators  conspire  to  reject  these  two  lines, 
which  yet  convey  a  delightful  touch  of  nature.  The  man 
has  been  watching  the  workmen,  and  comes  away  impressed 
less  by  their  manual  skill,  which  he  could  understand,  than 
by  what  he  regarded  as  their  mastery  of  scientific  principles 
(01  <ro<fioi),  which  was  far  beyond  him.  His  retailing  the 
information  to  his  fellow- servants  is  another  natural  touch, 
the  ye  being  a  bit  of  quiet  humour — "  inside,  that  is,  you 
know " — as  though  he  too  had  gained  some  tincture  of 
scientific  accuracy.     So  have  we  seen  boys  retailing  to  their 


338  EURIPIDES. 


As  bidding  to  the  feast  all  Delphi's  folk.  1140 

With  sacred  tapestries  from  the  treasuries 

He  screened  it,  marvellous  for  men  to  see. 

First  with  a  canopy  of  shawls  he  ceiled  it, 

The  offering  of  Zeus'  son,  which  Herakles 

Brought  to  the  God,  the  Amazonian  spoils.  JI45 

Therein  were  webs  of  woven  blazonry  : — 

Heaven  shepherding  his  stars  in  folds  of  air  : 

His  steeds  the  Sun  drave  to  their  goal  of  fire, 

After  him  drawing  the  bright  Evening  Star. 

And  sable- vestured  Night  with  team  of  twain  1150 

Upfloated  ;  and  the  stars  companioned  her. 

The  Pleiad  swam  her  mid-sky  path  along. 

And  sword-begirt  Orion  ;  and,  above, 

The  Bear's  tail  wheeled  around  the  gold-gemmed  sphere. 

The  Moon's  full  circle  of  the  parted  month  ll55 

Shot  silver  shafts  :  the  Hyads,  surest  sign 

To  shipmen  ;  and  the  Light-uplifter,  Dawn. 

Chasing  the  star-rout.     And  upon  the  walls 

Draped  he  yet  other  orient  tapestries  : 

Galleys  with  oars  that  charged  on  ships  of  Greece,  1 160 

Monsters  half-brute,  steeds  flying  in  the  chase, 

Huntings  of  stags  and  lions  of  the  wold. 

At  the  doors  Kekrops  coiling  spire  on  spire 

Amidst  his  daughters — some  Athenian's  gift 

Of  worship.     In  the  banquet's  midst  he  set  1165 


wide-eyed  fellows  the  number  of  cubic  feet  in  an  excavation, 
or  of  bricks  in  a  building,  with  immense  respect  for  the 
workman  whose  "  one  small  head  could  carry  all  he  knew." 
Shakespeare  knew,  as  well  as  Euripides,  that  mental  arith- 
metic is  beyond  these  simple  souls — "  Let  me  see  :  every 
'leven  wether  —  tods  ;  every  tod  yields  —  pound  and  odd 
shilling  ;  fifteen  hundred  shorn, — what  comes  the  wool  to  ? 
— I  cannot  do't  without  counters."     (Winter's  Tale.  IV,  ii). 


10  \.  329 

The  golden  bowls.     Forth  stately  pacing  then 
A  herald  cried,  "  What  Delphian  will  soe'er, 
Come  to  the  feast !  "     And  when  the  tent  was  thronged, 
With  garlands  crowned  they  satisfied  their  souls 
With  plenteous  meat.     And  when  they  would  no  more, 
An  old  man  entered  in,  and  in  their  midst  [JI7° 

Stood,  and  to  laughter  loud  the  feasters  stirred, 
Meddling  unasked.     He  drew  from  drinking  ewers 
Water  for  cleansing  hands ;  for  incense  burnt 
Balsam  of  myrrh,  and  of  the  golden  cups  IJ75 

Took  charge — yea,  laid  this  office  on  himself. 
But  when  the  flutes  'gan  play,  and  mazer-bowls 
Were  mixed,  the  greybeard  spake,  "  Take  hence  forth- 
right 
These  tiny  wine-cups — ample  beakers  bring, 
That  my  lords'  hearts  the  sooner  may  be  merry."   1180 
Then  toiled  we  bearing  goblets  silver-chased 
And  golden  ;  and  he  took  a  chosen  one, 
As  rendering  worship  to  his  new-made  lord, 
And  gave  the  chalice  brimmed,  first  casting  in 
The  drug  death- working,  which  our  mistress  gave,  1 1S5 
Men  say,  that  her  new  son  might  leave  the  light. 
None  marked  ; — but  as  the  god-discovered  heir 
Raised  with  the  rest  the  God's  cup  in  his  hand, 
He  heard  some  servant  speak  a  word  unmeet. 
He,  temple-reared,  perfect  in  bodement  lore,  1190 

Held  it  for  ominous,  bade  fill  up  with  wine 
Another  bowl ;  that  first  drink-offering 
He  cast  to  earth,  and  bade  all  do  the  like. 
Then  fell  a  hush.     With  water  brimmed  we  up 
And  Bybline  wine  the  sacred  mixing-bowls.  1195 

Then  midst  our  toils  a  flight  of  doves  dropt  down 
In  the  pavilion  ;  for  in  Loxias'  halls 

A  A 


33o  EURIPIDES. 


Unfrayed  they  dwell,  and  when  men  spilled  the  wine, 

The  thirsty  innocents  dipped  their  beaks  therein, 

And  drew  it  down  their  dainty-feathered  throats.    1200 

And  none  the  God's  libation  harmed — save  one  : 

But  she  lit  where  the  new  heir  spilled  the  wine. 

She  sipped  the  drink — her  dainty-feathered  frame 

Quivered  and  staggered  :  an  unmeaning  scream1 

She  shrilled  of  anguish  :  marvelled  all  the  throng  1205 

Of  banqueters  to  see  her  agonies. 

One  fierce  convulsion— the  pink  claws  uncramped  ; 

And  she  was  dead.     That  child  of  prophecy 

Bared  of  his  robe  his  limbs,  leapt  o'er  the  board, 

Shouting  "  Who  goeth  about  to  murder  me  ?  12 10 

Old  man,  declare  ! — thine  was  the  eager  zeal, — 

Yea,  from  thine  hand  did  I  receive  the  cup  !  " 

He  clutched  his  withered  arm,  he  searched  him  o'er 

To  take  the  ancient  in  the  very  fact. 

Detected,  under  strong  constraint  he  told  121 5 

Kreusa's  desperate  deed,  the  poison-plot. 

Straightway,  the  feasters  with  him,  hurries  forth 

The  stripling  given  by  Loxias'  oracle, 

Before  the  Pythian  nobles  stands,  and  cries, 

"  O  hallowed  land,  by  poison  is  my  death  1220 

Sought  of  Erechtheus'  child,  the  alien  dame  !  " 

Then  Delphi's  kings  by  general  vote  decreed 

That  from  the  precipice  hurled  my  queen  should  die, 

As  compassing  a  priest's  death,  planning  murder 

Within  the  Precinct.     All  the  city  seeks  her  1225 

Who  sped  on  wretched  mission  wretchedly. 

Drawn  by  desire  of  babes  to  Phoebus'  fane, 

She  hath  lost  her  life  and  children  therewithal. 

1  The  ordinary  note  of  the  bird  was  significant  in  augury. 


if  bere  tlu^.  C*0*os. 

ngeano    n£~Phce  (ror>i 
xiiere  is  no?,  ?  js  rr.      .    ium  death  t 

XT  ^rers.     b  Ir>e,  n  fs  th      dm  for  n,e 

None:  woe  ,,»  S  ^  end ! 

All  is  laid  bare  for  l"  \    J  s  eyes  to  ^  ,?, 

The  cup,  the  :opod     cr  Mend 
Of  gouts  of  viper-bk    L    Svvi^  for  /j/u> 

Mid  Bacchus'  '  0UtShters  shed ;        9Uei%r, 
Drink-offering— yea,  t         e^  in  darJt„es_   . 

Gods  of  tl      dea^-  SS  d^;n. 


6> 


Ruin  is  my  life's  porJood  1.    >  her  do--iL  '■ 

Stones  raining  death  upon  my  queen  ! 
Oh  had  I  wings,  or  could  but  plunge  to  gloom 

Under  the  earth,  to  screen 
Mine  head  from  horror  of  the  stones  down-beating  ! 

Oh,  borne  on  four-horsed  car,  1240 

To  hear  the  hurrying  hoofs ! — to  see  waves  fleeting 
Astern  afar  ! 

There  is  no  hope, — except  a  God  befriending 
Should  snatch  us  from  men's  sight. 

O  hapless  queen,  upon  thy  life  what  ending 
Of  agony  shall  light  ! 

O  God  !  is  justice'  sword  on  us  descending, 
Who  thought  to  smite  ? 

Enter  Kreusa  in  haste. 

Kreusa. 

Maidens,  I  am  chased  :  the  blood-hounds  are  upon  my 
track  to  slay;  1250 

For  the  Pythian  vote  hath  doomed  me,  given  me  up  to 
be  their  prey  ! 

Aa  2 


332  EURIPIDES. 


Chorus.  wine' 

Hapless    queen,    we    know    ic,    know    the   ruin    over- 
shadowing thee. 

Kreusa.     'f 

Whither  fly  ?     What  refuge  ?     Scarce  from  forth  the 

house  my  feet  could  flee 
Ere  the  death  rushed  in.     Through  throngs  of  foemen 

slipt  I  stealthily. 

Chorus. 
What  thy  refuge  save  the  a'Adi  i 

Kreusa. 
How  shall  this  avail  my  need  ?     1255 

Chorus. 
Impious  'tis  to  slay  the  suppliant. 

Kreusa. 
Yet  the  law  my  death  decreed. 

Chorus. 
Ay,  but  first  their  hands  must  hold  thee. 

Kreusa. 

Lo,  the  swords  ! — they  come,  the  feet 
Of  the  ministers  of  death  ! 

Chorus. 

Upon  the  altar  take  thy  seat. 


ION.  333 

For,  if  here  they  slay  thee,  shall  thy  blood  to  heaven 

for  vengeance  call 
On  the  murderers. 

[Kreusa  seats  herself  on  the  altar,  grasping 
if  with  her  hands. 

So  : — and  now  to  bear  what  fate  soe'er  befall.  1260 
Enter  Ion  with  armed  men  followed  by  a  crowd. 

Ion. 

O  form  bull-shapen  of  her  sire  Kephisus,1 

What  viper  of  thy  blood  is  this,  or  whai 

Dragon  up-glaring  murderous  tiame  of  fire ! 

Full  of  all  hardihood,  not  less  fell  she  is  [1 265 

Than  Gorgon's  blood  wherewith  she  sought  my  death. 

Seize  her  ! — Parnassus'  jagged  terraces 

Shall  card  the  dainty  tresses  of  her  hair 

When  quoitwise  down  the  rocks  she  shall  be  hurled. 

0  grace  of  fortune,  ere  to  Athens  town 

1  came,  and  fell  beneath  a  stepdame's  power  !  1270 
Begirt  with  friends  I  sounded  thy  soul's  depths, 
Knew  thee  my  bane,  and  measured  all  thine  hate. 
For,  had  thy  nets  been  staked  around  me  there, 

Me  with  one  fling  thou  hadst  hurled  to  Hades'  halls. 

Nay — not  the  altar,  not  Apollo's  house  1275 

Shall  save  thee  !     Ruth  for  thee  ! — Rather  for  me 

And  for  my  mother  : — though  she  be  afar 

In  body,  ever  her  name  is  in  mine  heart. 

See  her,  vile  monster  !     Webs  on  webs  of  guile 

1  Praxithea,  Kreusa's  mother,  was  grand-daughter  of  this 
River-god.  River-gods  were  represented  under  the  form  of 
a  bull,  perhaps  from  the  impetuous  rush  of  their  streams. 
The  short  rivers  of  Greece  all  hecame  rushing  mountain- 
torrents  in  winter. 


i:}4  EURIPIDES. 


She  weaves  !     At  Phcebus'  altar  hath  she  crouched, 
As  though  she  should  not  suffer  for  her  deeds  !      [1280 

Beckons  to  the  guards,  who  advance  irresolutely. 

Kreusa. 

1  warn  thee,  slay  me  not — in  mine,  own  cause, 
And  the  God's  cause,  upon  whose  floor  we  stand  ! 

Ion. 
Phcebus— and  thou  !     What  part  hast  thou  in  Phcebus  ? 

Kreusa. 
Myself  1  give  to  the  God,  a  sacred  thing.  1285 

Ion. 
Sacred  ? — and  poison  the  God's  minister  ! 

Kreusa. 
Thou,  thou  wert  none  of  Loxias',  but  thy  sire's. 

Ion. 
His  I  became  while  father  I  had  none. 

Kreusa. 
Ay.  then  : — now,  I  am  his,  thou  his  no  more. 

Ion. 
Blasphemer  !— his  ?     His  reverent  child  was  I.       1290 

Kreusa. 
I  did  but  seek  to  slay  mine  house's  foe. 


10  •.. 


3J5 


Iox. 
/  came  not  sword  in  hand  against  thy  land. 

Kreusa. 
No? — Thou  wouldst  set  Erechtheus'  halls  aflame. 

Ion. 
Yea  ?     With  what  brands  or  with  what  flame  of  fire  ? 

Kreusa.  [I295 

In  mine  house  wouldst  thou  dwell,  take  mine  by  force. 

Iox. 
Take  ? — my  sire  gives  the  land  that  he  hath  won. 

Kreusa. 
What  part  have  Aiolus'  sons  in  Pallas'  land  ? 

Ion. 
He  was  her  saviour — and  with  arms,  not  words. 

n.  Kreusa. 

Should  allies  in  possession  take  the  land  ! 

Ion. 
So  thou  wouldst  slay  for  fear  of  what  might  fall  ?    1300 

Kreusa. 
Ay,  lest  thou  fall  upon  me,  and  I  die.1 

1  See  lines  846-84^. 


336 


EURIPIDES. 


Ion. 
Childless,  dost  grudge  my  father  finding  me  ? 

Kreusa. 
What,  shalt  thou  seize  all  childless  parents'  homes  ? 

Ion. 
Had  I  no  part  at  least  in  my  sire's  wealth  ? 

Kreusa.  L^c^ 

His  wealth  ! — a  shield  and  spear.     Take  that  thine  is. 

Ion. 
Hence  ! — leave  the  altar  and  the  hallowed  seat  ! 

Kreusa. 
Thy  mother  teach  her  part,  where'er  she  be. 

Shalt  thou  not  suffer,  who  wouldst  murder  me  ? 

Kreusa. 
Yea— if  thou  dare  to  slay  me  mid  the  shrines. 

Ion. 
What  joy  hast  thou  mid  Phoebus'  wreaths  to  die  ?  1310 

Kreusa. 
One  shall  I  vex  of  whom  I  was  sore  vexed. 

Ion. 
Out  upon  this  ! 
Shame,  that  a  God  ordained  unrighteous  laws 


ION.  337 

For  mortals,  statutes  not  in  wisdom  framed  ! 

Never  should  crime  have  altar-sanctuary, 

But  hounding  thence.      Unmeet  it  is  that  hands     1315 

Sin-stained  should  touch  the  Gods  :  but  righteous  men, 

Whoso  is  wronged,  should  claim  their  sanctuary, 

And  not  the  good  and  evil  come  alike 

Hither  to  win  the  same  boon  of  the  Gods. 

Enter  the  Pythia,  bearing  a  cradle,  the  contents  of  which 

are  concealed  by  a  wrapping  which  partially  envelopes  it. 

Pythia. 

Forbear,  my  son.     The  seat  of  prophecy  1320 

I  leave,  and  step  across  this  temple-fence, 
Priestess  of  Phoebus,  chosen  of  Delphi's  daughters 
To  guard  his  tripod's  immemorial  use. 

Ion. 
Hail,  dear  my  mother,  though  thou  bar'st  me  not. 

Pythia. 
So  was  I  called  ;  nor  did  the  name  mislike  me.       1325 

Ion. 
Hast  heard  of  yonder  woman's  plot  to  slay  me  ? 

Pythia. 
I  heard  :  yet  is  thy  ruthlessness  all  wrong. 

Ion. 
Shall  I  not  pay  death -wage  to  murderers  ? 

Pythia. 
To  stepsons  from  of  old  have  wives  been  foes. 


338  EURIPIDES. 


Ion. 
Yea,  I  withal  of  stepdames  have  foul  wrong.  1330 

Pythia. 
Ah  hush  ! — Thou  leav'st  the  fane,  thou  farest  home — 

Ion. 
What  must  I  do  then  at  thy  counselling  ? 

Pythia. 
With  clean  hands  and  fair  omens  go  to  Athens. 

Ion. 
Clean  are  the  hands  of  whoso  slays  his  foes. 

Pythia. 
Nay,  nay  ! — but  hear  the  tale  I  bring  to  thee.  1335 

Ion. 
Speak  :  it  shall  come  of  love,  whate'er  thou  say. 

Pythia. 

Seest  thou  this  chest  that's  cradled  in  mine  arms  ? 

Ion. 
I  see  an  ancient  ark  with  fillets  dight. 

Pythia. 
In  this  I  found  thee  once,  a  new-born  babe. 

Ion.  [i34° 

What  say'st  thou  ?  Strange  the  story  hither  brought  ! 


ION.  339 

Pythia. 

Vea,  I  kept  silence.      I  reveal  it  now. 

Ion. 
Why  hide  so  long  whom  thou  didst  find  that  day  ? 

Pythia. 
The  God  would  have  thee  minister  in  his  house. 

Ion. 
Nor  needeth  now  ? — How  shall  I  know  it  so  ? 

Pythia. 
Showing  thy  sire,  he  sends  thee  forth  the  land.        1345 

Ion. 
Thou,  by  commandment  keptest  thou  these  things  ? 

Pythia. 
On  that  day  Loxias  put  it  in  mine  heart — 

Ion. 
To  do  what  deed  ?     Say  on,  tell  out  the  tale. 

Pythia. 
To  keep  this  treasure-trove  against  this  day. 

Ion. 
What  profit  or  what  hurt  hath  this  for  me  ?  1350 

Pythia. 
This  hides  the  swaddling-bands  that  wrapped  thee  then. 


340  EURIPIDES. 


Ion. 
My  mother  ! — clues  be  these  for  finding  her  ? 

Pythia. 
Yea;  'tis  the  God's  will  now — not  heretofore. 

Ion. 

0  day  of  blessed  revelations  this  ! 

Pythia. 

Take  them — rest  not  until  thou  find  thy  mother,     1355 
Though   thou  search   Asia  through,   search    Europe's 

bounds : 
Thou  shalt  not  err,  thou.     For  the  God's  own  sake 

1  nursed  thee,  son  :  these  give  I  back  to  thee, 
Which  his  unspoken  will  then  made  me  take 

And  guard.     Why  thus  he  willed  I  cannot  tell  :      1360 

But  none  of  mortal  men  was  ware  that  I 

Had  these,  nor  hidden  in  what  place  they  lay. 

Farewell     .     .     .     .     for  as  a  mother  kiss  I  thee. 

Turns  to  go,  but  resumes — 1 

Where  thou  shouldst  seek  thy  mother,  there  begin — 

First,  did  a  Delphian  bride  unwedded  bear  1365 

And  cast  thee  forth  upon  these  temple-steps  ? 

Then,  any  maid  of  Greece  ?     ...     So  hast  thou  all 

Of  me,  and  Phcebus,  pilot  of  thy  fate.  [Exit* 

1  Editors  are  inclined  to  reject  1364-8.  "  The  priestess 
.  .  .  .  now  that  she  has  said  good-bye,  is  little  likely  to 
revert  to  the  subject  again  in  five  tame  and  prosaic  verses." 
Is  it  not  rather  a  touch  of  nature — the  immemorial  feminine 
postscript,  conveying  the  most  important  part,  the  real 
business  part,  of  the  communication  ?  May  not  Euripides 
have  known  woman — how  in  her  the  emotional  is  apt  to 
precede  the  practical, — at  least  as  well  as  some  of  his  modern 
critics  ? 


ION.  341 


Ion. 


Ah  me,  mine  eyes  are  drowned  in  streaming  tears, 

As  leaps  my  thought  to  that  day  when  the  bride     1370 

Betrayed,  who  bare,  by  stealth  to  thraldom  sold  me,1 

Nor  ever  suckled  me  ;   but  nameless  all 

In  the  God's  courts  I  lived  a  servant's  life. 

Kind  was  the  God's  part,  but  my  fortune's  hand 

Heavy  ;   for  while  I  should  of  right  have  lain  1375 

Soft  in  a  mother's  arms,  and  known  life's  joy, 

Of  a  sweet  mother's  care  was  I  bereft. 

O  hapless  she  who  bare  me,  who  hath  suffered 

Like  me,  hath  lost  the  joys  of  motherhood  ! 

But  this  ark  will  I  bear  unto  the  God,  [380 

An  offering — lest  I  find  aught  I  would  not. 

For,  if  perchance  a  slave-girl  gave  me  birth, 

'Twere  worse  to  find  a  mother  than  let  be. 

Phoebus,  I  offer  this  unto  thy  fane  ; — 

What  ails  me  ?   Lo,  I  fight  against  the  favour         1385 

Of  Him  which  saved  for  me  my  mother's  tokens  ! 

This  must  I  open,  face  what  must  be  faced  ; 

For  never  can  I  overstep  my  doom. 

Ah,  sacred  fillets,  what  have  ye  hid  for  me, 

O  bands  wherein  mine  heart's  desire  was  kept  ?       1390 

Lo,  the  enwrapping  of  the  ark's  fair  curve, 

How  by  a  miracle  it  waxed  not  old  ; 

The  osier-plaitings  mouldless  ! — yet  long  time 

Since  then  hath  o'er  these  treasure-relics  passed. 

Kreusa. 

What,  O  what  vision  see  I,  past  all  hope  !  1395 

1  The  reference  seems  to  be  to  the  selling  of  a  child  by  its 
nurse  to  kidnappers  (as  in  the  Odyssey  xv,  450-4),  to  which,  in 
its  consequences  to  himself,  his  exposure  furnished  a  parallel. 


342  EURIPIDES. 


Ion. 
Peace  ! — for  thou  canst  be  silent— as  the  grave.1 

Kreusa. 

Not  for  me  silence  ! — Teach  not  me  my  part ! 

I  see  the  ark  wherein  I  set  thee  forth, — 

Thee,  O  my  child,  my  babbling  baby  then, — 

In  Kekrops"  cave,  beneath  the  Long  Cliff's  brow  !  1400 

This  altar  will  I  leave,  yea,  though  I  die. 

[Flings  her  arms  round  his  neck. 

Ion. 

Seize  her  ! — she  hath  been  driven  god-distraught 
To  leave  the  carven  altar  !— Bind  her  arms. 

Kreusa. 

Slay  on — spare  not— for  I  will  cling,  will  cling 

To  this,  and  thee,  and  what  is  hidden  there.  1405 

Ion. 
Foul  outrage  !   I  am  kidnapped  by  her  tongue  ! 

Kreusa. 
No,  no  ! — but  found,  O  love,  of  her  that  loves  ! 

1  Retaining  the  reading  of  the  MSS.  (o-iyai/  av  ttoXXu 
.  ola6d),  and  understanding  it  to  refer  to  her  previous 
(7rapoi#ev)  absolute  (ttoXAo.)  secrecy  in  plotting,  which,  as  he 
had  cause  to  know  (/xol),  had  so  nearly  proved  fatal  to  him. 
Paley's  emendation — "  Silence  ! — my  foe  thou  art  as  hereto- 
fore," undoubtedly  gives  a  clear  and  relevant  sense,  (as 
resenting  an  impertinent  intrusion),  but  is  a  less  direct  and 
telling  reference  to  his  ever-present  burning  sense  of  wrong, 
to  which  he  continually  recurs,  as  in  1286,  1300,  1308,  1526, 
1408. 


ION.  343 

Ion. 

I  thy  beloved — whom  thou  wouldst  slay  by  stealth  ! 

K RE  USA. 

Yes — yes  !  my  son  !— Is  aught  to  parents  dearer  ? 

Ion. 
Cease  ! — -I  shall  take  thee  mid  thy  webs  of  guile —  1410 

Kreusa. 
Take  me  ? — ah  take  !     I  strain  thereto,  my  child. 

Ion. 
Void  is  this  ark,  or  somewhat  doth  it  hide  ? 

Kreusa. 
Yea,  that  which  wrapped  thee  when  I  cast  thee  forth. 

Ion. 
Speak  out  and  name  them  ere  thine  eyes  behold. 

Kreusa. 
Yea,  if  I  tell  not,  I  submit  to  die.  141 5 

Ion. 
Say  on  : — 'tis  passing  strange,  thy  confidence  ! 

Kreusa. 
See  there  the  web  I  wove  in  girlhood's  days. 

Ion. 
Its  fashion  ? — girls  be  ever  weaving  webs. 


344 


EURIPIDES. 


Kreusa. 

No  perfect  work  ;  'twas  but  a  prentice  hand. 

Ion. 
The  pattern  tell : — thou  shalt  not  trick  me  so.  1420 

Kreusa. 
A  Gorgon  in  the  mid-threads  of  a  shawl. 

Ion   (aside). 
O  Zeus,  what  weird  is  this  that  dogs  our  steps  ? 

Kreusa. 
'Tis  fringed  with  serpents — with  the  Aegis-fringe. 

Ion. 

Behold  !   (lifts  and  spreads  it  forth.) 
This  is  the  web  : — lo,  here  the  oracle  ! 

Kreusa. 
()  work  of  girlhood's  loom,  so  long  unseen  !  1425 

Ion. 
Is  there  aught  else  ?— or  this  thy  one  true  shot  ? 

Kreusa. 
Serpents,  an  old  device,  with  golden  jaws — ' 

Ion. 
Athene's  gift,  who  biddeth  deck  babes  so  ? 

1  So  the  MSS.  Paley  suggests  Trayxpvaov  ydvos — "an 
ancient  golden  ornament  "  :  Verrall,  yc'vci — "  an  old  badge 
of  our  golden  (i.e.,  glorious)  race." 


ION.  345 

Kreusa. 
Moulded  from  Erich thonius'  snakes  of  old. 

Iox. 
What  use,  what  purpose,  tell  me,  hath  the  jewel  ?  1430 

Kreusa. 
A  necklace  for  the  new-born  babe,  my  child. 

Ion. 
Even  these  be  here.     The  third  I  long  to  know. 

Kreusa. 

A  wreath  of  olive  set  I  on  thee  then  : 

Athene  brought  it  first  unto  our  rock. 

If  this  be  there,  it  hath  not  lost  its  green,  1435 

But  blooms  yet,  from  the  sacred  olive  sprung. 

Ion. 

Mother  ! — dear  mother  ! — glad,  O  glad,  I  fall, 
Beholding  thee,  on  thy  cheeks  gladness-flushed. 

Kreusa. 

Child  ! — light  to  mother  better  than  the  sun — 

He  will  forgive1 — I  have  thee  in  mine  arms,  J-f-J-O 

Unhoped  treasure-trove  ! — as  a  dweller  in   Hades,  so 

thought  I  of  thee, 
An  abider  mid  nethergloom  shades  with  Persephone. 

Ion. 

Ah  no,  dear  mother  mine  ;  within  thine  arms 
Revealed  is  he  that  liveth  and  was  dead. 

1  The  Sun-god  will  pardon  the  apparent  slight. 

Bb 


346  EURIPIDES. 


Kreusa. 

Ho  ye,  ye  unfoldings  of  ether,  ye  sunlit  expanses,  1445 
In  what  cry  shall  I  peal  out  my  rapture  ?     O  whence 
unto  me 
Came   it,    this   sweetness   undreamed   of  ?      By   what 
strange  chances 

Such  bliss  do  I  see  ? 

Ion. 

Nought  were  so  strange,  but  I  had  looked  for  that, 
O  mother,  rather  than  to  know  me  thine.  [I45° 

Kreusa. 
Still  I  tremble  with  dread — 

Ion. 

Lest  holding  thou  hold  me  not  ? 

Kreusa. 

I  had  seen  hope  flee 
So  long  agone  ! 
O  prophetess,  whence  and  O  whence  to  thine  arms 
came  he, 

My  little  one  ? 
Upborne  by  what  hand  unto  Loxias'  halls  was  he  sped  ? 

Iox. 

A  miracle  :  but  through  our  lot  to  be 
May  we  be  happy  as  our  past  was  sad. 


ION.  347 

Kreusa. 

At  thy  birth-travail,  O  my  child,  was  there  many  a 

tear : 
Thou  wert  torn   from   the  arms  of  thy   mother  with 

many  a  moan  : 
And  now  on  thy  cheeks  is  my  breath  :  my  darling  is 

here !  1460 

The  uttermost  bliss  of  the   Blessed,  lo,  now  have    I 

known  ! 

Ion. 
Thou  speakest  for  mine  heart  and  thine,  as  one. 

Kreusa. 

No  more  are  we  childless,  no  more  unto  barrenness 

banned : 
The  home  hath  the  hearth-glow  again,  and  her  kings 
hath  the  land. 
The  strength  of  his  youth  doth  Erechtheus  renew  : 
The  house  of  the  Earth-born  Race  no  longer  to  night- 
ward  shall  gaze, 
But  the  sun's  beam  cleaveth  its  darkness  through. 

I  ox. 

Mother,  my  sire  is  here  :  let  him  too  share 
This  happiness  which  I  have  given  to  you. 

Kreusa. 

O  child,  child,  what  sayest  thou  ? — must  the  shame  be 
laid  bare  of  thy  mother  ?  1470 

Ion. 
What  is  this  thou  hast  said  ? 

B  B  2 


348  EURIPIDES. 


Kreusa. 
Of  another  thou  earnest— oh,  of  another  ! 

Ion. 
Woe's  me  !  a  bastard  ? — child  of  maiden's  shame  ? 

Kreusa. 

No  torches  were  gleaming,  no  raiment  outstreaming 
In  the  dance,  my  child,  for  the  bridal  bed 
Which  brought  to  the  birth  thy  dear-loved  head  ! 

Iox. 
Alas  !  base-born  am  I  ? — O  mother,  whence  ? 

Kreusa. 
Be  witness  the  Gorgon-slaying  Maid — 

Ion. 

What  is  this  ?— what  meaneth  the  word  thou  hast 
said  ? 

Kreusa. 

Who  hath  set  on  my  watch-tower  crags  her  throne 
On  the  hill  with  her  olives  overgrown, —  1480 

Ion. 
Dark  sayings  are  these,  and  I  cannot  interpret  the  thing. 

Kreusa. 

Unto  Phoebus  beside  the  rock  where  the  nightingales 
sing— 

Ion. 

What  should  of  Phoebus  by  thee  be  said  ? 


ION.  349 

Kreusa. 
In  a  bridal  from  all  men  hid  was  I  wed. 

Ion. 
Say  on  :  glad  tidings  this  and  fortune  fair  !  1485 

Kreusa. 

And    the  months  swept  round,  till   the  tenth   month 

came, 
And  I  bare  unto  Phoebus  a  child  of  shame. 

Ion. 
O  happy  words,  if  this  thou  say'st  be  true  I1 

Kreusa. 

And  these,  these  mother's  swathing-bands 

About  thee  cast,  my  maiden  hands  x49° 

Wrought,  my  loom's  skilless  fashionings. 

Nor  to  thy  lips  for  suck  I  gave 

The  breast,  nor  with  mine  hands  did  lave : 

But  forth  into  a  lonesome  cave, 

A  banquet-spoil  for  swooping  wings,  H95 

To  Hades  thee  thy  mother  flings. 

Ion. 

0  mother,  what  horror  to  do,  to  dare  ! 

Kreusa. 

1  was  thrall  unto  terror — I  flung  away 

1  Now,  by  this  light,  were  I  to  get  again, 
Madam,  I  would  not  wish  a  better  father.  .  .  . 
With  all  my  heart  I  thank  thee  for  my  father  ! 

King  John,  I,  i. 


350  EURIPIDES. 


Thy  life,  my  baby  :   I  steeled  me  to  slay 

When  mine  heart  was  moaning  "  Spare  !  "  1500 

Ion. 
And  of  me  nigh  slain  ! — foul  horror  it  were  ! 

Kreusa. 

O  fearful  chances  of  that  dark  day, 

And  of  this  withal  !     We  are  tossed  to  drift 

On  the  surge  of  calamity  hither  and  thither  :  1505 
Yet  anon  do  the  winds  of  heaven  shift, 

And    behold,    we   are    gliding    through    summer 
weather  ! 
Oh  may  it   last  ! — for  the  ills  overpast  should  surely 

suffice. 
Fair   winds,  my  son,  now   are    wafting   us   on,  after 
stormy  skies. 

Chorus. 

Let  none  e'er  deem  aught  in  the  lot  of  man  1510 

Past  hope,  who  marketh  what  to-day  befalls. 

Ion. 

O  Fortune,  thou  that  shiftest  countless  mortals 

Unto  misfortune,  and  anon  to  weal, 

Lo,  to  what  fearful  pass  came  we,  that  I 

Should  slay  my  mother,  should  endure  like  wrong  !  151 5 

Ah  strange  ! 

Yet — midst  the  bright  embraces  of  the  sun 

Somewhere  such  things  day  after  day  befall ! 

Sweet,  mother,  is  my  treasure-trove  of  thee  ; 

And  this  my  birth,  I  find  no  fault  therein. 

Yet  somewhat  would  I  say  to  thee  apart.  1520 


ION.  351 

Come  hither  :   1  would  speak  it  in  thine  ear, 

And  fold  about  with  darkness  that  thy  past  : — 

See  to  it,  mother,  lest  thy  steps  have  slipped, 

As  maids  infatuate  yield  to  love — to  shame, 

And  now  thou  chargest  this  upon  the  God,  1525 

And,  striving  to  escape  the  shame  of  me, 

Phcebus  thou  nam'st  my  sire,  who  sire  was  none. 

Kreusa. 

No  ! — by  Athene,  Lady  of  Victory,  who 
With  car  and  shield  on  the  earth-born  charged  for  Zeus, 
No  mortal  man  was  sire  to  thee,  my  son,  1530 

But  he  which  reared  thee,  Loxias  the  King. 

Ion. 

How  gave  he  then  his  own  son  to  another, 
And  named  me  Xuthus'  son — begotten  son  ? 

Kreusa. 

Nay,  not  begotten  ;  but  his  gift  art  thou,  [I535 

Sprung  from  himself, — as  friend  to  friend  should  give 
His  own  son,  that  his  house  might  have  an  heir. 

Ion. 

Is  the  God  true  ? — or  naught  his  prophecies  ? 
Mother,  my  soul  it  troubleth  :  well  it  may. 

Kreusa. 

Hear  now  what  cometh  to  my  mind,  my  son. 

Of  kindness  Loxias  giveth  thee  a  place  I54° 

In  a  proud  house :  hadst  thou  been  called  his  son, 

Thou  hadst  had  none  inheritance  thereof, 

Nor  a  sire's  name  : — how  couldst  thou,  when  myself 


352  EURIPIDES. 


Still  hid  his  rape,  yea,  by  thy  secret  death  ? 

Thee  for  thy  good  to  another  sire  he  gives.  J545 

lox. 

Nay,  not  thus  lightly  on  the  quest  I  press.1 

I  will  ask  Phoebus,  entering  his  fane, 

"  Am  I  of  Loxias  or  a  mortal  sire  ?  " 

Athene  appears  above  the  temple  in  her  chariot. 

Ha  !  high  above  the  incense-breathing  house 

What  God  reveals  a  face  that  fronts  the  Sun  ?         1550 

Let  us  flee,  mother,  lest  we  gaze  on  Gods, 

Except  in  season  meet  for  that  great  vision. 

Athene. 

Fly  not ;  no  foe  am  I  that  ye  should  flee  ; 

But  as  in  Athens,  so  here,  gracious-willed. 

I  come  from  thy  land — land  that  bears  my  name  :  1555 

I  Pallas  from  Apollo  speed  in  haste, 

1  Ion  is  not  to  be  satisfied  with  plausible  conjecture  : 
moreover,  Kreusa  may  be  under  a  delusion  as  to  the 
cardinal  fact.  The  counter-evidence  is  that  of  Xuthus,  who 
had  received  an  oracle  which,  according  to  his  own  version 
(11.  536-7,  where  see  note,)  might  be  ambiguous,  and  whose 
evidence,  owing  to  his  haste  and  excitement  (1.  541),  was 
anything  but  conclusive.  Ion  himself  had  reluctantly 
accepted  it  only  when  cross-questioning  elicited  that  there 
was  room  for  it  in  Xuthus'  past  history.  The  settlement  of 
the  doubt  expressed  in  11.  1537-8  turned  entirely  on  the 
value  of  Xuthus'  evidence,  on  the  accuracy  of  his  con- 
clusions ;  for  men's  faith  in  the  oracle  was  never  shaken  by 
the  often  intentionally  ambiguous  nature  of  its  responses, 
Ion's  familiarity  with  which  made  him  prompt  to  discount 
an  enquirer's  own  impression  (1.  533).  Hence,  Ion  would 
be,  as  he  afterwards  is,  quite  satisfied  with  an  authoritative 
divine  declaration  on  a  matter  in  which  there  is  (1.  1608)  no 
inherent  incredibility.  I  find  no  justification  here  for  the 
theory  that  Euripides  wrote  this  play  to  discredit  the  oracle. 


ION.  353 

Who  deigned  not  to  reveal  him  to  your  sight, 

Else  must  he  chide  you  for  things  overpast,1 

But  sendeth  me  to  tell  to  you  his  words  : — 

Thee  this  queen  bare,  begotten  of  Apollo  :  1560 

He  gives  to  whom  he  gave,  not  that  they  gat  thee, 

But  for  thy  bringing  home  to  a  princely  house. 

But,  when  the  matter  was  laid  bare  and  told, 

Fearing  lest  thou  shouldst  of  her  plot  be  slain, 

And  she  of  thee,  saved  thee  by  that  device.  1565 

Now  the  God  would  have  kept  the  secret  hid 

Until  in  Athens  he  revealed  her  thine, 

And  thee  the  son  of  her  and  Phoebus  born. 

But— to  make  end,  and  tell  his  oracles, 

For  which  I  yoked  my  chariot,  hearken  ye.  :57° 

Take  this  thy  son,  and  go  to  Kekrops'  land, 

Kreusa,  and  on  thrones  of  sovereignty 

Seat  him  ;  for,  of  Erechtheus'  lineage  sprung, 

Worthy  he  is  to  rule  o'er  mine  own  land. 

Famed  shall  he  be  through  Hellas  ;  for  the  sons     1575 

1  For  unfaith  and  impatient  interference  with  his  provi- 
dential dealings :  Kreusa,  in  particular,  for  her  hasty 
upbraidings  and  her  attempt  at  murder ;  Ion,  for  proposing 
to  violate  the  right  of  sanctuary.  The  result  was  to  thwart 
Apollo's  design  of  bringing  about  a  happy  issue  in  his  own 
good  time.  But  to  chide  them  at  this  juncture  would  have 
entailed  that  mingling  in  one  communication  of  good 
(promises)  and  evil  (rebukes)  which  the  Greeks  with  reli- 
gious scrupulosity  avoided.  The  interpretation  which 
assumes  that  Apollo  was  afraid  lest  he  should  be  chidden  by 
those  whose  lives  he  was  crowning  with  blessing,  by  two 
Greeks  whose  reverential  awe  made  them  fear  even  to  gaze 
on  divinity,  is  little  in  harmony  with  Ion's  own  words  in 
M-  37°-373>  aQd  with  the  fact  that  the  whole  plot  of  tin 
"  Andromache  "  turns  on  the  vengeance  visited  by  Apollo 
on  Neoptolemus,  despite  his  repentance,  for  having  pre- 
sumed to  upbraid  him  for  a  far  deeper  and  more  irreparable- 
wrong. 


354  EURIPIDES. 


Born  to  him,  even  four  from  this  one  root, 

Shall  give  their  names  unto  the  several  tribes 

Of  the  land's  folk  which  dwell  upon  mine  hill. 

Teleon  the  first  shall  be  ;  the  second  tribe 

Hopletes  ;  Argades  the  third  :  the  fourth,  1580 

One  tribe,  of  my  shield  named  Aegikores. 

And  their  sons  in  the  fulness  of  the  time 

Shall  found  them  cities  in  the  Cyclad  Isles, 

And  seaboard  realms,  for  strength  unto  my  land. 

Yea,  they  shall  people  either  mainland's  plains        1585 

On  either  side  the  strait,  of  Asia-land 

And  Europe  :  and  because  of  thy  son's  name 

Ionians  shall  be  named,  and  win  renown. 

From  Xuthus  too  and  thee  a  seed  shall  spring, 

Dorus,  of  whom  shall  Doris  song-renowned  I59° 

Arise  :  the  second  goeth  to  Pelops'  land, 

Achaius ;  o'er  the  seaboard  shall  he  reign 

Nigh  Rhion,  and  the  people  of  his  name 

Among  the  nations  shall  be  sealed  therewith. 

Well  hath  Apollo  all  things  done  :  for,  first,  1595 

He  gave  thee  health  in  travail ;  so  none  knew  : 

And,  when  thou  hadst  born  this  child,  and  cast  him  out 

In  swaddling-bands,  bade  Hermes  in  his  arms 

Snatch  him  away,  and  hither  waft  thy  babe  ; 

And  nurtured  him,  nor  suffered  him  to  die.  1600 

Now  therefore  say  not  that  this  lad  is  thine, 

That  Xuthus  in  his  phantasy  may  joy, 

And  thine  the  substance,  lady,  be  of  bliss. 

Farewell  ye  :  after  this  relief  from  woes 

I  bring  you  tidings  of  a  happy  lot.  1605 

Ion. 

Pallas,  Daughter  of  the   Highest,  child  of  Zeus,  we 
will  receive 


ION.  355 

These  thy  words  with  no  unfaith,  but  Loxias  do  I  be- 
lieve 

Sire  to  me,  and  her  my  mother  : — never  was  this  past 
belief. 

Kreusa. 

Hear  me  :  Phoebus  praise  I,  whom  1  praised  not  in  mine 

hour  of  grief, 
For  that  whom  he  set  at  nought,  his  child,  to  me  he 

now  restores.  1610 

Lovely  is  his  oracle,  and  fair  to  me  these  temple-doors, 
Hateful  though  they  were  aforetime.     Now  unto  the 

portal-ring, 
As  I  bid  his  gates  my  blithe  farewell,  with  loving  hands 

I  cling. 

Athene. 

Well  dost  thou  to  turn  to  praises  of  the  God  :  so  is  it 

still- 
Slow  the  Gods'  hands  haply  are,  but  mightily  at  last 

fulfil.  161 5 

Kreusa. 
Homeward  let  us  pass,  my  son. 

Athene. 
Pass  on  :  myself  shall  following  come. 

Ion. 
Best  way-warden  art  thou  ! 

Kreusa. 
Thou  who  holdest  dear  our  city-home. 


356  EURIPIDES. 


Athene. 
Seat  thee  on  the  ancient  throne. 

Ion. 

A  goodly  heritage  is  mine. 

Chorus. 

Zeus'  and  Leto's  Son  Apollo,  hail  !    Let  him  to  powers 

divine 
Render  homage  undismayed,  whose  house  affliction's 

buffets  smite  :  1620 

For  the  good  at  last  shall  overcome,  at  last  attain  their 

right ; 
But  the  evil,  by  their  nature's  law,  on  good  shall  never 

light. 

[Exeunt  in  procession  to  marching  music. 


SUPPLIANTS 


ARGUMENT. 

In  the  days  when  Theseus  ruled  in  Athens,  there  was 
war  between  Argos  and  Thebes.  For  the  two  sons  oj 
Oedipus,  being  mindful  of  their  father 's  curse,  that  they 
should  divide  their  inheritance  with  the  sword,  covenanted 
to  rule  in  turn,  year  by  year,  over  Thebes.  So  Eteokles, 
being  the  elder,  became  king  for  the  first  year,  and 
Polyneikes  his  brother  departed  from  the  land,  lest  any 
occasion  of  offence  should  arise.  But  when  after  a 
year's  space  he  returned,  Eteokles  refused  to  yield  to  him 
the  kingdom.  Then  went  he  to  Adrastus  king  of  Argos, 
who  gave  him  his  daughter  to  wife,  and  led  forth  a  host 
of  war  under  seven  chiefs  against  Thebes.  But,  foras- 
much as  in  going  he  set  at  nought  oracles  and  seers,  his 
array  was  utterly  broken  in  battle,  and  of  those  seven 
captains  none  returned,  but  Adrastus  only.  Thereafter, 
according  to  the  sacred  custom  of  Hellas,  and  the  law  of 
war,  the  Ar gives  sent  to  require  the  Thebans  to  suffer 
them  to  bear  away  their  slain  that  they  might  bury 
them.  For,  among  the  Greeks,  if  a  man  being  dead 
obtained  not  burial,  this  was  accounted  a  calamity 
worse  than  death,  forasmucJi  as  he  was  thereby  made 


homeless  and  accurst  in  Hades.     Yet  did  the  Thebans 

impiously  and  despitefully  reject  that  claim,  being 
minded  to  wreak  vengeance  on  their  enemies  after  death. 
Then  king  Adrastus,  with  the  mothers  of  the  slain 
chiefs,  came  to  Eleusis  in  Attica,  and  made  supplication 
at  the  altar  of  Demeter  to  Aitlira  the  mother  of  Theseus, 
and  to  the  kings  self.  So  Theseus  consented  to  their 
prayer,  and  led  the  array  of  Athens  against  Thebes,  and 
there  fought  and  prevailed,  and  so  brought  back  the 
bodies  of  those  chiefs,  and  rendered  to  them  the  death- 
rites  at  Eleusis. 


DRAMATIS  PERSONS. 

Aithra,  mother  of  Theseus. 

Theseus,  son  of  Aigeus,  king  of  Athens. 

Adrastus,  king  of  Argos. 

Herald  from  Kreon  king  of  Thebes. 

Messenger  from  the  army  of  Theseus  before  Thebes. 

Evadne,  ivife  of  Kapaneus  one  of  the  seven  chiefs. 

Iphis,  father  of  Evadne. 

Sons  of  the  slain  chiefs. 

Athene,  Patron-goddess  of  Athens. 

Chorus,  consisting  of  the  mothers  of  the  slain  chiefs,  with  their 

Handmaids. 
Athenian  herald,  guards,  attendants,  Athenian  soldiers. 
Scene  : — In   the   forecourt  of  the  temple  of  Demeter   and 

Persephone  at  Eleusis.     The  great  altar  stands  in  the 

midst. 


SUPPLIANTS. 


On  the  steps  of  the  altar  Aithra  is  seated ;  and  around 
her  sit  the  members  of  the  Chorus.  The  olive-boughs 
of  suppliance  lie  upon  the  altar,  and  from  these  are 
stretched  woollen  fillets,  attaching  them  to  Aithra  and 

the  Chorus. 

Aithra. 

Demeter,  warder  of  Eleusis-land, 

And  ye  which  keep  and  serve  the  Goddess'  fanes, 

To  me  and  my  son  Theseus  be  propitious, 

And  unto  Athens  and  to  Pittheus'  land, 

Where  my  sire  nursed  me  in  a  happy  home,  5 

Aithra,  and  gave  me  to  Pandion's  son 

Aigeus,  to  wife,  by  Loxias'  oracles. 

Thus  pray  I  as  on  these  grey  dames  I  look, 

These  which  have  left  their  homes  in  Argos-land, 

And  fall  with  suppliant  bough  before  my  knee,  10 

Stricken  with  grievous  stroke :  for  round  the  gates 

Of  Kadmus  lying  are  their  seven  sons  dead, 

Sons  of  the  childless,  whom  the  Argive  king 

Adrastus  led,  in  Oedipus'  heritage 

To  win  his  share  for  Polyneikes  exiled,  15 

His  daughter's  lord.     The  mothers  now  of  these, 

c  c 


362  EURIPIDES. 


Spear-slain,  are  fain  to  lay  them  in  the  grave, 

Wherefrom  the  victors  let  them,  and  refuse 

The  corpses,  setting  the  Gods'  laws  at  nought. 

Sharing  the  burden  of  their  need  of  me,  20 

Adrastus  lieth  here,  his  eyes  with  tears 

Drowned,  mourning  for  the  battle-shivered  spear 

And  that  ill-starred  array  led  forth  of  him. 

Sore  pleadeth  he  with  me  to  bend  by  prayers 

My  son  to  be  redeemer  of  the  dead  25 

By  speech  or  spear,  and  helper  to  the  grave, 

Laying  this  charge  alone  upon  my  son 

And  Athens.     Now  it  chanceth  that  I  come 

For  the  land's  harvest's  sake  from  forth  mine  halls 

To  this  god's-acre,  where  first  rose  to  light  30 

Above  this  earth's  face  bristling  ears  of  corn. 

And,  bound  in  this  strong  gossamer-chain  of  leaves,1 

At  the  two  Goddesses'  holy  hearths  I  stay, 

Demeter's  and  her  Daughter's,  both  for  ruth 

Of  these  unchilded  mothers  silver-haired,  35 

And  awe  of  the  holy  bands.     To  Athens  sped 

Mine  herald  is,  to  summon  Theseus  hither, 

That  he  may  banish  from  the  land  these  mourners,2 

Or  loose  this  strong  constraint  of  suppliance 

By  rendering  heaven  its  due.     Seemly  it  is  40 

That  women,  which  be  wise,  still  act  through  men. 


1  Lit.  "  a  (real)  chain  which  is  (apparently)  no  chain." 
The  woollen  fillets  and  boughs  could  not  be  removed  with- 
out sacrilege.  Cf.  "  Those  ties  which,  light  as  air  though 
strong  as  iron,  bind  the  colonies  to  the  mother-land."    Burke. 

2  The  presence  of  such,  especially  at  the  temple  of 
Demeter,  was  ominous  of  evil,  which  the  king  only  could 
avert,  either  by  granting  their  request,  or  by  refusing  it  and 
ordering  them  to  depart. 


SUPPLIANTS.  363 


Chorus. 

(Str.  1) 

Reverend  Queen,  with  aged  lips  do  I  implore  thee; 

In  my  suppliance  at  thy  knee  I  fall  before  thee. 

O  redeem  thou  unto  me  from  that  assemblage  of  the 

dead 

My  beloved,  from  the  harvest  that  the  hand  of  death 

hath  spread 

For  the  mountain-beasts  to  ravin  on  the  children  of 

my  womb  ! 

(Ant.  1) 

Look  upon  me  : — from  mine  eyes  in  my  despairing 

Tears   are   streaming,  and   my   frenzied   hands  are 

tearing  50 

Crimson    furrows    on    my   wrinkled   cheeks.      What 

should  I  do  but  mourn, 
Who  have  laid  not  out  my  dead  unto  their  burial  to  be 
borne, 
And  who  see  not  any  heaping  of  the  earth-mound  for 

their  tomb  ? 

(Str.  2) 
Thou   hast   born   a   little   one,    thou   hast   given    a 
princely  son 
To  thy  lord,  that  marriage-treasure  made  his  heart  to 
joy  in  thee  : 
Let  the  full   soul   deal   its  bread   to  the  sad  ones 
famished  : 
Give  according  to  the  measure  of  my  childless  agony. 
Bend  the  spirit  of  thy  scion,  that  he  come,  whose  help 
we  crave,  60 

To  Ismenus,  that  he  give  them,  goodly  bodies  of  our 
dead, 
To  the  arms  of  her  that  loveth,  who  shall  lay  them  in 


the  grave. 


c  c  2 


364  EURIPIDES. 


{Ant.  2) 

Not  according  unto  rite,1  but  as  overmastering  might 

Of  Necessity  constraineth,  at  the  altars  do  I  bend 

Whence  to  heaven  leaps  the  flame  ;  and  the  right  is 

that  I  claim. 

Thou  art  strong,  thy  son  remaineth  ;  thou  canst  make 

my  sorrows  end. 
Out  of  depths  of  sorest  anguish  rings  my  supplication 
wild 
That  thou  give  me  but  a  corpse,  in  mine  embrace  to 
hold  the  same, 
And  to  fling  mine  arms  around  the  piteous  body  of  my 
child.  70 

The  attendant  Handmaids,   beating  their  breasts  and 
marring  their  faces,  wail  in  unison  with  the  Mothers. 

(Str.  3) 
O  hearken  yon  wails  to  our  wailing  replying, 

To  the  hands  of  our  handmaidens  smiting  hard 

On  their  bosoms  !     Come,  ye  that  re-echo  our  crying 

With    a   burden    of    mourning,    who   sigh    with    our 

sighing— 

Come  ye  to  the  one  dance  Death  doth  regard ; 

Rend,  rend  ye  the  cheek,  till  the  red  stains  streak 

White  fingers  : — the  dues  that  our  dear  dead  seek 

Shall  be  all  our  reward. 

(Ant.  3) 

Unsatisfied  mourning  my  soul  is  enthralling 

Sorrow-burdened,  as  forth  from  a  precipice  flows   80 

A  spring  with  its  rain  ever  flashing  and  falling. 

Unrestingly  wailing  to  wailing  is  calling  ; 

For  the  heart's  love  of  woman  but  one  path  knows, 

1  There  was  no  place  in  the  temple-ritual  for  mourning. 


SUPPLIANTS.  365 


Nor  can  choose  but  to  moan  for  the  dear  dead  son  : — 
And  oh  that  the  days  of  my  life  were  done, 
And  forgotten  my  woes  ! 

Enter  Theseus. 

Theseus. 

What  wailings  heard  I,  smitings  upon  breasts, 

And  dirges  for  the  dead,  as  rang  the  sound 

From  the  holy  place  ?     How  throbs  mine  heart  with 

fear 
Lest  to  my  mother,  who  hath  drawn  me  hither  90 

By  her  long  absence,  some  mischance  betide. 
Ha! 

What  see  I  here  ?     What  strange  tale  is  to  tell  ? 
At  the  altar  sitting  my  grey  mother  is, 
And  alien  dames  with  her  in  diverse  guise 
Of  sore  affliction  ;  for  the  piteous  tear  95 

Unto  the  ground  from  aged  eyes  they  drop. 
Shorn  hair  and  garb  unmeet  for  worshippers  ! 
What  means  it,  mother  ?     'Tis  thy  part  to  tell, 
And  mine  to  hear.     I  look  for  some  strange  thing. 

Aithra. 

My  son,  these  dames  the  mothers  are  of  those,  100 

The  chieftains  seven,  that  in  battle  fell 
By  gates  Kadmean.     And  with  suppliant  boughs 
Compassed  they  hold  me,  captive,  as  thou  seest. 

Theseus. 
Who  yonder  at  the  gates  makes  piteous  moan  ? 

Aithra. 
Adrastus,  as  they  tell,  the  Argive  king.  105 


366  EURIPIDES. 


Theseus. 
And  yon  lads  at  his  side,  his  boys  are  they  ? 

Aithra. 
Nay,  but  the  sons  of  those  dead  which  have  died. 

Theseus. 
Wherefore  to  us  came  they  with  suppliant  hand  ? 

Aithra. 
I  know  : — but  these  must  tell  the  rest,  my  son. 

Theseus. 

Thee,  in  thy  mantle  muffled  close,  I  ask —  no 

Unshroud  thine  head,  speak,  let  thy  mourning  be  ; 
Nought  shalt  thou  profit,  if  nought  pass  thy  tongue. 

Adrastus. 

O  triumph-glorious  king  of  Athens'  land, 
Theseus,  I  come  thy  suppliant  and  thy  city's. 

Theseus. 
What  seekest  thou,  and  whereof  hast  thou  need  ?     115 

Adrastus. 
Thou  know'st  what  host  1  to  destruction  led. 

Theseus. 
Yea,  not  in  silence  passedst  thou  through  Greece. 

Adrastus. 
The  chiefest  men  of  Argos  lost  I  there. 


SUPPLIANTS.  367 


Theseus. 
Such  desolation  worketh  woeful  war. 

Adrastus. 
And  these  my  dead  I  went  to  ask  of  Thebes.  120 

Theseus. 
Did  heralds  sanctify  thy  burial -claim  ? 

Adrastus. 
Yea  :  even  so  the  slayers  grant  them  not. 

Theseus. 
What  say  they  to  thy  plea  of  holy  right  ? 

Adrastus. 
Ay,  what  ? — prosperity  hath  puffed  them  up. 

Theseus. 
For  counsel  com'st  thou  then,  or  what  wouldst  thou  ?  1 25 

Adrastus. 
That  thou  shouldst  rescue,  Theseus,  Argos'  sons. 

Theseus. 
Where  is  your  Argos  ?     Is  her  vaunting  vain  ? 

Adrastus. 
We  are  fallen  and  undone.     To  thee  we  come. 

Theseus. 
Dost  thou  alone  will  this,  or  all  thy  state  ? 


368  EURIPIDES. 


Adrastus. 
All  Danaus'  sons  beseech  thee  entomb  their  dead.    130 

Theseus. 
Why  didst  thou  march  those  seven  hosts  to  Thebes  ? 

Adrastus. 
To  my  two  daughters'  lords  this  grace  I  showed. 

Theseus. 
Thy  daughters  ?     To  what  Argives  gav'st  thou  them  ? 

Adrastus. 
With  no  man  native-born  I  linked  mine  house. 

Theseus. 
Ha  !  gavest  thou  to  aliens  Argive  maids  ?  135 

Adrastus. 
To  Tydeus,  and  to  Thebes'  son  Polyneikes. 

Theseus. 
Whence  thy  strong  love  for  such  affinity  ? 

Adrastus. 
Phoebus'  dark  saying  wrought  upon  my  mind. 

Theseus. 
What  spake  Apollo  to  control  their  marriage  ? 

Adrastus. 
"  Thy  daughters  give  to  a  lion  and  a  boar"  140 


SUPPLIANTS.  369 


Theseus. 
And  the  God's  precept  how  unfoldest  thou  ? 

Adrastus. 
There  came  by  night  two  exiles  to  my  gates. 

Theseus. 
Who  this,  who  that  ? — for  thou  dost  speak  of  twain. 

Adrastus. 
Tydeus  and  Polyneikes  :  there  they  fought. 

Theseus.  [145 

To  these,  as  those  wild  beasts,  gav'st  thou  thy  daughters  ? 

Adrastus. 
Yea  :  like  those  monsters  twain,  methought,  they  strove. 

Theseus. 
How  left  they  home-land's  bounds,  and  came  to  thee  ? 

Adrastus. 
Tydeus,  for  shedding  blood  of  kin  exiled. 

Theseus. 
And  Oedipus'  son,  for  what  cause  left  he  Thebes  ? 

Adrastus. 
His  father's  curse,  lest  he  should  slay  his  brother.    150 

Theseus. 
Wise  was  that  self-sought  exile,  named  of  thee. 


37o  EURIPIDES. 


Adrastus. 
But  they  that  tarried  wrought  the  absent  wrong. 

Theseus. 
Ha  !  did  his  brother  take  his  heritage  ? 

Adrastus. 
To  claim  his  right  I  came  :  I  was  undone. 

Theseus. 
Didst  seek  to  seers,  and  gaze  on  altar-flames  ?  155 

Adrastus. 
Ah  me  !  thou  pressest  me  where  most  I  erred  ! 

Theseus. 
Not  with  heaven's  blessing  didst  thou  go,  methinks. 

Adrastus. 
Nay,  worse ;  in  Amphiaraus'  despite  I  went. 

Theseus. 
Didst  thou  thus  lightly  flout  the  will  divine  ? 

Adrastus. 
The  clamour  of  the  young  men  daunted  me.  160 

Theseus. 
Valour  instead  of  wisdom  favouredst  thou. 

Adrastus. 
Even  that  hath  ruined  many  a  battle-chief. 


SUPPLIANTS.  37  r 


O  thou  in  prowess  first  all  Hellas  through, 
O  king  of  Athens,  sore  ashamed  am  I 
To  fall  to  earth,  and  to  embrace  thy  knee,  165 

A  grey-haired  king  in  time  past  prosperous. 
Yet  to  mine  evil  plight  I  needs  must  bow. 
Save  thou  my  dead,  compassionate  my  woes, 
And  these  the  mothers  of  the  slaughtered  sons 
Whom  hoary  eld  hath  found  in  childlessness  ;  170 

Who  have  endured  to  come,  on  alien  soil 
To  set  their  feet,  who  scarce  for  eld  may  creep  ; 
No  mission  to  Demeter's  mysteries, 
But  seeking  burial  for  their  dead,  a  boon 
Themselves   should   have    obtained   of    young   strong 
hands.1  175 

Wisely  doth  wealth  consider  poverty  : 
Wisely  to  wealth  the  poor  uplifts  his  eyes 
Aspiring,  that  desire  of  good  may  spur  him : 
So  ought  the  prosperous  to  look  on  woe. 
[The  poet's  self  in  gladness  should  bring  forth  180 

His  offspring,  song  ;  if  he  attain  not  this, 
He  cannot  from  a  heart  distraught  with  pain 
Gladden  his  fellows  :  reason  sayeth  nay.]'-' 
Perchance  thou  askest,  "  Why  pass  by  the  land 
Of  Pelops,  and  on  Athens  lay  this  charge  ?  "  185 

Sooth,  right  it  is  that  I  should  answer  this  : — 
Sparla  is  heartless,  never  at  one  stay  ; 
The  rest  be  small  and  weak  :  but  this  thy  burg 
Alone  can  stand  beneath  the  mighty  strain. 
'Twas  ever  pitiful,  and  hath  in  thee  190 

1  In  the  natural  course  of  things,  the  mothers  might  have 
expected  to  be  committed  to  the  grave  by  their  sons. 

2  Lines  180-183  are  by  most  editors  bracketed  as  an  irrel- 
evant interpolation. 


372 


EURIPIDES. 


A  young  and  valorous  chief,  for  lack  of  whom 
To  lead  their  hosts,  have  many  cities  fallen. 

Chorus. 

I  too  put  up  to  thee  the  selfsame  prayer, 
Theseus,  to  have  compassion  on  my  lot. 

Theseus. 

With  others  oft  in  wrestle  of  argument  195 

I  have  grappled  touching  this  : — there  be  that  say 

That  evil  more  abounds  with  men  than  good. 

Opinion  adverse  unto  these  I  hold, 

That  more  than  evil  good  abounds  with  men  : 

Were  this  not  so,  we  were  not  of  the  light.  200 

Praise  to  the  God  who  shaped  in  order's  mould 

Our  lives  redeemed  from  chaos  and  the  brute, 

First,  by  implanting  reason,  giving  then 

The  tongue,  word-herald,  to  interpret  speech  ; ' 

Earth's  fruit  for  food,  for  nurturing  thereof  205 

Raindrops  from  heaven,  to  feed  earth's  fosterlings, 

And  water  her  green  bosom  ;  therewithal 

Shelter  from  storm,  and  shadow  from  the  heat, 

Sea-tracking  ships,  that  traffic  might  be  ours 

With  fellow-men  of  that  which  each  land  lacks;       210 

And,  for  invisible  things  or  dimly  seen, 

Soothsayers  watch  the  flame,  the  liver's  folds, 

Or  from  the  birds  divine  the  things  to  be. 

Are  we  not  arrogant  then,  when  all  life's  needs 

God  giveth,  therewith  not  to  be  content  ?  215 

But  our  presumption  stronger  fain  would  be 

Than  God  :  we  have  gotten  overweening  hearts, 

1  Cf.  Horace,  Odes  I,  x,  2-3. 


SUPPLIANTS.  373 


And  dream  that  we  be  wiser  than  the  Gods. 

And  thou  art  of  this  fellowship  of  folly, 

Who  didst  by  Phcebus'  hest  thy  daughters  wed,i      220 

And  gav'st  to  aliens,  even  as  though  Gods  lived  ; 

Yet,  mingling  thy  clear  blood  with  turbid,  so 

Didst  mar  thine  house:  thououghtest  ne'er  to  have  blent, 

So  thou  wert  wise,  just  lives  with  lives  unjust,         [225 

But  for  thine  house  to  have  gotten  heaven-blest  friends  : 

For  God,  adjudging  fates  joined  hand  in  hand,2 

Destroyeth  by  the  sinner's  stroke  whoe'er 

Partaketh  with  him,  though  he  have  not  sinned. 

Thou  leddest  forth  the  Argives  all  to  war, 

Though  seers  spake  heaven's  warning,  sett'st  at  nought 

These,  floutedst  Gods, — so  ruinedst  thy  state,  [230 

By  young  men  led  astray,  which  love  the  praise 

Of  men,  and  multiply  wars  wrongfully, 

Corrupting  others,  one,  to  lead  the  host, 

One,  to  win  power,  and  use  it  for  his  lust,  235 

And  one  for  lucre"s  sake,  who  recketh  nought 

Of  mischief  to  a  people  thus  misused. 

For  in  a  nation  there  be  orders  three  : — 

The  useless  rich,  that  ever  crave  for  more  ; 

The  have-nots,  straitened  even  for  sustenance,  240 

A  dangerous  folk,  of  envy  overfull, 

Which  shoot  out  baleful  stings  at  such  as  have, 

Beguiled  by  tongues  of  evil  men,  their  "  champions  "  : 

But  of  the  three  the  midmost  saveth  states  ; 

They  keep  the  order  which  the  state  ordains.  245 

1  The  argument  is,  that,  while  recognizing  the  authority 
of  the  Gods  in  one  matter,  your  daughters'  marriage,  you 
disregarded  it  in  another  ;  for  they  had  not  told  you  also  to 
bind  up  the  fortunes  of  your  house  with  those  of  the  bride- 
grooms ;  nay,  they  warned  you  against  doing  so. 

2  Cf.  Horace,  Odes  III,  ii,  29- 30,  and  Prov.  xiii,  20. 


374  EURIPIDES. 


Shall  1  then  make  me  ally  unto  thee  ? 
How  to  my  nation  should  I  make  defence  ? 
Depart  in  peace  :  if  thou  hast  ill  devised, 
It  must  not  be  that  thy  fate  drag  us  down.1 

Chorus. 

He  erred  ;  yet  on  the  young  men  lieth  this  :  250 

But  meet  it  is  that  he  find  grace  with  thee. 

Adrastus. 

Not  for  a  judge  I  chose  thee  of  mine  ills, 

But  as  to  a  healer  of  them,  king,  I  came  ; 

Nor,  if  I  have  calamitously  sped, 

Need  I  thy  chastisement  and  chiding,  king.  255 

No,  but  thine  aid.     And  if  thou  wilt  not  this, 

I  must  content  me  with  thy  choice  : — what  help  ? 

Come,  aged  dames,  depart  : — yet  leave  ye  here 

The  grey-green  boughs  to  roof  the  altar  o'er,2 

Calling  to  witness  heaven  and  earth,  Demeter,  260 

Fire-bearing  Goddess,  and  the  Sun-god's  light, 

That  nought  our  prayers  unto  the  Gods  availed. 

[On  thine  head  be  it,  grandson  thou  of  Pittheus]3 

Old  Pelops'  son  ! — Lo,  we  of  Pelops'  land 

The  selfsame  blood  ancestral  share  with  thee. 

Aithra.4  [265 

How  ? — wilt  thou  flout  these  prayers,  cast  forth  the  land 

1  Reading,  with  Paley,  ov  Set  for  auTos. 

2  If  the  petitioner's  prayer  was  granted,  he  carried  away 
with  him  his  suppliant-bough  ;  if  not,  he  left  it  on  the  altar. 

3  A  line  inserted,  to  supply  an  obvious  gap  in  the  MSS., 
in  accordance  with  Paley's  suggestion. 

4  Variously  assigned  by  other  editors  to  Chorus,  and  to 
Adrastus. 


SUPPLIANTS.  375 


Grey  mothers,  which  have  gained  of  their  dues  nought  ? 
Nay,  nay ! — the  beast  finds  refuge  in  the  rock, 
The  slave  at  the  Gods'  altars ;  and  a  state 
Storm-tossed  must  cower  beneath  another's  lee  ; 
For  in  man's  lot  nought  prospereth  to  the  end.         270 

Chorus. 

{Sir.) 

O  thou  afflicted,  arise  from  Persephone's  hallowed  floor  ; 

Rise  thou,  and  bow  at  his  knees,  flinging  round  them 

thine  hands,  and  implore 
That  he  rescue  the  clay  of  my  dead,  my  beloved — ah, 

woe  is  me,  woe  ! — 

Of  the  sons  I  have  lost,  under  ramparts  of  Kadmus  in 

dust  lying  low. 

(Mesode) 

Woe  for  me ! — clasp  me,  uplift  me,  help  onward,  up- 
holding 275 
The  palsied  hand  of  the  woe-forspent ! 
By  thy  beard,  O  thou  chiefest  of  champions  of  Hellas, 
O  friend,  I  beseech  thee, 
In   the  clasp  of  the  wretched  thy  knees  and  thy 
fingers  enfolding ! 

Pity  me,  for  my  children  in  suppliance  bent 
Like  a  beggar  I  bow :  let  my  pitiful,  pitiful  outcryings 

reach  thee  ! 

(Ant.) 

Ah,  not  unburied  on  Kadmus's  soil,  for  a  ravin  and  glee 

Unto  beasts  of  the  wold  do  thou  leave  them,  the  young 

men  like  unto  thee  ! 
O  look  on  the  tears  from  mine  eyes  that  are  streaming  ! 

— and  all  that  I  crave 
Falling  low  at  thy  knees,  is  a  grave — that  thou  win  for 

my  sons  but  a  grave  !  285 


376  EURIPIDES. 


Theseus. 

Mother,  why  weepest  thou,  before  thine  eyes 
Casting  thy  fine-spun  veil  ?     Dost  weep  to  hear 
Their   mournful  wails  ?     Sooth,  mine  own  heart  was 

thrilled. 
Raise  thy  white  head  ;  be  not  a  fount  of  tears, 
There  sitting  at  Demeter's  holy  hearth.  290 

Aithra. 

Ah  me ! 

Theseus. 

'Tis  not  for  thee  to  wail  their  woes, — 

Aithra. 
Oh  hapless  dames  ! 

Theseus. 
Thou  art  not  of  their  blood. 

Aithra. 
Son,  may  I  speak  for  thine  and  Athens'  honour  ? 

Theseus. 
Yea,  wisdom  oft  hath  flowed  from  women's  lips. 

Aithra. 
Yet — yet,  it  gives  me  pause-,  the  word  I  hide.  295 

Theseus. 
Nay,  this  were  shame,  to  hide  from  friends  good  rede. 

Aithra. 
I  will  not  hold  my  peace,  to  blame  hereafter 


SUPPLIANTS.  377 


Myself  for  coward  silence  of  this  day  ; 

Nor  by  that  taunt  abashed,  "  that  woman's  best 

Is  worthless,"  will  refrain  my  lips  from  good.  300 

My  son,  I  bid  thee  look  to  this  first,  lest 

Thou  err,  despising  their  appeal  to  heaven. 

In  this  alone  thou  err'st,  in  all  else  wise. 

Nay  more — I  had  endured,  and  murmured  not, 

Wert  thou  not  bound  to  champion  the  oppressed  :    305 

Lo,  this  is  the  foundation  of  thy  fame. 

Therefore  I  fear  not  to  exhort  thee,  son, 

That  thou  wouldst  lay  thy  strong  constraining  hand 

On  men  of  violence  which  refuse  the  dead 

The  dues  of  burial  and  of  funeral-rites,  310 

And  quell  the  folk  that  would  confound  all  wont 

Of  Hellas  :  for  the  bond  of  all  men's  states 

Is  this,  when  they  with  honour  hold  by  law. 

Ay,  some  will  say  faint  heart  made  feeble  hand  : 

'Twas  thine  to  win  for  Athens  glory's  crown,  315 

Yet  didst  thou  flinch  for  fear  ;  with  that  wild  swine1 

Thou  grappledst  in  a  strife  of  little  toil  ; 

But  when  behoved  to  face  the  helm,  bear  brunt 

Of  the  spear's  point,  a  craven  wert  thou  found. 

Ah,  do  not  so,  my  son,  as  thou  art  mine  !  320 

Hast  marked — bemocked  for  spiritless  policy, 

How  on  the  mockers  glares  with  Gorgon  eyes 

Thy  country  ? — in  her  energy  is  her  life. 

But  states  which  work  in  darkness,  cautelous, 

Grope  in  the  darkness,  for  their  caution's  meed.        325 

What,  to  the  dead,  and  women  misery-worn 

Wilt  thou  not  bring  help,  son,  in  this  their  strait  ? 


1  Phaia,  the  wild  sow  of  Krommyon,  slain  by  Theseus  in 
his  first  journey  to  Athens. 

D   D 


378  EURIPIDES. 


I  fear  nought  :  justice  is  with  thine  assay  ; 

And,  though  the  folk  of  Kadmus  prosper  now, 

Far  otherwise  yet  for  them  the  dice  of  doom  330 

Shall  fall,  I  trust :— God  bringeth  low  the  proud. 

Chorus. 

O  best-beloved,  well  hast  thou  said,  for  him 
And  me  alike  ;  herein  is  twofold  joy. 

Theseus. 

Mother,  the  words  I  spake  were  words  of  truth 

Unto  this  man,  wherein  I  showed  my  mind  335 

Touching  the  counsels  by  the  which  he  fell. 

Yet  these  thy  warnings — yea,  1  see  their  force, 

That  with  my  life's  use  it  accordeth  not 

To  flinch  from  peril.     Many  a  glorious  deed 

Hath  shown  to  sons  of  Hellas  this  my  wont,  340 

Ever  to  be  a  punisher  of  wrong. 

Toil's  challenge  therefore  cannot  I  refuse  : 

For  what  will  they  which  hate  me  say  of  me, 

When  she  that  bare  me — who,  beyond  all,  fears 

For  me, — first  bids  me  undertake  this  toil  ?  345 

I  will  unto  the  deed,  redeem  their  dead 

By  fair  words,  if  I  may  ;  if  not,  the  might 

Of  spears  shall  do  it,  nor  the  Gods  shall  grudge. 

Yet  I  require  all  Athens'  sanction  here. 

My  wish  should  win  their  sanction  ;  yet,  if  I  35° 

Show  cause  withal,  the  loyaller  shall  they  be. 

For  I  have  made  the  land  one  single  realm, 

A  free  state,  with  an  equal  vote  for  all. 

Adrastus  for  my  witness  will  I  take, 

And  meet  their  concourse  ;  their  consenting  won,     355 

With  muster  of  chosen  youths  Athenian 


SUPPLIANTS.  379 


Will  I  return ;  and,  tarrying  under  arms, 

Will  send  to  Kreon,  asking  back  the  dead. 

But  ye,  grey  women,  from  my  mother  take 

The  holy  wreaths,  that  I  may  clasp  her  hand,  360 

And  lead  to  Aigeus'  halls.     A  sorry  son 

Is  he  that  pays  not  service-debt  to  parents. 

Who  giveth  of  love's  best,  by  his  own  sons 

For  all  he  hath  given  his  parents  is  repaid. 

(Exeunt  Theseus  and  AitJira.) 

Chorus. 

(Sty.  1) 

O  Argos,  mead  of  the  battle-steed,  O  land  where  my 

fathers  abode  of  yore, 

Ye  have  heard  it,  have  heard  the  changeless  word 

of  the  hero-king, 

His  sacred  plight  in  Pelasgia's  sight,  the  pledge  to  be 

published  all  Argos  o'er. 

(A  ut.  1) 

O  may  he  gain — yea,  more  than  attain  to  the  goal  that 

seeth  my  miseries  end  ! 

Forth  let  him  go,  let  him  wrest  from  the  foe,  to  the 

mother  to  bring  37° 

Her  darling's  clay  blood-stained,  and  for  aye  have  our 

own  dear  Inachus'  land  to  friend. 

(Str.  2) 

Memorial  fair  shall  the  cities  share  of  the  sacred  labour 

of  love  :  evermore 

The  grace   thereof  shall   abide,  and    the   love   aye 

lingering. 

Ah,  what  shall  come  of  their  rede  ? — what  doom  ? — 

shall  Athens  bestow  the  grace  I  implore  ? 

Shall  she  league  her  might  with  me,  and  the  right  of 

the  tomb  to  my  slaughtered  sons  restore  ? 

D  D  2 


380  EURIPIDES. 


(Ant.  2) 

O   Pallas'  Town,  for  my  help  step  down  ;    the   holy 

cause  of  the  mother  defend  ; 

So  the  laws  of  men  shall  be  made  not  then  a  polluted 

thing. 

Thou  reverencest  great  Justice'  hest :  injustice  beneath 

thy  yoke  shall  bend  ; 
And  through  all  the  lands  thy  champion  hands  to  the 
helpless  oppressed  deliverance  send.  380 

Enter  Theseus  with  Athenian  Herald. 

Theseus. 

O  thou  that  usest  still  thine  art  to  serve 

Athens  and  me,  wide  publishing  mine  hests, 

Pass  thou  Asopus  and  Ismenus'  stream, 

And  to  the  proud  Kadmean  despot  say : 

"  Theseus  of  grace  asks  corpses  for  the  tomb  :  385 

He  dwells  thy  neighbour,  and  he  claims  but  right : 

So  make  thou  the  Erechtheid  folk  thy  friend." 

If  they  consent  to  grant  it,  turn  thou  back. 

If  they  refuse,  my  second  message  speak, 

That  for  my  shielded  war-array  they  look.  390 

Mine  host  is  camped  and  marshalled  hard  at  hand 

By  sacred  Kallichorus  for  fight  prepared. 

Yea,  x\thens  of  good  will,  and  glad  withal, 

Took  up  this  task,  made  ware  of  my  desire. 

Ha  ! — breaking  in  upon  my  speech  who  comes  ?       395 

Theban,  I  deem,  yet  know  not  certainly  : — 

A  herald  ! — stay  :  thy  toil  perchance  is  spared. 

His  coming  meets  my  purpose  in  mid  way. 

Enter  Theban  Herald. 

Herald. 

Your  despot,  who  ? — To  whom  must  I  proclaim 


SUPPLIANTS.  381 


The  words  of  Kreon,  lord  of  Kadmus'  land  400 

Since  Eteokles  by  the  hand  was  slain 
Of  Polyneikes  by  the  sevenfold  gates  ? 

Theseus. 

First,  stranger,  with  false  note  thy  speech  began, 

Seeking  a  despot  here.1     Our  state  is  ruled 

Not  of  one  only  man  :  Athens  is  free.  405 

Her  people  in  the  order  of  their  course 

Rule  year  by  year,  bestowing  on  the  rich 

Advantage  none  ;  the  poor  hath  equal  right. 

Herald. 

One  vantage  hast  thou  given  me,  as  to  one 

That  playeth  draughts  : — the  city  whence  I  come    410 

By  one  man,  not  by  any  mob,  is  swayed. 

There  is  none  there  who,  slavering  them  with  talk, 

This  way  and  that  way  twists  them  for  his  gain, 

Popular  now,  and  humouring  all  their  bent, 

Now  an  offence  :  but  still  fresh  calumnies2  415 

Gloze  past  faults,  and  he  slips  through  justice'  net. 

How  should  the  mob  which  reason  all  awry 

Have  power  to  pilot  straight  a  nation's  course  ? 

For  time  bestoweth  better  lessoning 

Than  haste.     But  yon  poor  delver  of  the  ground,    420 

How  shrewd  soe'er,  by  reason  of  his  toil 

Can  nowise  oversee  the  general  weal. 

Realm-ruining  in  the  wise  man's  sight  is  this, 

1  Cf.  Henry  V,  pt.  1,  I,  ii.  Henry,  in  answer  to  first  words 
of  the  ambassador  of  France,  replies,  "  We  are  no  tyrant, 
but  a  Christian  King." 

2  He  lays  the  blame  of  his  misconduct  upon  others,  when 
impeached  for  failure. 


382  EURIPIDES. 


When  the  vile  tonguester  getteth  himself  a  name 

By  wooing  mobs,  who  heretofore  was  naught.  425 

Theseus. 

An  eloquent  herald  this,  a  speech-crammed  babbler  ! 
But,   since  thou   hast   plunged   into   this    strife,    hear 

me  :  — 
'Twas  thou  flung'st  down  this  challenge  unto  parley  : — 
No  worse  foe  than  the  despot  hath  a  state, 
Under  whom,  first,  can  be  no  common  laws,  430 

But  one  rules,  keeping  in  his  private  hands 
The  law  :  so  is  equality  no  more. 
But  when  the  laws  are  written,  then  the  weak 
And  wealthy  have  alike  but  equal  right. 
Yea,  even  the  weaker  may  fling  back  the  scoff  435 

Against  the  prosperous,  if  he  be  reviled  ; 
And,  armed  with  right,  the  less  o'ercomes  the  great. 
Thus  Freedom  speaks1 : — "  What  man  desires  to  bring 
Good  counsel  for  his  country  to  the  people  ?  " 
Who  chooseth  this,  is  famous  :  who  will  not,  440 

Keeps  silence.     Can  equality  further  go  ? 
More — when  the  people  piloteth  the  land, 
She  joyeth  in  young  champions  native-born. 
But  in  a  king's  eyes  this  is  hatefullest  ; 
Yea,  the  land's  best,  whose  wisdom  he  discerns,       445 
He  slayeth,  fearing  lest  they  shake  his  throne. 
How  can  a  state  be  stablished  then  in  strength, 
When,  even  as  sweeps  the  scythe  o'er  springtide  mead, 
One  lops  the  brave  young  hearts  like  flower-blooms  ? 
What  boots  it  to  win  wealth  and  store  for  sons,        450 


1  He  quotes  the  formula  with  which  the  herald  opened 
the  proceedings  of  the  popular  assembly  at  Athens. 


SUPPLIANTS.  383 


When  all  one's  toil  but  swells  a  despot's  hoard  ? 

Or  to  rear  maiden  daughters  virtuously 

To  be  a  king's  sweet  morsels  at  his  will, 

And  tears  to  them  that  dressed  this  dish  for  him  ? 

May  I  die  ere  I  see  my  daughters  ravished  !  455 

Such  is  the  answering  shaft  that  I  hurl  back. 

But  thou,  what  wouldst  thou  have  of  this  our  land  ? 

Except  thy  state  had  sent  thee,  thou  shouldst  rue 

Thine  insolent  prating  !     'Tis  the  herald's  part 

To  speak  his  message,  and  to  get  him  back  460 

With  speed.     Henceforth  let  Kreon  to  my  town 

Send  a  less  wordy  messenger  than  thee. 

Chorus. 

Out  on  it !     WThen  God  prospereth  evil  men, 
Wanton  they  wax,  as  who  should  prosper  aye. 

Herald. 

Now  will  I  speak  my  charge.     For  our  dispute,        465 

Be  this  thy  mind,  contrariwise  be  mine. 

But  I  and  all  the  folk  Kadmean  warn  thee — 

Receive  Adrastus  not  into  this  land. 

If  in  the  land  he  is,  ere  set  of  sun 

Free  from  yon  wreaths  your  sacred  Mysteries,  1         470 

And  drive  him  forth,  nor  go  about  by  force 

To  take  those  dead  :  ye  have  nought  to  do  with  Argos. 

If  thou  obey  me,  thou  by  storm  unscathed 

Shalt  helm  thy  city ;  if  not,  our  great  surge 

Of  war  on  thee  and  thine  allies  shall  fall.  475 

Look  to  it,  nor,  being  chafed  at  these  my  words, — 

Because  forsooth  a  city  free  thou  hast, — 

1  Of  which  this  temple  of  Demeter  at  Eleusis  was  the  seat. 


384  EURIPIDES. 


Make  arrogant  answer  from  a  weaker  cause. 

Hope  is  men's  curse :  full  many  a  state  hath  this 

Embroiled,  by  kindling  it  to  mad  emprise.  480 

For,  when  for  war  a  nation  casteth  votes, 

Then  of  his  own  death  no  man  taketh  count, 

But  passeth  on  to  his  neighbour  this  mischance. 

But,  were  death  full  in  view  when  votes  were  cast, 

Never  war-frenzied  Greece  would  rush  on  ruin.        485 

Yet,  of  elections  twain,  we  know — all  know — 

Whether  is  best,  the  blessing  or  the  curse, 

And  how  much  better  is  peace  for  men  than  war, 

Peace,  which  is  to  the  Muses  chiefest  friend, 

But  mourning's  foe,  which  joyeth  in  fair  children,    490 

In  wealth  delighteth.     Fools  let  all  these  slip, 

And  rush  on  war  :  man  bringeth  weaker  man 

To  bondage  ;  city  is  made  city's  thrall. 

Thou  helpest  men  our  foes,  and  dead  men  they,       [495 

Wouldst  win  for  graves  them  whom  their  insolence  slew ! 

Good  sooth,  then,  wrongfully  did  levin  blast 

Kapaneus'  frame  upon  yon  ladder's  height, 

Which  he  had  reared  against  our  gates,  and  swore 

To  sack  the  town,  whether  God  willed  or  no  : —      [500 

Wrongly  earth's  chasm  snatched  from  sight  the  seer, 

Shrouding  with  yawning  gulf  his  four-horse  car ; 

And  other  captains  lie  before  our  gates, 

The  knittings  of  their  bones  with  crags  to-shattered  ! 

Or  boast  thee  now  in  wisdom  more  than  Zeus, 

Or  say  that  rightly  Gods  destroy  the  wicked.  505 

Behoves  the  wise  to  love  his  children  first, 

Parents  and  country  next, — to  make  her  great, 

Not  break  her  down.     Rash  leaders,  pilots  heady, 

Mean  ruin  :  the  wise  in  season  sitteth  still. 

This  too  is  manful  valour,  even  discretion.  510 


SUPPLIANTS.  385 


Chorus. 

The  punishment  of  Zeus  might  well  suffice 
Shall  lie  insult  with  wanton  arrogance  ? 


'&• 


Adrastus. 
Villain  of  villains  ! — 

Theseus. 

Hold,  Adrastus,  peace, 
And  thrust  not  in  before  my  words  thine  own  ; 
For  not  to  thee  yon  fellow  doth  his  message,  515 

But  unto  me  :  'tis  I  must  make  reply. 
Now,  thy  first  utterance  will  I  answer  first  :— 
I  know  no  Kreon  despot  over  me, 
Nor  more  of  might  than  I,  that  he  should  force 
Athens  to  do  this.     Sourceward  back  should  flow     520 
Life's  stream,  if  we  shall  brook  such  hest  as  his  ! 
It  is  not  I  that  launch  upon  this  war, 
Seeing  with  these  I  sought  not  Kadmus'  land. 
But  lifeless  bodies — harming  not  your  state, 
Nor  thrusting  man-destroying  strife  on  her, —  525 

I  claim  to  bury  :  lo,  all  Hellas'  law 
Do  I  uphold.     How  is  not  this  well  done  ? 
For  if  of  Argives  ye  have  suffered  aught, 
They  are  dead  :  with  glory  ye  hurled  back  your  foes, 
With    shame   to   them  : — but    there    your   right    hath 
end.  53° 

Let  now  the  dead  be  hidden  in  the  earth, 
And  each  part,  whence  it  came  forth  to  the  light, 
Thither  return,1  the  breath  unto  the  air, 
To  earth  the  body  ;  for  we  hold  it  not 

1  Reading  dirt XOeiv  vice  a7r>}A#t. 


386  EURIPIDES. 


In  fee,  but  only  to  pass  life  therein  ;  535 

Then  she  which  fostered  it  must  take  it  back. 

Dost  think  thou  woundest  Argos  through  her  dead  ? 

Not  so :  the  common  cause  of  Greece  is  this, 

If  one  shall  rob  the  dead  of  rightful  dues, 

And  hold  them  from  the  tomb  :  this  shall  unman      540 

Even  heroes,  if  such  law  shall  be  ordained. 

And  to  me  comest  thou  to  bluster  threats, 

While  ye  fear  corpses,  if  they  be  entombed  ? 

What  fear  ye  ?     Lest  they  undermine  your  land, 

There  buried  ? — or  in  earth's  dark  womb  beget         545 

Children,  of  whom  shall  vengeance  fall  on  you  ? 

'Twere  idle  waste  of  speech,  good  sooth,  to  unmask 

Your  caitiff  terrors  and  your  empty  fears  ! 

O  fools.,  learn  ye  the  real  ills  of  men  : — 

Our  life  is  conflict  all :  of  mortals  some  550 

Succeed  ere  long,  some  late,  and  straightway  some ; 

While  Fortune  sits  a  queen  :  worship  and  honour 

The  unblest  gives  her,  so  to  see  good  days ; 

The  blest  extols  her,  lest  her  wafting  breath 

Should  fail  him.     Therefore  should  we  think  on  this  : 

Wronged,  temperately  bear  it,  not  with  wrath  ;       [555 

Neither  on  one  whole  nation  visit  wrong. 

How  shall  it  be  then  ? — grant  to  us,  who  will, 

To  entomb  the  dead  and  render  heaven  its  due. 

Else,  clear  is  the  issue  :  this  will  I  by  force.  560 

For  never  unto  Greeks  shall  it  be  told 

That  the  Gods'  ancient  law  was  set  at  nought 

In  mine  and  in  Pandion's  city's  charge. 

Chorus. 

Fear  not  :  for  while  thou  wardest  justice'  light, 

Thou  shalt  not  fear  what  men  can  say  of  thee.  565 


SUPPLIANTS.  387 


Herald. 
Wouldst  thou  I  summed  up  this  thy  claim  in  brief  ? 

Theseus. 
Speak,  an  thou  list :  no  tongue-tied  wight  art  thou. 

Herald. 
Thou  ne'er  shalt  win  from  our  land  Argos'  sons. 

Theseus. 
Now,  if  thou  wilt,  give  ear  to  me  in  turn. 

Herald. 
Yea — since  I  cannot  choose  but  hear  in  turn.  570 

Theseus. 
From  thy  land  will  I  take  and  bury  them. 

Herald. 
First  must  thou  face  the  hazard  of  the  shield. 

Theseus. 
Full  many  a  harder  emprise  have  I  dared. 

Herald. 
A  champion  born  to  match  him  with  all  men  ! 

Theseus. 
With  all  proud  scorners  :  not  the  right  1  scourge.    575 

Herald. 
Ay,  thou  wilt  still  be  meddling — thou  and  Athens. 


388  EURIPIDES. 


Theseus. 
Much  glorious  toil  is  hers,  and  much  good  speed. 

Herald. 
Come  ! — let  the  dragon-seed  but  find  thee  there  ! 

Theseus. 
What  valorous  host  should  spring  from  dragons'  teeth  ? 

Herald.  [5^° 

This  shalt  thou  learn,  and  rue.    Thou  art  yet  but  young. 

Theseus. 

Tush,  man,  thou  canst  not  move  mine  heart  to  wrath 
With  all  thy  vauntings.     Get  thee  forth  the  land  : 
The  idle  words  thou  broughtest,  bear  them  back  ; 
For  nought  can  come  of  this.  [Exit  Herald. 

Behoves  set  forth 
Each  man-at-arms,  each  rider  of  the  car.  585 

Now  let  the  charger's  cheek-piece,  dashing  foam 
About  his  jaws,  hurl  into  Kadmus'  land. 
For  on  to  Kadmus'  seven  gates  will  I  march, 
Bearing  myself  the  whetted  steel  in  hand, 
Myself  mine  herald.     Thee  1  bid  remain,  590 

Adrastus  :  mingle  not  with  mine  thy  fate. 
For  I  'neath  mine  own  fortune's  star  will  lead 
Mine  host,  a  chief  renowned  with  glorious  spear. 
One  only  thing  I  need,  all  Gods  to  have  [595 

Which  reverence  right :  for  where  these  are,  they  give 
Victory.     Naked  valour  nought  avails 
To  men,  except  it  have  the  Gods'  good  will.         [Exit. 


SUPPLIANTS.  389 


Half-Chorus  i. 

{Str.  1) 

Ye  hapless  mothers  of  hapless  chieftains  dead, 

Ah,   how  is    mine   heart    storm-tossed    with    pale 

dismay — 

Half-Chorus  2. 

What  ominous  word  and  strange  of  thee  was  said  ?  600 

Half-Chorus  i. 
For  what  shall  befall  Queen  Pallas'  war-array ! 

Half-Chorus  2. 

Through  battle,  or  peace-fraught  parley,  wouldst 
thou  say  ? 

Half-Chorus  i. 

Ay,  this  last  should  be  well ;  but  if  warrior-quelling 
Slaughters  and  battles  again  shall  be  seen, 

With  the  beating  of  breasts  in  each  desolate  dwelling 
Of  the  land,  what  reproaches  bitter-keen 
Should  I  win,  through  whom  this  sorrow  hath 
been  ! 

Half-Chorus  i. 

{Ant.  1) 

Yet  doom  may  the  victor  bring  down  low  in  dust  ; 

This  comforteth  me,  and  bids  be  dauntless-souled. 

Half-Chorus  2. 
Thou  speakest  of  Gods  that  fail  not,  ever  just.  610 

Half-Chorus  i. 
Of  whom  but  of  such  be  all  our  fates  controlled  ? 


3Q0  EURIPIDES. 


Half-Chorus  2. 
Ah,  many  a  change  in  God's  ways  I  behold  ! 

Half-Chorus  i. 

By  the  terrors  o'erpast  is  the  heart  in  thee  stricken  : 
Yet  justice  aloud  unto  justice  doth  call ; 

Blood  calleth  for  blood,  and  the  Gods  shall  requicken 
Our  souls,  for  to  mortals  all  blessings  befall 
From  the  hands  that  encompass  the  goal  of  all. 

Half-Chorus  i. 

(Str.  2) 
O  might  I  speed  from  the  Goddess's  springs, 
Even  Kallichorus,  to  the  fair-towered  plain  ! 

Half-Chorus  2. 

O  would  the  Gods  but  vouchsafe  to  me  wings,  620 
So  to  win  to  the  city  of  rivers  twain  I1 

Half-Chorus  i. 

Ah  then  shouldst  thou  clearly  discern — 
How  thy  champions  speed  shouldst  thou  learn. 

Half-Chorus  2. 

Ah  God,  what  fate,  what  doom  doth  await 
The  king  of  the  mighty  hand, 
The  hero  of  Kekrops'  land  ? 

Half-Chorus  i. 

{Ant.  2) 
We  have  cried  to  the  Gods,  and  we  cry  once  more 
To  the  first  best  trust  of  the  sore  afraid. 

1  Thebes  :  round  the  base  of  the  hill  on  which  stood  the  old 
fortress,  flowed,  on  one  side,  the  Ismenus,  on  the  other,  the 
Dirke. 


SUPPLIANTS.  391 


Half-Chorus  2. 

Zeus,  hear  us,  whose  offspring  was  born  of  yore 
Of  Inachus'  daughter,  the  heifer-maid  ! 

Half-Chorus  i. 

Oh  be  our  champion  thou, 

To  our  city  be  gracious  now  !  630 

Half-Chorus  2. 

Thy  beloved  are  we,  it  was  planted  of  thee, 
This  city  whose  sons  we  would  gain 
For  the  tomb  from  the  outrage-stain. 

Enter  Messenger. 

Messenger. 

Women,  I  come  with  tidings  full  of  joy, — 

Myself  escaped,  for  I  was  ta'en  in  fight,  635 

What  time  those  seven  bands  of  chieftains  slain 

Hard  by  the  fount  of  Dirke  strove  their  strife, — 

Tidings  of  Theseus'  triumph.     I  will  spare  thee 

Question  : — a  vassal  I  of  Kapaneus 

Whom  Zeus  did  blast  with  blazing  levin-bolt.  640 

Chorus. 

Dear  friend,  glad  tidings  this  of  thy  return, 
Glad  news  of  Theseus  :  but  if  Athens'  host 
Is  safe  withal,  thou  heraldest  all  joy. 

Messenger. 

Safe  :  and  hath  fared — I  would  Adrastus  so 

Had  fared  with  Argos'  sons  whom  forth  he  led  645 

From  Inachus  to  that  Kadmean  burg. 


392  EURIPIDES. 


Chorus. 

How  then  did  Aigeus'  son  uprear  to  Zeus 
The  trophy,  he  and  those  his  spear-allies  ? 
Tell ;  thou  wast  there  :  them  that  were  not  make  glad. 

Messenger. 

Bright  the  sun's  beam,  true-levelled  shaft  of  light,    650 

Smote  on  the  earth.     Beside  Electra's  gate 

On  a  far -looking  tower  I  stood  to  watch. 

And  three  tribes  I  beheld  of  war-bands  three  :l 

A  mail-clad  host  far-stretching  up  the  slopes 

Unto  the  height  Ismenian,  as  men  said  ;  655 

And  the  king's  self,  even  Aigeus'  glorious  son, 

And  those  about  him,  marshalled  on  the  right  ; 

In  Kekrops'  ancient  land  abiders  they  : 

To  left,  the  Seaboard  Men,  arrayed  with  spears 

By  Ares'  fountain,  and  the  clouds  of  horse  660 

Drawn  out  upon  the  fringes  of  the  host, 

Equal  by  tale  :  the  battle-cars  stood  ranged 

On  levels  'neath  Amphion's  hallowed  tomb. 

Before  their  ramparts  marshalled,  Kadmus'  folk 

Behind  them  had  those  corpses,  cause  of  strife.         665 

There  against  horsemen  panoplied  horsemen  stood, 

And  chariots  facing  four-yoked  chariots  set. 

Then  Theseus'  herald  cried  in  all  men's  ears : 

"  Silence,  ye  people  !     Hush  ye,  ranks  of  Kadmus  ! 

Hearken — we  come  but  for  the  corpses'  sake,  670 

To  bury  them,  and  keep  all  Hellas'  law 

Inviolate  ;  nor  would  lengthen  bloodshed  out." 

But  Kreon  let  his  herald  answer  not, 

But  silent  under  shield  abode.     Thereat 

1  See  Appendix  B. 


SUPPLIANTS.  393 


The  four-horsed  chariot-lords  began  the  fray.  675 

On,  down  the  battle-lanes  of  foes  they  swept, 
Set  down  their  warriors,  spear  opposing  spear, 
And,  while   these   strove  with   bickering   steel,   those 

wheeled 
Their  steeds  about,  to  aid  their  fighting-men. 
Then  Phorbas,  captain  of  the  Erechtheid  horse,       680 
And  they  withal  which  led  the  Theban  riders, 
Marking  the  tumult  of  the  battle-cars, 
Down  charging  clashed,  now  triumphing,  rolled  back 

now. 
This  saw  1,  and  not  heard  ;   for  I  was  there,  [685 

There  where  the  chariots  and  the  warriors  grappled. 
Of  thousand  horrors  there,  which  first  to  tell 
I  know  not — or  of  dust  that  surged  and  soared 
Upward  unto  the  heavens,  clouds  on  clouds, — 
Of  men,  by  tangling  reins  snatched  from  the  cars,  [690 
Slung  earthward, — of  the  murder-streams  of  gore, — 
Men  falling  here,  and  there,  as  crashed  the  chariots, 
With  violence  hurled  head  downwards  to  the  earth, 
And  battered  out  of  life  by  chariot-shards. 
But  Kreon,  marking  how  our  horse  prevailed 
On  one  wing,  grasped  his  buckler  in  his  hand,  695 

And  vanward  pressed,  ere  allies'  hearts  should  faint. 
Ha,  but  the  heart  of  Theseus  fainted  not  ! 
On  charged  he,  tossing  high  his  flaming  shield. 
There  clashed  they  in  the  midmost  of  the  fray : 
Men  slew — were  slain — a  thunder  of  battle-cries       700 
Rang,  roared,  of  men  on-cheering  each  his  fellow — 
"  Smite  !  " — "  Drive    the    spear    against    Erechtheus' 

sons !  " 
But  the  host  wrought  to  man  of  dragon-teeth 
Was  a  grim  wrestler  :  back  it  bowed  our  wing 

Ee 


394  EURIPIDES. 


Far  on  the  left ;  but,  by  our  right  o'erborne,  705 

Fled  theirs  :  so  equal-balanced  was  the  fight. 
Then  did  our  captain  well  and  worshipfully  ; 
His  triumph  on  the  right  sufficed  him  not, 
But  he  to  his  hard-pressed  half-array  sped  fast, 
And  sent  a  shattering  shout, — earth  rang  again, —  710 
"  My  sons,  except  ye  stay  the  stubborn  spear 
Of  the  Dragon-seed,  your  Pallas'  cause  is  lost !  " 
So  thrilled  with  courage  all  the  Danaid  host. 
Himself  that  Epidaurian  weapon  seized, 
The  fearful  mace,  and  slingwise  swung  it  round,       715 
Down-mowing  and  clean-lopping  with  his  club 
Alike  their  necks  and  heads  in  helmets  cased  : 
And  scarce  even  then  those  stubborn  feet  would  fly. 
And  1,  for  joy  I  shouted,  yea,  I  danced, 
And  clapped   mine  hands.      On   strained  they  to  the 
gates.  720 

Then  rang  a  cry  and  wailing  through  the  town 
Of  young  and  old  :  the  panic-stricken  thronged 
The  fanes.     But,  though  the  way  within  lay  clear, 
There  Theseus  stayed  : — "  Not  to  destroy  the  town 
Came  I,"  spake  he,  "  but  to  reclaim  the  dead."         725 
Well  might  men  choose  such  battle-chief  as  this,1 
Who  is  in  peril's  midst  a  tower  of  strength, 
But  hates  the  scorners  who,  in  fortune's  hour 
Seeking  to  mount  the  ladder's  topmost  round, 
Let  slip  the  bliss  that  lay  within  their  hands.  730 

Chorus. 
Now  I,  beholding  this  unhoped-for  day, 

1  Cf.  "  O,  was  there  ever  such  a  knight,  in  friendship  or 
in  war,"  Macaulay,  Ivry. 


SUPPLIANTS.  395 


Know  that  Gods  live,  and  feel  my  load  of  ill 
Lighter,  since  these  have  paid  the  penalty. 

Adrastus. 

Zeus,  wherefore  do  they  say  that  wretched  man 

Is  wise  ?     For  lo,  we  hang  upon  thy  skirts,  735 

And  that  we  do,  it  is  but  as  thou  wilt. 

We  deemed  before  our  Argos  none  might  stand, 

Ourselves,  a  countless  host  of  lusty  arms  ; 

And,  when  Eteokles  proferred  terms  of  peace, 

Fair  was  his  offer,  yet  we  would  not  hear ;  740 

So  were  undone.     Now,  prospering  in  their  turn, 

Like  beggar-wight  with  sudden-gotten  wealth, 

Wanton  they  waxed,  and  perished  in  their  pride 

Kadmus'  mad-hearted  sons.     O  foolish  men, 

Who,  straining  with  the  bow  beyond  the  mark,         745 

And  suffering  many  ills  at  justice'  hand, 

To  friends  at  last  yield  not,  but  circumstance  ! 

Ye  states,  which  might  by  parley  end  your  feuds, 

By  bloodshed,  not  by  words,  decide  your  wrongs. 

Yet  wherefore  this  ? — Fain  would  I  know  of  thee      750 

How  thou  didst  'scape  ;  then  will  I  ask  the  rest. 

Messenger. 

When  tumult's  battle-earthquake  shook  the  town, 
Through  that  gate  slipt  I  where  the  host  poured  in. 

Adrastus. 
And  the  dead  bring  ye,  cause  of  all  the  strife  ? 

Messenger.  [755 

Even  all  which  captained  those  seven  bands  renowned. 

Ee  j 


396  EURIPIDES. 


Adrastus. 
Ha  ! — and  the  rest  which  perished,  where  be  they  ? 

Messenger. 
Laid  in  the  tomb,  hard  by  Kithairon's  folds. 

Adrastus. 
On  that  side,  or  on  this  P1 — who  buried  them  ? 

Messenger. 
Theseus,  where  hangs  Eleutherae's  shadowing  rock. 

Adrastus. 
Where  leftest  thou  those  whom  he  buried  not  ?         760 

Messenger. 
At  hand  :  for  earnest  haste  brings  all  things  near. 

Adrastus. 
I  wot,  with  loathing  thralls  took  up  the  slain. 

Messenger. 
Never  a  slave  set  hand  unto  the  toil. 

Adrastus. 
[How  ? — did  the  king  endure  this,  of  his  love  ?] 2 


1  i.e.  On  the  Theban  or  the  Attic  side  of  the  range :  the 
tombs  would  be  in  the  possession  of  the  people  in  whose 
land  they  were.     Eleutherae  was  in  Attica. 

2  Inserted  conjecturally,  to  complete  the  defective  sticho- 
muthia. 


SUPPLIANTS.  397 


Messenger. 

Hadst  thou  but  seen  his  ministry  of  love  ! 

Adrastus.  [765 

He  washed,  himself,  the  poor  youths'  slaughter-stains  ! 

Messenger. 
And  spread  the  biers,  and  veiled  the  bodies  o'er. 

Adrastus. 
An  awful  burden  was  it,  fraught  with  shame  ! 

Messenger. 
Nay,  but  what  shame  to  men  are  brethren's  ills  ? 

Adrastus. 
Ah  me,  far  liever  had  I  died  with  them  ! 

Messenger. 
Bootless  thy  mourning,  stirring  these  to  tears.  770 

Adrastus. 

I  trow  themselves  this  mourning-lore  have  taught. 
But  now  I  raise  mine  hand  to  greet  the  dead, 
And  pour  out  songs  of  death  with  streaming  eyes, 
Hailing  our  loved,  bereft  of  whom — ah  me  ! — 
Forlorn  I  weep  :  for  the  one  loss  is  this1  775 

1  Might  have  been  suggested  by  the  words  of  Achilles  : — 

"  For  kine  may  ye  get  you  in  foray,  and  flocks  of  goodly  sheep  ; 

There  be  tripods  to  win,  and  the  bright-maned  war-steed's 

gallant  head : 
But  neither  by  foray  nor  price  returneth  the  life  to  the  dead, 
When  once  through  the  fence  of  the  teeth  the  soul  of  a 
man  hath  fled."     Iliad  ix,  406-9. 


39S  EURIPIDES. 


That  never  mortal  maketh  good  again, — 

The  life  of  man,  though  wealth  may  be  re-won. 

Chorus. 

(Str.  i) 

There  is  joy,  there  is  sorrow  this  day  ;  for  our  town 

Hath  a  garland  of  glory  ; 
And  the  chiefs  of  the  spear-host,  lo,  twofold  renown  780 

Maketh  splendid  their  story. 
But  to  see  my  sons'  limbs ! — sight  bitter  for  me, 
Yet  proud,  for  the  day  that  I  hoped  not  to  see 

Hath  uprisen  before  me 
Who  have  seen  earth's  ghastliest  misery. 

(Ant.  1) 
Ah  that  Time  the  father,  the  ancient  of  days, 

Had  but  caused  me  unmarried 
To  abide  !     Was  I  wholly  in  evil  case 

While  childless  I  tarried  ? 
Nay,  no  dark  bodings  of  anguish  broke  790 

My  peace,  when  I  thought  to  refuse  love's  yoke  : 

But  of  dear  sons  harried 
Now  see  I  mine  home,  no  visioned  stroke. 

Ah,  yonder  I  see  the  forms  draw  nigh 

Of  our  perished  children  ;  alas  ! 
O  but  with  these  my  beloved  to  die, 

Unto  union  in  Hades  to  pass ! 

Enter    Theseus,    with    Athenian    soldiers    marching    in 
procession  with  corpses  on  biers. 

Adrastus. 

(Str.  2) 

Mothers,  ring  out  the  moan 

For  dear  dead  'neath  the  ground  ; 


SUPPLIANTS.  399 


Echo  my  crying  with  accordant  groan  800 

Of  mournful -wailing  sound. 

Chorus. 

O  my  son  ! — bitter  word 
For  mothers'  lips  to  know  ! 
I  cry  on  thee,  in  ears  that  have  not  heard  : 
Ah  for  my  woe  ! 


We  suffered — 


Adrastus. 

Chorus. 
Deepest  anguish  ! 

Adrastus. 

Ah,  fair  town 
Of  Argos,  see  my  fate  ! 

Chorus. 

O  yea,  upon  our  sorrows  she  looks  down, 

The  childless  desolate  !  810 


Adrastus. 

Bring  them,  the  blood -besprent 
Forms  of  the  evil-starred, 
When  to  unrighteous  foes  the  victory  went, 
Slain,  an  unmeet  reward  ! 

Chorus. 

Give  them,  that  I  may  cast 
Mine  arms  round  these,  and  lull, 
In  death's  sleep  clasped,  my  children. 


{Ant.  2) 


4oo  EURIPIDES. 


Woe! 


Adrastus. 

This  thou  hast. 
Chorus. 
Griefs  cup  is  full ! 

Adrastus. 

Chorus. 
Blend  thy  wails  with  ours  ! 

Adrastus. 

Hear  me ! 

Chorus. 

Thy  moan 
For  us,  for  thee,  is  sped.  820 

Adrastus. 
Oh  had  the  foe  slain  me  ! 

Chorus. 

Oh  had  I  known 
Never  a  husband's  bed  ! 

Adrastus. 


Ah  mother  ! — ah,  dead  child  ! 
Lo,  what  a  trouble-sea  ! 


(Str.  3) 


Chorus. 

Our  cheeks  are  furrow-scarred,  and  our  white  heads  are 
marred 

With  ashes  all  defiled. 


SUPPLIANTS.  401 


Adrastus. 

Woe's  me,  ah  woe  is  me ! 

(Ant.  3) 
Yawn  for  my  grave,  earth's  floor  ! 
Storm-blast,  in  pieces  break  !  830 

O  that  on  mine  head  dashed  the  flame  of  Zeus  down 
flashed  ! 

Chorus. 

Ruin  thy  bridals  bore : 

Thy  ruin  Phoebus  spake. 

(Epode.) 
The  curse  of  Oedipus,  with  sighing  fraught, 
Childless  hath  left  his  house,  and  thee  hath  sought. 1 

Theseus  (to  leader  of  Chorus). 

Thee  had  I  asked,  but,  for  thy  mourning  poured 
Forth  to  the  host,  refrain,  and  my  request 
To  thee  forego,  and  ask  Adrastus  now  :— 2  840 

Of  what  race  sprang  these  chiefs,  above  all  men 
Which  shone  in  valour  ?     To  my  young  Athenians 
Tell,  of  thy  fuller  wisdom  ;  for  thou  know'st. 
Their  gallant  deeds,  too  great  for  words  to  speak, 
Thou  saw'st,  whereby  they  hoped  to  win  yon  Thebes. 
One  question,  meet  for  laughter,  I  ask  not —  [845 

Whom  each  of  these  encountered  in  the  strife, 
Or  from  what  foeman's  spear  received  his  wound. 

1  Reading  eprjixd  cr  for  eyrjfias. 

2  Lines  838-40  are,  by  general  consent,  corrupt,  and  have 
been  variously  emendated.  The  translation  given  is  an 
approximation  to  the  sense  of  the  text  as  it  stands  in  the 
MSS. 


4o2  EURIPIDES. 


For  they  that  hear  such  tales  as  much  could  say1 

As  he  which  tells.     Who,  that  hath  stood  in  fight,  850 

When  spear  on  spear  is  flying  before  men's  eyes, 

Can  certainly  report  who  bravely  bears  him  ? 

I  could  not  ask  such  vanity  as  this, 

Nor  them  believe  whose  impudence  would  tell. 

For  scarce  a  man  can  see  what  see  he  must,  855 

What  time  he  standeth  foot  to  foot  with  foes. 

Adrastus. 

Hear  then.     To  no  unwilling  lips  thou  givest 

The  praise  of  these  :  full  fain  am  I  to  speak 

Both  truth  and  justice  touching  men  I  loved. 

Seest  thou  yon  corpse  wherethrough  leapt  Zeus's  bolt  ? 

Kapaneus  he,  a  mighty  man  of  wealth,  [860 

Yet  nought  thereby  exalted,  but  he  bare 

A  spirit  no  whit  loftier  than  the  poor, 

Shunning  the  man  whose  pomp  of  banquets  scorned 

That  which  sufficeth.     "  Not  in  gluttony,"  865 

Said  he,  "  is  good  :  enough  is  as  a  feast." 

True  friend  to  friends  was  he,  alike  when  near 

And  far  :  of  such  is  there  no  multitude. 

A  guileless  heart,  a  mouth  of  gracious  speech, 

Who  left  no  dues  unrendered,  or  to  servants  870 


1  I  have  retained  the  MSS.  reading  of  kolvol  and  o.kov6vt<i)v. 
Literally — "  Such  tales  are  as  much  the  property  of  the 
listener  as  of  the  narrator,"  i.e.,  one  has  as  much  right  to 
tell  them  as  the  other.  The  sarcasm,  that  the  latter  in 
point  of  fact  knows  no  more  than  the  former,  is  materially 
weakened  by  the  emendations  («voi  and  cponwroDv)  of 
Grotius  and  Nauck,  adopted  by  Paley,  which  give  the 
sense — 

"  For  empty  words  are  these  of  whoso  asks 
And  whoso  tells." 


SUPPLIANTS.  403 


Or  citizens.     Now  of  the  next  I  speak, 

Eteoklus,  graced,  he  too,  with  excellence. 

A  young  man  he,  not  rich  in  this  world's  goods, 

But  in  the  Argive  land  dowered  rich  with  honour  ; 

Who  oft,  when  friends  would  lavish  on  him  gold,     875 

Received  it  not  his  doors  within,  to  make 

His  life  a  slave  stooped  'neath  the  yoke  of  wealth. 

He  loathed  wrong-doers,  not  his  erring  country  ; 

Seeing  the  guilt  is  nowise  in  the  state 

That  through  an  evil  pilot  wins  ill  fame.  880 

Such  too  Hippomedon  was,  the  third  with  these. 

From  childhood  up  he  deigned  not  turn  aside 

Unto  the  Muses'  joys  for  ease  of  life  ; 

But  in  the  field  abode,  enduring  hardness 

Gladly  for  valour's  sake,  and,  hunting  still,  885 

Joyed  in  the  steed  and  hands  that  strain  the  bow, 

Eager  to  yield  his  land  his  body's  best. 

The  fourth  was  huntress  Atalanta's  son, 

Parthenopaeus,  unmatched  in  goodlihead  : 

Arcadian  he,  but  came  to  Inachus,  890 

And  lived  his  youth  at  Argos.     Fostered  there, 

First,  as  beseems  the  sojourner  in  the  land, 

He  vexed  not,  nor  was  jealous  of  the  state,1 

Nor  was  a  wrangler,  whereby  citizens 

Or  aliens  most  shall  jar  with  fellow-men  ;  895 

But  in  the  ranks-  stood  like  an  Argive  born, 

Fought  for  the  land,  and,  whenso  prospered  Argos, 


1  i.e.  Of  the  caste-distinctions  of  Greek  society,  which 
made  an  alien  permanently  inferior  to  citizens  born,  and  ex- 
cluded him  from  politics. 

2  Or,  "  But  even  in  ambush  " — a  service  of  special  danger, 
evincing  peculiar  devotion  to  the  cause,  like  the  "  forlorn 
hope  "  of  modern  warfare  (cf.  Iliad  i,  227,  xiii,  277). 


4o4  EURIPIDES. 


Rejoiced,  and  grieved  when  it  went  ill  with  her  ; — 

Beloved  of  many  a  man,  of  maids  how  many  ! 

Yet  from  transgression  did  he  keep  him  pure.  900 

Tydeus'  high  praise  next  will  I  sum  in  brief. 

In  speech  he  shone  not ;  a  dread  reasoner  he 

In  logic  of  the  shield,  and  war's  inventions  : 

In  counsel  not  as  his  brother  Meleager, 

Yet  of  like  fame,  through  science  of  the  spear  905 

Getting  him  ripest  scholarship  of  war. 

A  soaring  soul  was  his,  a  spirit  rich1 

Where  deeds  might  serve  ;  in  speech  of  less  avail. 

Hearing  my  words,  O  Theseus,  marvel  not 

That  these  before  yon  towers  feared  not  to  die :         910 

For  noble  nurture  harvest  bears  of  honour  ; 

And  whosoe'er  hath  practised  knightly  deeds 

Shames  to  be  called  base.     It  may  be  taught, 

This  chivalry  ;  for  even  the  babe  is  taught 

To  speak  and  hear  things  not  yet  understood  ;  915 

And  what  one  learneth,  that  he  is  wont  to  keep 

To  hoary  hairs.     So  train  ye  well  the  child. 

Chorus. 

O  son,  for  thy  sorrow  I  gave  thee 
Life  of  my  life  'neath  my  zone, 

And  I  bore  for  thee  travail-pain  :  920 

And  now  is  my  loss  death's  gain  ; 
Of  my  labours  no  fruit  doth  remain, 
Nor  to  foster  mine  eld  may  I  have  thee. 
Woe's  me  that  I  bare  a  son  ! 

1  Retaining  MSS.  reading  r/0o<;,  ttXovo-lov  (jypovrjfia,  etc. 
Paley's  emendation  conveys  a  reflection  on  rich  men,  which 
would  by  implication  be  a  disparagement  of  Kapaneus  (861). 


SUPPLIANTS.  405 


Theseus. 

Yea  ;  and  for  Oikleus'  noble  son  withal, —  925 

Him  the  Gods  living  snatched  down  earth's  abyss, 

Him  and  his  car; — his  praise  is  manifest.1 

But  Oedipus'  son — I  tell  of  Polyneikes — 

Myself  shall  praise,  nor  falsely  speak  herein. 

My  guest  was  he,  ere,  leaving  Kadmus'  town  930 

Self-banished,  unto  Argos  he  crossed  o'er. 

But  knowest  thou  my  wish  as  touching  these  ? 

Adrastus. 
Nought  know  I,  save  one  thing — to  heed  thy  words. 

Theseus. 
Kapaneus,  stricken  by  the  fire  of  Zeus — 

Adrastus. 
Wouldst  bury  him  apart,  a  hallowed  corpse  ?  935 

Theseus. 
Yea,  but  the  rest  all  on  one  funeral-pyre. 

Adrastus. 
Where  wilt  thou  set  for  him  that  several  tomb  ? 

Theseus. 
Here,  by  these  halls  I  have  built  his  sepulchre. 

1  And  he  therefore  needs  none  from  me.  Amphiaraus 
was  "  the  righteous  taken  away  from  the  evil  to  come," 
being  thus  rescued  from  the  pursuit  of  the  enemy,  and  en- 
tombed by  the  Gods  themselves. 


4o6  EURIPIDES. 


Adrastus. 
He  then  shall  have  the  tendance  of  thy  thralls. 

Theseus. 
These,  mine.    Now  let  the  biers  of  death  move  on.  940 

Adrastus. 
Come,  hapless  mothers,  to  your  sons  draw  nigh. 

Theseus. 
Adrastus,  this  thou  say'st  were  all  unmeet. 

Adrastus. 
How  should  the  mothers  choose  but  touch  their  sons  ? 

Theseus. 
'Twere  death  to  look  on  them  so  sorely  marred. 

Adrastus. 
A  ghastly  sight  is  death,  even  in  death's  hour.1         945 

Theseus. 
Why  then  wouldst  add  fresh  anguish  to  their  grief  ? 

Adrastus. 

Sooth  said.     Ye,  tarry  patiently,  for  well 
Speaks  Theseus.     When  to  fire  we  have  given  these, 
Yourselves  the  bones  shall  gather.     Hapless  mortals  ! 
Why  do  ye  get  you  spears  and  deal  out  death  950 

To  fellow-men  ? — Stay,  from  such  toils  forbear, 

1  "  Before  decay's  effacing  fingers 
Have  swept  the  lines  where  beauty  lingers." 


SUPPLIANTS.  407 


And'peaceful  mid  the  peaceful  ward  your  towns. 
Short  is  life's  span  :  behoves  to  pass  through  this 
Softly  as  may  be,  not  with  travail  worn. 

The  funeral  procession  passes  on  to  the  pyres,  which  are 
kindled  in  sight  of  the  stage. 


Chorus. 


(Str.  1) 


Crowned  with  fair  sons  above  others 

No  more  am  I  seen, 
Neither  blessed  mid  Argive  mothers  ; 

Nor  the  Travail-queen 

To  the  childless  shall  give  fair  greeting  ! 

Forlorn  is  my  life,  as  the  fleeting  960 

Clouds  that  flee  fast  from  the  beating 

Of  the  storm-scourges  keen. 

(Ant.  1) 
Seven  mothers — and  heroes  seven 

To  our  sorrow  we  bare  : 
None  princelier  to  Argos  were  given. 

Now  in  childless  despair 
Drear  old  age  creepeth  upon  me  ; 
Yet  the  ranks  of  the  dead  have  not  known  me, 
Nor  the  count  of  the  living  may  own  me  ; 

But  an  outcast  I  fare.  970 

(Epode) 
For  me  are  but  tears  remaining  : 

Saddest  memorials  rest 

In  mine  halls  of  my  son — shorn  hair 
For  mourning,  and  garlands  are  there  ; 
Libations — for  dead  lips'  draining  ;i 

1  "  In  ordinary  circumstances,  libations  and  songs  were 
signs  of  festivity  ;  here  they  are  so  qualified  as  to  signify  the 
reverse."     (Paley). 


4o8  EURIPIDES. 


Songs — which  the  golden-tressed 
Apollo  shall  turn  from  in  scorn  ; 
And  with  wails  shall  I  greet  each  morn, 
Ever  drenching  with  tears  fast  raining 

The  vesture  folds  on  my  breast. 

Lo,  yonder  the  fiery  bower,  980 

Even  Kapaneus'  sacred  pyre  : 
I  see  it  without  the  fane, 
With  Theseus'  gifts  to  the  slain. 
Lo,  Evadne  his  bride,  in  this  hour 
By  the  slain  of  the  levin-fire  ! 
King  Iphis'  daughter  renowned, 
On  yon  cliff  why  is  she  found 
Whose  crags  above  this  fane  tower  ? 

And  she  climbs,  and  she  climbs  ever  higher  ! 

Evadne  appears  on  the  cliff  above  the  pyre  of  Kapaneus, 
dressed  in  festal  attire. 

Evadne. 

Where  now  that  light  that  shone  990 

When  flashed  thy  wheels,  O  Sun, 
Or  when  the  moon  raced  on, 

And  star-lamps  glancing 
Raced  through  a  lowering  sky, 
When  Argos  tossed  on  high 
The  gladsome  bridal-cry, 

And  throbbed  with  dancing, 
And  thrilled  with  song,  to  see 
Mine  hero  wed  with  me  ? — 
O  love,  I  rush  to  thee  1000 

From  mine  home,  raving, 
Seeking  thy  tomb,  thy  pyre, 


SUPPLIANTS.  409 


Longing  with  strong  desire 
To  end  in  that  same  fire 

Mine  anguish,  braving 
Hades — to  end  life's  woe  ; 
For  death  is  sweetest  so 
With  dear  dead  to  lie  low  : — 

God  grant  my  craving  ! 

Chorus. 

Lo,  the  pyre  nigh, — above  it  dost  thou  stand, — 
Zeus'  own  possession,  on  the  which  is  laid  1010 

Thy  lord,  o'erthrown  by  flash  of  levin-bolt. 

Evadne. 

The  end  ! — I  see  it  now, 

Here  standing.     Friend  art  thou, 

Fortune  !     From  this  cliff's  brow, 

For  wifehood's  glory, 
With  spurning  feet  I  dart 
Down  into  yon  fire's  heart 
To  meet  him,  ne'er  to  part, — 

Flames  reddening  o'er  me, —  1020 

To  nestle  to  his  side, 
In  Cora's1  bowers  a  bride  ! — 
O  love,  though  thou  hast  died, 

I'll  not  forsake  thee. 
Farewell  life,  bridal  bed  ! — 
By  happier  omens  led,2 

1  Persephone,  queen  of  Hades. 

2  Lines  1026 — 30  are  imperfect  in  the  MSS.  The  most 
probable  sense,  (reading  (j>aveuv  t€kvolctlv  i/xols  •  eir]& — etc.), 
is  that  her  orphan  daughters  may  find  loving  husbands  and 
a  wedded  lot  more  fortunate  than  hers. 

Fk 


4io  EURIPIDES. 


Ah,  be  our  children  wed  ! 

May  leal  love  make  ye, 
Bridegrooms  to  be,  life  through 
Unto  my  daughters  true  : 
One  love-breath  breathe  in  you. 

Now,  Death,  come — take  me  !         1030 

Chorus. 

Lo,  here  himself,  thy  sire,  is  drawing  nigh, 
Old  Iphis,  within  sound  of  thy  strange  speech, 
Which,  heard  not  yet,  shall  wring  his  heart  to  hear. 

Enter  Iphis. 

Iphis. 

O  hapless  thou  ! — O  hapless  ancient  I  ! — 

Burdened  with  twofold  grief  for  kin  I  came         1035 

To  bear  unto  his  fatherland  o'ersea 

My  son  Eteoklus,  slain  by  Theban  spear, 

And  seeking  for  my  daughter,  who  hath  fled 

Forth  of  mine  halls,  the  wife  of  Kapaneus,        [1040 

Longing  with  him  to  die.      Through  days  o'erpast 

Guarded  she  was  at  home  :  but  soon  as  I 

Slackened  the  watch,  for  ills  that  pressed  on  me, 

Forth  did  she  pass.     Howbeit  here,  methinks, 

Is  she  most  like  to  be.     Say,  have  ye  seen  her  ? 

Evadne. 

Wherefore  ask  these  ?    Here  am  I  on  the  rock.  1045 
Even  as  a  bird,  my  father,  hang  I  poised 
In  misery  o'er  the  pyre  of  Kapaneus. 

Iphis. 

My  child,  what  wind  hath  blown,  what  journeying 

led  thee  ? 
Why  flee  thine  home  and  come  unto  this  land  ? 


SUPPLIANTS.  411 


EVADNE. 

Thou  wouldst  be  wroth  to  hear  my  purposes.      1050 
O  father,  I  would  not  that  thou  shouldst  hear. 

Iphis. 
How  ? — were't  not  just  thy  very  father  knew  ? 

Evadne. 
Thou  wouldst  be  no  wise  judge  of  my  resolve. 

Iphis. 
And  why  in  this  attire  array  thy  form  ? 

Evadne. 
Father,  strange  meaning  this  my  vesture  hath.    1055 

Iphis. 
Thou  seemest  not  as  one  that  mourns  her  lord. 

Evadne. 
For  deed  unheard-of  have  I  decked  me  thus. 

Iphis. 
By  tomb  and  pyre  appear'st  thou  in  such  guise  ? 

Evadne. 
Yea,  I  for  victory's  triumph  hither  come. 

Iphis. 
What  victory  this  ?    Fain  would  I  learn  of  thee.  1060 

Evadne. 
Over  all  wives  on  whom  the  sun  looks  down. 

F  F   1 


4i2  EURIPIDES. 


Iphis. 
Or  in  Athene's  toils,1  or  prudent  wit  ? 

EVADNE. 

In  courage.     With  my  lord  will  I  lie  dead. 

Iphis. 
How  sayest  thou  ? — what  sorry  riddle  this  ? 

Evadne. 
I  plunge  to  yon  pyre  of  dead  Kapaneus.  1065 

Iphis. 

0  daughter,  speak  not  so  before  a  throng ! 

Evadne. 
Even  this  would  I,  that  all  the  Argives  hear. 

Iphis. 
Nay,  surely  will  I  let  thee  from  this  deed. 

Evadne. 

Let  or  let  not — thou  canst  not  reach  nor  seize  me. 
Lo,  hurled  my  body  falls,  to  thee  no  joy,  1070 

But  to  me  and  my  lord  with  me  consumed. 

Throws  herself  from  the  cliff  on  to  the  pyre. 

Chorus. 

O  lady,  what  awful  deed  hath  been  compassed  of  thee  ! 

1  "  The  daughters  of  that  land  still  surpass  all  other,  to 

whom 
Athene  hath  given  rare  skill  in  the  beautiful  works  of 
the  loom."  Odyssey  vii,  104-5. 


SUPPLIANTS.  413 


I  PHIS. 

0  Argos'  daughters,  wretched  I  ! — undone  ! 

Chorus. 

Woe  for  thee,  woe,  who  hast  borne  this  misery  ! 

Yet  its  fulness  of  horror  remaineth  for  thee  to  see.  1075 

Iphis. 
None  other  shall  ye  find  more  sorrow-crushed. 

Chorus. 

O  ancient,  O  sore-stricken  heart, 
In  the  fortune  partaker  thou  art 
Of  Oedipus  :  thou  and  mine  hapless  city  therein  have 
part. 

Iphis. 

Ah  me,  wdiy  is  not  this  to  men  vouchsafed,  1080 

Twice  to  see  youth,  and  twice  withal  old  age  ? 
Now  in  our  homes,  if  aught  shall  fall  out  ill, 
By  wisdom's  second  thoughts  this  we  amend. 
Our  life  we  may  not.     Might  we  but  be  young 
And  old  twice  o'er,  if  any  man  should  err,  1085 

We  would  amend  us  in  that  second  life. 
For  I,  beholding  others  rich  in  sons, 
For  children  yearned,  and  by  my  longing  perished. 
Had  I  to  this  come  first, — by  suffering  proved 
What  to  a  father  child-bereavement  means,  1090 

1  had  never  come  to  this,  to  this  day's  woe, 
I,  who  begat  a  young  son  of  my  loins 
Most  goodly,  and  am  now  of  him  bereft ! 

No  more  ! — what  must  I  do,  the  sorrow-fraught  ? 
Wend  home  ? — and  see  with  desolation  filled       1095 


4U  EURIPIDES. 


Home — for  my  life  the  hunger  of  despair  ? 
Or  seek  the  mansion  of  yon  Kapaneus  ? — 
Erst  sweet,  O  sweet,  when  this  my  daughter  lived  ! 
Ah,  but  she  is  no  more,  who  wont  to  draw 
Down  to  her  lips  my  face,  fold  in  her  arms  noo 

Mine  head  : — nought  sweeter  than  a  daughter  is 
To  grey-haired  sire  :  sons'  hearts  be  greater-framed, 
But  not,  not  theirs  the  dear  caressing  wiles ! 
Lead  me,  with  speed  O  lead  me  to  mine  home, 
And  hide  in  darkness,  there  to  make  an  end         1105 
Of  this  old  frame,  by  fasting  pined  away. 
What  profit  if  I  touch  my  daughter's  bones  ? 
Strong  wrestler  Eld,  O  how  I  loathe  thy  grasp, 
Loathe  them  which  seek  to  lengthen  out  life's  span, 
By  meats  and  drinks  and  magic  philtre-spells      11 10 
To  turn  life's  channel,  that  they  may  not  die, 
Who,  when  they  are  but  cumberers  of  the  ground, 
Should  hence,  and  die,  and  make  way  for  the  young. 

The  stage  gradually  Jills  with  a  procession,  in  which  the 
Sons  of  the  dead  chiefs  bear  the  urns  containing  their 
ashes.    The  members  of  the  Chorus  advance  to  meet  them. 

Chorus. 

Woe  is  me,  woe  ! 
Onward,  onward  the  bones  of  sons,  sons  dead, 
Are  borne  :  O  lend  me  your  hands  ;  my  strength  is 

sped, 
Handmaids  :  stricken  with  eld,  in  childless  pain 

I  faint  for  my  dear  sons  slain. 
Bowed  down  under  the  load  of  years  on  years, 
Wasted  ever  with  sorrows,  aye  with  tears, 


SUPPLIANTS.  415 


Couldst  thou  tell  of  a  harder,  sorer  stroke  11 20 

That  lighteth  on  mortal  folk, 
Than  when  mothers  behold  their  dead  sons'  biers  ? 

Chorus  of  Children. 

{Sir.  1) 
I  bear,  O  I  bear, 

Sad  mother,  the  limbs  of  my  sire  from  the  burning, — 
A  burden   not   light,  for  the  weight  of   my  sorrow  is 

there, — 
All  that  I  love  in  this  little  vial  inurning. 

Chorus  of  Mothers. 

Woe  is  me,  woe  ! 
Is  it  all  that  thou  bringest,  the  salt  tears'  flow, 
To  the  dead  men's  mother  ? — nought  else  canst  thou 
show  ? 
To  a  handful  of  dust  brought  down  are  the  forms  of  the 
men  of  renown  1 130 

So  glorious  erewhile  in  Mycenae-town  ? 

First  Child. 

(Ant.  1) 
Alas  for  my  doom  ! 

Sad  son  of  an  ill-starred  father  forsaken, 
Henceforth  I  inherit  the  orphan's  desolate  home, 
Unsheltered  by  arms  of  the  sire  from  whose  loins  I 
was  taken. 

First  Mother. 

Woe  for  my  plight ! 
Whitherward  hath   my   toil   for    my  babes  taken 

flight  ? 
What  thank  have  I  now  for  the  vigils  of  night  ? 


4i6  EURIPIDES. 


What  thank  for  the  mother's  breast,  for  the  eyes  that 
would  take  no  rest, 

And  the  dear  face  oft  to  my  own  face  pressed  ? 

Second  Child. 

(Str.  2) 
They  are  gone  ! — no  sons  hast  thou  any  more — they 
are  gone,  [iH° 

O  mother  :  for  these  by  this  hath  the  wide  air  won. 

Second  Mother. 

They  crumbled  to  ashes  mid  flame  as  they  lay, 
And  to  Hades  now  have  they  winged  their  way. 

Third  Child. 

O  my  father,  the  wail  of  thy  sons  ringeth  down  unto 

thee. 
Ah  shall  I  ever  bear  shield,  an  avenger  to  be 
Of  thy  blood  ? 

Third  Mother. 
God  grant  it,  my  child,  to  thy  destiny  ! 

Fourth  Child. 

(Ant.  2) 

My  father's  avenging  ! — one  day  unto  me  shall  it  come, 
If  God  will : — the  wrong  sleepeth  not  by  his  side  in  the 
tomb. 

Fourth   Mother. 

Ah,  to-day's  disaster  and  sorrow  suffice : 

Sufficeth  the  grief  on  mine  heart  that  lies  !  1150 

Fifth  Child. 

Ha,  yet  shall  they  greet  me,  Asopus'  ripples  of  light, 
Leading  the  Danaans  onward  in  brass-mail  dight  ? 


SUPPLIANTS.  417 


Fifth   Mother. 
A  champion  thou  of  thy  perished  father's  right. 

Sixth  Child. 

(Sir.  3) 
O  father  mine,  methinks  I  see  thee  now  ! 

Sixth  Mother. 
Laying  the  kiss  of  love  upon  thy  brow. 

Sixth  Child. 

But  thy  words  of  exhorting  are  come  to  nought  ; 
They  are  wafted  afar  on  the  wind's  wing  caught. 

Sixth  Mother. 

Unto  twain  is  anguish  bequeathed,  unto  me, 
And  grief  for  thy  father  shall  ne'er  leave  thee. 

Seventh  Child. 

(Ant.  3) 

By  this  my  burden  am  I  all  undone  !  1160 

Seventh  Mother. 
Let  me  embrace  the  ashes  of  my  son  ! 

Seventh  Child. 

I  weep  to  hearken  thy  piteous  word, 

Most  piteous — the  depths  of  mine  heart  hath  it  stirred. 

Seventh   Mother. 

O  son,  thou  art  gone :  never  more  shall  I  gaze 
On  the  light  of  thy  mother,  thy  glorious  face  ! 


418  EURIPIDES. 


Theseus. 

Adrastus,  and  ye  dames  of  Argive  race,  1165 

Ye  see  these  children  bearing  in  their  hands 

The  dust  of  gallant  sires  whom  I  redeemed  : 

Even  these  do  I  and  Athens  give  to  thee. 

And  ye  must  guard  the  memory  of  this  grace, 

Keeping  my  boon  for  aye  before  your  eyes.  n 70 

And  on  these  boys  I  lay  the  selfsame  charge, 

To  honour  Athens,  and  from  son  to  son 

To  pass  on  like  a  watchword  this  our  boon. 

And  Zeus  is  witness,  and  the  Gods  in  heaven, 

How  honoured  and  how  favoured  hence  ye  pass.     1175 

Adrastus. 

Theseus,  our  hearts  know  all  thy  noble  deeds 
To  Argos,  and  thy  kindness  in  her  need. 
Our  love  shall  ne'er  wax  old  :  ye  have  dealt  with  us 
Nobly  :  your  debtors  owe  you  like  for  like. 

Theseus. 
What  service  yet  remains  that  I  may  render  ?  1180 

Adrastus. 
Fare  well :  for  thou  art  worthy — thou  and  Athens. 

Theseus. 
So  be  it.     The  same  fortune  light  on  thee. 

Athene  appears  in  her  chariot  above  the  temple-roof. 

Athene. 

Give  ear,  O  Theseus,  to  Athene's  hest 

What  thou  must  do — for  Athens'  service  do  : — 


SUPPLIANTS.  419 


Yield  thou  not  up  thus  lightly  yonder  bones  1185 

For  these  their  sons  to  bear  to  Argive  land  ; 

But,  for  thine  and  thy  city's  travail's  sake, 

First  take  an  oath.     Let  yon  Adrastus  swear — 

He  answereth  for  them,  despot  of  their  folk, 

For  all  troth  of  the  land  of  Danaus'  sons  :—  ngo 

Be  this  the  oath, — that  never  Argive  men 

Shall  bear  against  this  land  array  of  war  ; 

If  others  come,  their  spear  shall  bar  the  way. 

If  ye  break  oath,  and  come  against  our  town, 

Call  down  on  Argos  miserable  ruin.  11 95 

And  where  to  slay  the  victims  hear  me  tell : 

Thou  hast  a  brazen  tripod  in  thine  halls, 

Which  Herakles,  from  Ilium's  overthrow 

Hasting  upon  another  mighty  task, 

Bade  thee  to  set  up  at  the  Pythian  hearth.  1200 

O'er  this  three  throats  of  three  sheep  sever  thou, 

And  in  the  tripod's  hollow  grave  the  oath. 

Then  give  it  to  the  Delphian  God  to  guard, 

Token  of  oaths  and  witness  unto  Hellas. 

And  that  keen  knife,  wherewith  thou  shalt  have  gashed 

The  victims  with  the  death-wound,  bury  thou        [1205 

In  the  earth's  depths  hard  by  the  seven  pyres. 

For,  if  they  march  on  Athens  ever,  this, 

Shown  them,  shall  daunt,  and  turn  them  back  with 

shame. 
This  done,  then  send  the  dead  dust  forth  the  land.  12 10 
The  precinct  where  fire  purified  their  limbs 
Be  the  God's  Close,  by  those  three  Isthmian  ways. 
This  to  thee  :  now  to  the  Argives'  sons  I  speak. 
Ye  shall,  to  man  grown,  waste  Ismenus'  town 
In  vengeance  for  the  slaughter  of  dead  sires.  121 5 

Thou  in  thy  sire's  stead,  Aigialeus,1  shalt  be 

1  Son  of  Adrastus. 


420  EURIPIDES. 


Their  young  chief:  from  Aetolia  Tydeus'  son, 

Named  Diomedes  of  his  sire,  shall  come. 

When  beards  your  cheeks  are  shadowing,  tarry  not 

To  hurl  a  brazen-harnessed  Danai'd  host  1220 

On  the  Kadmean  seven-gated  hold. 

Bitter  to  them  as  lions'  whelps  full-grown 

To  strength,  to  sack  their  city  shall  ye  come. 

This  is  sure  doom.     "  The  After-born"  through  Hellas 

Named,  shall  ye  kindle  song  in  days  to  be ;  1225 

Such  war-array  with  God's  help  shall  go  forth. 

Theseus. 

Athene,  Queen,  thy  words  will  I  obey  : 

Thou  guid'st  me  ever  that  I  may  not  err. 

Him  will  I  bind  with  oaths :  only  do  thou 

Still  lead  me  aright ;  for,  gracious  while  thou  art    1 230 

To  Athens,  shall  we  ever  safely  dwell. 

Chorus. 

On  pass  we,  Adrastus,  and  take  oath-plight 
Unto  Theseus  and  Athens.     That  worship  requite 
Their  travail  for  us,  is  meet  and  right. 

[Exeunt  Onines. 


APPENDIX  A. 

On   the  Character  of  Admetus. 

While  the  play  of  Alcestis  is,  of  all  the  remains  of  the  ancient 
classical  drama,  the  most  popular  with  modern  readers,  it  is,  be- 
yond question,  the  most  misunderstood.  We  bring  to  our  estimate 
of  it  judgments  based  on  instincts  inherited  from  our  Teutonic 
forefathers,  ideas  which  took  form  in  the  days  of  medieval  chivalry, 
and  convictions  begotten  in  us  of  the  teachings  of  Christianity. 
Hence,  when  we  read  of  a  husband  who  availed  himself  of  a 
heaven-given  opportunity  of  escaping  death  at  the  price  of  his  wife's 
life,  all  our  sympathies  go  out  to  the  love,  the  unselfishness,  the 
courage,  of  the  willing  sacrifice,  and  in  the  husband's  conduct  we 
find  the  meanest  selfishness  and  the  most  unmanly  cowardice. 
The  invectives  of  Pheres  appear  as  a  well-merited  castigation,  un- 
answerable in  their  withering  force.  The  sorrow  of  Admetus  seems 
hypocritical,  and  his  lamentations  hollow.  Browning  (Balaustion's 
Adventure)  describes  him  as  doing  in  the  death-scene  everything 
but  the  one  right  thing,  which  would  have  been  to  insist  on  revoking 
the  compact.  It  is  not  enough  to  answer  that  Euripides  had  to 
make  the  best  of  a  legend  which  he  could  not  alter  ;  we  have  to 
account  for  the  fact  that  the  legend,  both  in  its  original  form  and 
in  Euripides'  treatment  of  it,  was  regarded  as  redounding  to 
Admetus'  glory  rather  than  to  his  shame.  For  it  is  certain  that 
the  modern  view  is  diametrically  opposed  to  that  of  the  Athenian 
audience.  In  their  eyes — i .  Admetus  was  a  noble  character  :  2.  He 
was  iji  the  right  in  respect  to  the  motif  and  incidents  of  the  play  : 
3.    He  reaped  the  just  reward  of  the  good  man. 

1.  Admetus  was  a  noble  character,  for  he  displayed  the  highest 
social  virtue  recognised  by  a  Greek — hospitality,  the  crowning 
height  of  unselfishness,  as  truly  a  part  of  patriotism  in  peace,  as 
heroism  was  in  war.  The  hospitable  man  embodied  for  them  the 
virtues,  not  only  of  the  modern  philanthropist,  but  also  those  of 
the  enlightened  diplomatist :  he  established  and  maintained  friendly 
relations  with  other  states,  gaining  for  his  city  allies,  and  for  her 
people  friends  and  protectors  in  foreign  lands,  and  that  in  days 


422  APPENDIX. 


when,  without  such,  not  only  was  travel  perilous,  but  even  com- 
merce was  difficult  and  precarious.  The  deserts  of  the  man  who 
thus  served  his  country,  and  his  countrymen  individually,  without 
regarding  the  cost  to  his  own  fortune  and  convenience,  could  not 
be  overrated.  Conjugal  affection  shrank  into  insignificance  beside 
such  a  trait.  Admetus  is  the  supreme  type  of  this  class,  a  point 
which  is  emphasized  by  the  fact  that  Apollo  set  the  seal  of  Heaven's 
approval  upon  his  peculiar  excellence,  by  accepting,  and  so  conse- 
crating, his  hospitality.  It  was  his  duty  to  his  country  (quite  apart 
from  his  position  as  her  king  and  protector),  to  neglect  no  means 
of  prolonging  his  usefulness. 

2.     He  was  in  the  right  in  respect  to  the  motif  and  incidents  of 
the  play : — A  God  put  forth  special  exertions,  taxed  to  the  utmost 
his  divine  craft  in  outwitting  the  Fates,  in  order  to  gain  a  con- 
ditional privilege  for  his  earthly  friend.      That  the  man  should 
thereupon  decline  to  accept  the  boon,  would  have  seemed  to  the 
Greeks,  not  false  delicacy  merely,  but  impiety  ;  just  as  it  would 
have  seemed  to  a  Hebrew  impious  for  Abraham  to  renounce  the 
favour  of  God  when  it  involved  the  sacrifice  of  his  son.     The 
acceptance  of  the  condition  was  perhaps  the  easier,  because  the 
time  of  its  fulfilment  was  indefinite,  as  we  gather  from  11.  524  and 
526,  where  Herakles,  while  referring  to  Alcestis'  pledge  as  a  matter 
well  known  to  him,  yet  has  no  idea  that  the  time  for  its  redemption 
has  come.    The  compact  once  made,  we  may  fairly  infer  that  it  was 
impossible  to  draw  back  from  it :  a  mortal  could  not  play  fast  and 
loose  with  the  powers  beneath,  and  "  the  Gods  themselves  cannot 
recall  their  gifts."     Hence,  though  Admetus  passionately  cries  to 
Alcestis  to  take  him  with  her,  he  does  not,  he  cannot,  propose  the 
impossible,  to  die  instead  of  her.     Again,  it  was  part  of  the  fitness 
of  things  that  the  less  valuable  life  should  be  surrendered  for  the 
more  valuable.      To  the  Greeks  of  that  time,  the  proper  victim 
should  have  been  the  king's  old  father  or  mother.    Pheres'  conduct 
in  valuing  his  own  life  before  that  of  his  son  was  in  their  eyes  un- 
natural, unreasonable,  and  unpatriotic.     He  owed  a  paternal  duty 
to  his  son  :  he  had  already  enjoyed  his  share  of  life's  pleasures  ; 
his  life  was  no  longer  worth  living,  for  the  utter  contempt  for  old 
age  prevalent   in   Athens   in   those  days,   must   have    made   its 
infirmities  an  unmitigated  misfortune  :i  and  his  life  was  now  use- 
less to  the  community.    Hence  his  arguments  in  reply  to  Admetus' 
reproaches  would  appear  as  a  tissue  of  selfishness  and  shameless- 

1.  This  view  of  old  age  is  again  and  again  expressed  in  the  plainest  language 
both  by  the  Dramatic  and  Gnomic  poets. 


APPENDIX.  423 


ness.  His  exclamation  (1.  726)  that  he  cares  not  what  men  may 
say  of  him  after  his  death  —  a  sentiment  simply  atrocious  to  a 
Greeki — is  enough  in  itself  to  indicate  that  he  is  meant  to  be  in  the 
wrong  throughout  the  altercation,  in  which  he  could  have  been  in 
the  right  only  on  the  supposition  that  he  had  as  good  a  claim  to 
live  as  his  son,  which  is  precisely  what  to  the  Greek  was  incon- 
ceivable. Failing  the  substitute  who  shirked  his  duty,  Alcestis 
would  be  regarded  as  simply  fulfilling  hers  in  yielding  her  life. 
For  here  again,  besides  the  obvious  claims  of  wifely  devotion,  was 
the  incontestable  fact  that  the  less  precious  life  was  given  for  the 
more  precious.  It  was  an  axiom  with  the  Greeks,  which  Euripides 
has  in  the  Iphigeneia  in  Aulis  (1394)  put  into  words,  that  "the  life 
of  one  man  was  better  than  that  of  ten  thousand  women."  That 
Alcestis  did  but  rise  to  the  height  of  her  duty  is  in  no  way  incon- 
sistent with  the  praises  lavished  upon  her.  A  soldier  who  throws 
himself  in  front  of  his  king  to  receive  in  his  own  body  the  stroke 
of  an  assassin  or  a  foe  is  indeed  extolled,  but  would  he  not  be 
counted  false  to  his  duty,  did  he,  at  the  supreme  moment,  shrink 
behind  his  king  ?  The  especial  pathos  of  the  situation  to  the 
audience  lay  in  this,  that  the  sacrifice  of  a  young  and  happy  woman 
was  forced  upon  her  by  the  cowardly  selfishness,  not  of  her 
husband,  but  of  a  miserable  old  man  :  that  Admetus  should  not 
have  found  a  substitute  at  all  would  have  seemed  monstrous. 

3.  Admetus  reaped  the  just  reward  of  the  good  man  : — All  the 
respectable  characters  of  the  play  have  nothing  but  sympathy  for 
him.  The  Chorus — the  embodiment  of  enlightened  public  opinion 
— praise  him  and  condemn  his  parents  :  they  put  up  prayers  on  his 
behalf :  they  offer  for  his  consolation  considerations  which  pre- 
suppose the  paramount  value  of  the  life  so  redeemed,  and  express 
a  nascent  hope  (11.  603-5)  that  there  may  yet  be  blessing  in  store  for 
him.  Herakles,  the  incarnation  of  manliness  and  high  courage,  is 
full  of  sympathy  and  admiration  for  him,  and  is  kindled  to  enthu- 
siasm by  his  unselfish  hospitality  ;  and  it  is  of  cardinal  importance 
to  the  right  understanding  of  the  situation  that  the  turning-point 
of  the  plot  is  to  be  found  in  a  crowning  instance  of  Admetus'  pre- 
eminent virtue,  which  is  made  the  justification  for  the  extreme 
measure  by  which  the  denouement  is  effected,  as  though  he  alone 
of  men  were  worthy  to  have  the  decrees  of  fate  reversed  in  his 
favour,  To  adapt  the  words  of  a  modern  poet,  his  actions  said, 
"  Write  me  as  one  that  loves  his  fellow-men  "    ....   "  and  lo, 

1.  The  current  view  is  expressed  by  Odysseus  in  the  Hecuba  (II.  315-319). 


424 


APPENDIX. 


Admetus'  name  led  all  the  rest."  We  might  go  so  far  as  to  say 
that  for  the  Greek  audience  the  real  theme  of  the  play  was  not  so 
much  "The  devotion  of  Alces-tis,"  as  "  The  reward  of  virtue," 
just  as  for  a  Hebrew  the  subject  of  the  crowning  episode  of  his 
first  father's  history  was  not  "  The  self-devotion  of  Isaac,"  but 
"  The  faith  and  obedience  of  Abraham." 

The  foregoing  remarks  are,  of  course,  not  designed  to  change 
the  modern  reader's  estimate  of  Admetus'  action,  but  to  show  that 
he  was  not  intended  to  be  lowered  in  the  eyes  of  the  audience,  and 
that  whatever  censure  we  pronounce  must  include  also  a  condem- 
nation of  some  fundamental  principles  of  Greek  ethics. 


APPENDIX  B. 

Note  on  Suppliants,  1.  653. 

The  following  plan  will  make  the  disposition  of  the  troops  clear  : 

Athenian  Infantry. 


Horse. 


Theseus. 


Seaboard  men. 


Horse. 


Athenian  Chariots. 


Theban  Chariots. 


Horse. 


Theban  Infantry. 


Horse. 


Walls  of  Thebes. 


END    OF    VOL.    I. 


The  Alcestis,  Medea,  and  Hecuba,  are  published  separately  in 
paper  wrapper,  price  1/6  each. 


BY  THE  SAME  AUTHOR. 


THE    ILIAD    OF    HOMER    DONE    INTO    ENGLISH 

VERSE, 

In  2  vols.,  price  9/-  each. 


"Close,  spirited,  swift  in  movement,  and  simple.  .  .  The  merits  are 
such  as  to  place  Mr.  Way's  performance  in  the  front  rank  of  Homeric 
translations.  .  .  Mr.  Way's  version  is  never  bald,  frigid,  or  pompous. 
In  the  point  of  metrical  form  it  has  advanced  on  all  its  predecessors ; 
his  metre  comes  very  near,  in  length,  volume,  and  movement,  to  being 
a  genuine  English  equivalent  for  the  Greek  Hexameter." — Saturday 
Review. 

"He  is  a  trustworthy  scholar;  he  has  fire  and  speed  enough  and  to 
spare.  He  holds  our  attention  ;  we  read  him  for  his  own  sake.  .  .  A 
work  which  we  heartily  admire." — Athentziun. 

"  Mr.  Way  has  accomplished  a  remarkable  feat.  A  Iine-for-line  trans- 
lation .  .  rendered  with  absolute  conscientiousness,  with  scholarlike 
accuracy,  and  with  unflagging  vigour,  is  a  success  of  which  the  author 
may  weil  be  proud." — Oxford  Magazine. 

"  Really  a  great  success.  .  .  There  is  a  sonorous  roll  in  it,  and  a 
variety  of  pause,  a  flexibility,  a  richness,  and  a  dignity  about  it  that 
make  it  approach  nearer  to  the  splendid  music  of  the  Greek  than  any- 
thing else  that  has  been  produced  in  the  same  line.  The  diction,  too, 
of  the  translation  is  Homeric,  while  Pope  has  smoothed  and  polished 
away  all  character  out  of  his  original,  and  its  fidelity  is  really  remark- 
able.''— Pall  Mall  Gazette. 

"  We  feel  confident  that  this  spirited  and  powerful  translation  will 
grow  in  popularity  and  favour.  Turn  wherever  we  may,  we  read  Mr. 
Way's  verses  with  a  different  kind  of  pleasure  from  that  which  is  derived 
from  the  ordinary  run  of  translators." — Westminster  Review. 

"So  accurate  and  forcible  is  this  brilliant  version  of  Homer's  poem, 
that  it  will  not  only  recommend  itself  to  cultured  readers,  but  it  should 
also  tend  to  popularise  the  study  of  the  grand  Greek  poet's  entire 
work." — Morning  Post. 

"A  faithful  line-for-line  rendering  of  Homer.  .  .  A  swing  and 
energy  which  leave  most  translators  far  behind.  A  very  high  level  is 
maintained  from  first  to  last  in  the  Iliad,  as  if  the  grandeur  of  the  theme, 
the  sense  of  noble  action,  had  constrained  him." — British  Quarterly 
Review. 

"Where  the  poetry  of  simple  action  reaches  sublimity,  this  suits  Mr. 
Way." — Academy. 


"  Has  given  new  life  to  Homer  in  an  English  metrical  dress,  and  the 
fidelity  of  the  version  is  matched  by  the  fire  and  force  infused  into  the 
rendering.  Mr.  Way  is  like  Chapman  in  his  freedom  and  swing,  but  he 
is  richer  in  colouring,  although  he  is  rigidly  close  to  his  text.  Trans- 
lates Homer  as  one  poet  can  alone  translate  another.  Has  the  true 
Homeric  feeling,  and  he  seems  to  live  the  verse  that  he  renders  with 
such  remarkable  force,  fidelity,  and  spirit." — Public  Opinion. 

"He  swings  along  as  if  he  enjoyed  it,  and  carries  the  reader  by  the 
force  of  his  swift  movement." — Atlantic  Monthly. 

"  The  general  admiration  with  which  Mr.  Way's  Odyssey  of  Homer 
done  into  English  Verse  was  received  will  certainly  be' revived  by  the 
present  work.  If  the  work  be  calculated  to  give  students  of  Homer  the 
greatest  pleasure,  it  also  deserves,  by  its  original  and  brilliant  qualities, 
to  be  esteemed  as  a  great  boon  by  all  lovers  of  fine  poetry." — Harper's 
Monthly  Magazine. 

"  Perhaps  the  nearest  equivalent  we  can  hope  for  to  the  strong- 
winged  music  of  Homer.  No  merely  skilful  versifier  could  produce  a 
work  of  this  kind  ;  it  is  marked  by  true  poetic  gifts.  Readers  anxious 
to  become  acquainted  with  the  greatest  of  epics  and  the  poetry  of  the 
time  when  the  world  was  young,  will  not  find  themselves  deterred  by  the 
faults  which  usually  beset  translations." — Literary  World. 

"Asa  poem  his  translation  is  full  of  simplicity  and  strength;  as  a 
translation,  it  is  one  of  the  most  scholarly  rendings  of  the  Iliad  that 
have  appeared  in  the  English  tongue." — Bookseller. 

"  Far  above  any  modern  translations  which  have  appeared." — 
Publisher's  Circular. 

"  He  is  unquestionably  the  most  Homeric  of  English  translators  since 
Chapman.  Probably  the  nearest  equivalent  to  the  swiftly-moving 
various  hexameter  of  Homer  which  the  genius  of  English  versification 
permits." — London  Quarterly  Review. 

"  It  seems  a  far  cry  from  Chapman  to  Mr.  Way,  and  yet  we  doubt 
whether  the  interval  offers  any  version  of  Homer  which  is  not,  by  com- 
parison with  these,  formal  and  mechanical.  .  .  This  fascinating 
volume  .  .  abounds  in  instances  of  the  combination  of  freedom  of 
expression  with  essential  fidelity  to  the  meaning  .  .  has  made  a 
distinct  contribution  to  the  resources  of  Homeric  translation.  .  .  He 
has  adopted  a  metre  in  which  it  would,  we  think,  be  impossible  to  main- 
tain a  high  level  of  poetry  without  a  poetic  gift  of  his  own.  Mr.  Way's 
adventure  admits  of  no  mean  between  failure  and  success.  We  believe 
that  he  has  chosen  the  measure  which  is  best  fitted  to  represent  Homer 
to  English  readers,  but  we  feel,  at  the  same  time,  that  it  is  a  veritable 
bow  of  Ulysses,  which  only  a  master's  hand  will  be  able  to  bend." — 
Guardian. 

"The  first  volume  of  Mr.  Way's  fine  translation  of  the  Iliad  led  us  to 
place  it  above  Chapman's.  The  second  crowns  the  edifice  of  his 
Homeric  labours  so  splendidly  that  we  are  able  to  express  our  pref- 
erence again  with  renewed  confidence.  .  .  We  believe  that  a  full  and 
fair  comparison  of  the  two  versions  would  convince  even  Lamb  and 
Keats,  whose  names  present  themselves  inevitably  here,  that  in  Mr. 
Way  the  delightful  old  fellow  who  '  spake  out  loud  and  bold,'  has  found 
more  than  his  match." — Spectator. 

"If  we  are  right  in  ranking  him,  as  we  are  inclined  to  do,  as  the  best 
of  this  trio — Chapman,  Professor  Newman,  and  Mr.  Worsley — there 
are  few  lovers  of  Homer  who  will  not  be  eager  to  read  him.  And  Mr. 
Way  deserves  to  be  read.  His  translation  is  instinct  with  that '  forcible 
liveliness '  which  Mr.  H.  N.  Coleridge  notes  as  the  leading  character- 
istic of  Homer's  poetry.  Its  terseness,  too,  and  literalness  are  really 
wonderful,  combined  as  they  are  with  such  unflagging  '  go,'  if  we  may 
use  that  word,  and  such  melodious  vivacity." — St.  James's  Gazette. 


"  Many  an  English  student  will  realize  from  this  version  what  the 
gifted  young  poet  felt  when  he  saw  the  new  planet  swim  into  his  ken. 
The  radiance  of  that  planet  is  yet  better  represented  to  the  English 
reader  by  Mr.  Way  than  it  was  by  Chapman,  and  this,  which  is  the 
highest  tribute  of  praise  that  can  be  accorded  to  the  translator  of 
Homer,  is,  we  cordially  and  sincerely  believe,  not  too  high  praise  for  the 
translator  whose  work  is  before  us.  .  .  The  reader  may  surrender 
himself  to  the  full  enjoyment  of  the  sonorous  verse  without  that  uneasy 
feeling  which  so  often  suggests  itself  in  dealing  with  a  translation  which 
breathes  the  true  spirit  of  poetry,  that  the  poetical  effect  of  the  English 
has  been  attained  by  a  sacrifice  of  fidelity  to  the  original.  .  .  It 
carries  the  reader  along  with  it  in  the  same  irresistible  rush  which  is 
the  great  charm  of  the  Greek  original,  a  charm  which  no  other  writer, 
not  even  Chapman  himself,  has  so  well  succeeded  in  reproducing." — 
John  Bull. 

"  His  style  is  simple,  clear,  and  vigorous,  saved  from  baldness  by  a 
remarkably  rich  vocabulary." — Cambridge  Review. 

"Takes  rank  among  the  highest.  It  is  full  of  spirit  .  .  a  poem  as 
closely  resembling  the  great  original  as  we  are  likely  to  get." — British 
Weekly. 

"A  masterly  and  singularly  vivid  version,  done  in  a  measure  that 
seems  to  reproduce  Homer  in  sound  as  well  as  in  sense." — European 
Mail. 

"  His  swinging,  strenuous  verse  is  delightful  to  read.  The  abiding 
effect  of  his  work  is  a  lifting  of  the  reader's  spirit,  which  is  certainly 
not  the  worst  or  least  sympathetic  state  of  mind  in  which  to  follow  '  the 
light  of  the  Maeonian  Star.'  " — Notes  and  Queries. 

"An  extremely  able  and  scholarly  rendering  of  Homer,  and  one 
which  preserves  a  large  measure  both  of  the  sound  and  fire  of  the 
original. ' ' — Scotsman. 

"  Everywhere  distinguished  by  spirited  movement,  by  brio,  by  swing 
and  'go.'  " — Scots  Observer. 

"The  fault  to  be  found  in  the  majority  of  such  translations  is  that 
they  are  too  technical,  too  formal,  too  purely  mechanical,  to  give  a  lively 
or  fascinating  picture  of  the  immortal  Homeric  scenes.  This  objection 
cannot  be  urged  against  the  work  of  Mr.  Way.  His  Odyssey  has  long 
been  deservedly  popular,  and  in  the  latest  effort  to  which  he  has  devoted 
his  rare  erudition,  scholastic  vigour,  and  poetic  power,  he  has  achieved 
marked  success." — Glasgow  Evening  News. 


BY  THE  SAME  AUTHOR  (Avia). 


THE  ODYSSEY  OF  HOMER  DONE  INTO  ENGLISH 

VERSE. 

Second  edition,  revised,  price  7/6. 


"The  work  of  a  poet  of  no  mean  merit.  .  .  We  had  till  now 
thought  Mr.  Worsley's  Odyssey  in  the  Spenserian  Stanza  as  satisfactory 
a  version  as  was  possible,  but  Avia  has  shown  cause  why  we  should  re- 
consider that  judgment.  .  .  Has  given  us,  and  we  trust  it  will  give 
many  of  our  readers,  real  and  genuine  pleasure.  .  .  Original  and 
brilliant." — Saturday  Review. 


"  Has  life  and  movement ;  has  what  we  might  be  allowed  to  call  '  go,' 
in  speaking  of  a  work  of  a  different  character.  .  .  Has  secured  what 
is  absolutely  essential  in  Homeric  translation,  something  that  answers 
to  the  '  bright  speed  '  of  the  hexameter.  .  .  Scarcely  a  safe  book  to 
give  to  an  imaginative  boy,  for  he  would  shout  his  favourite  passages 
about  the  house  as  loudly  as  Walter  Scott,  when  a  child,  shouted 
'  Hardyknute.'     .     .     Truly  inspired  by  the  Odyssey." — Athenaum. 

'■  An  achievement  of  considerable  distinction,  and  one  for  which  his 
readers  who  cannot  read  the  Greek  should  be  grateful,  while  those  who 
can  will  be  glad  to  see  the  Greek  and  the  English  idiom  so  happily  recon- 
ciled.    .     A  very  spirited  translation." — Daily  News. 

"  Passage  after  passage  of  true  poetic  power,  and  of  genuine  appreci- 
ation of  the  spirit  of  the  great  original  was  presented  to  us,  and  we 
were  led  on  from  passage  to  passage  with  a  keen  sense  of  enjoyment 
which  is  very  unusual  in  the  student  of  such  productions.  .  .  It  is 
difficult  by  any  extracts  to  give  an  adequate  idea  of  the  general  level  of 
excellence  attained,  and  the  great  charm  of  his  poem  is  to  be  found  in 
the  well-sustained  power  and  melody  of  whole  books,  not  of  isolated 
passages.  .  .  The  most  successful  attempt  made  of  late  years  to  re- 
produce the  vigorous  ring  of  the  original.  The  task  of  selection  is  no 
easy  one,  as  almost  every  page  contains  some  happy  rendering  of  the 
Greek  or  some  passage  instinct  with  the  true  Homeric  spirit." — John 
Bull. 

"Took  the  literary  world  by  a  surprise  that  soon  ripened  into  admir- 
ation."— British  Weekly. 

"  Has  already  taken  a  high  place  amongst  English  versions  of  Homer." 
— Cambridge  Review. 

"Sounding  Saxon  such  as  no  previous  translator  of  Homer  into 
verse  has  employed.  .  .  We  are  unwilling  to  mention  particular 
parts  of  the  work  for  fear  of  intimating  that  some  may  be  better  than 
others.  .  .  This  fine,  bold  work  is  a  literary  achievement." — Public 
Opinion. 

"  The  volume  is  a  poem  of  more  than  average  beauty,  when  considered 
apart  from  any  original." — Literary  World. 

"  No  one  can  fail  to  recognise  in  many  of  the  passages  the  grace  and 
feeling  of  a  true  poet." — Notes  and  Queries. 

"  Its  greatest  recommendations,  to  those  who  are  able  to  read  and 
appreciate  Homer  in  his  native  language,  will  be  its  wonderfully  stricc 
closeness,  not  only  to  the  sense,  but  even  to  the  very  forms  of  expression 
made  use  of  by  Homer,  and  the  happy  art  which  the  translator  has 
of  finding  exact  English  equivalents  for  Homeric  words.  English  read- 
ers, again,  will  be  no  less  charmed  with  the  purely  English  verbiage 
into  which  he  has  contrived  to  convert  the  grand  rolling  lines  of  the 
grand  old  poet,  thus  preserving  much  of  the  poetical  spirit  which  is  so 
apt  to  evaporate  in  the  process  of  translation,  and  much  of  which  did, 
in  point  of  fact,  evaporate  under  Pope's  more  conventional  treatment." 
— Scotsman. 

"  We  have  been  most  agreeably  surprised  and  pleased  ...  a 
vigorous  flow  and  '  lilt '  that  seems  as  near  an  approach  as  the  genius  of 
our  language  is  likely  to  make  to  the  '  grand  old  rolling  verse '  of 
Homer." — Guardian, 

"We  have  said  enough  to  prove  that  this  is  no  ordinary  work.  It 
shows  power  as  well  as  grace  and  literalness  .  .  .  his  work  is  not  a 
paraphrase  but  a  real  translation,  very  literal  and  yet  full  of  poetic 
beauty." — London  Quarterly  Review. 


J 


in 


PLEASE  DO  NOT  REMOVE 
SUPS  FROM  THIS  POCKET 


UNIVERSITY  OF  TORONTO 
LIBRARY 


