@@ 13
I also read there that God the Word was born not of flesh, nor of blood, nor of the will of man, nor of the will of the flesh, but of God. But that the Word was made flesh, and dwelt among us, I did not read there. For I found in those books, stated in many different ways, that the Son, being in the form of the Father, thought it not robbery to be equal with God, because by nature He was the same Substance. But that He emptied Himself, taking the form of a servant, being made in the likeness of men, and found in fashion as a man, humbled Himself and became obedient unto death, even the death of the cross; so that God exalted Him from the dead and gave Him a name above every name, that at the name of Jesus every knee should bow, of things in heaven, and things on earth, and things under the earth, and that every tongue should confess that the Lord Jesus Christ is in the glory of God the Father — this those books do not have. That Your Only-Begotten Son remains unchangeably before all times and above all times, co-eternal with You; that souls receive of His fullness in order to be blessed; and that they are renewed by sharing in the Wisdom that abides in itself, so that they become wise — that is there. But that in due time He died for the ungodly, and that You did not spare Your Only Son but delivered Him up for us all — that is not there. For You hid these things from the wise and revealed them to little ones, so that those who labor and are heavy laden might come to Him and He might refresh them, because He is meek and lowly in heart. The meek He guides in judgment, and the gentle He teaches His ways, seeing our lowliness and our trouble and forgiving all our sins. But those who strut on the high boots of what they take to be a loftier learning do not hear Him saying, Learn of Me, for I am meek and lowly in heart, and you shall find rest for your souls. Even though they know God, they do not glorify Him as God or give thanks, but become futile in their thoughts, and their foolish heart is darkened; claiming to be wise, they became fools.

@@ 14
And so I also read there that they had changed the glory of Your incorruptible nature into idols and all kinds of images, into the likeness of the image of corruptible man, and of birds, and beasts, and creeping things. This was that Egyptian food for which Esau lost his birthright: Your first-born people honored the head of a four-footed beast in place of You, turning back in their hearts toward Egypt and bowing Your image, their own soul, before the image of a calf that eats hay. I found these things there, but I did not feed on them. For it pleased You, Lord, to take away from Jacob the reproach of being the lesser, so that the elder should serve the younger; and You called the Gentiles into Your inheritance. I had come to You from among the Gentiles, and I set my mind on the gold that You wanted Your people to carry away from Egypt, since it was Yours wherever it was. And You told the Athenians through Your Apostle that in You we live and move and have our being, as some of their own poets had said; and those books certainly came from there. But I did not set my mind on the idols of the Egyptians, which they served with Your gold — those who changed the truth of God into a lie, and worshiped and served the creature rather than the Creator.

@@ 15
Warned by all this to return to myself, I went into my own innermost self with You as my guide; and I was able to, because You had become my helper. I went in, and with the eye of my soul, such as it was, I saw above that same eye of my soul, above my mind, the unchangeable Light. It was not this ordinary light that all flesh can see, nor something of the same kind only larger, as if this light were to shine many, many times brighter and fill everything with its size. That light was not like this; it was something else, utterly different from all these. Nor was it above my mind the way oil floats above water, or the way heaven is above the earth. It was above me because it made me, and I was beneath it because I was made by it. Whoever knows the Truth knows that Light, and whoever knows it knows eternity. Love knows it. O Truth, You who are Eternity! Love, You who are Truth! Eternity, You who are Love! You are my God; to You I sigh night and day. When I first came to know You, You lifted me up so that I could see that there was something to see, and that I was not yet the kind of person who could see it. And You beat back the weakness of my sight, shining on me with overwhelming force, and I trembled with love and dread. I found that I was far away from You, in the region of unlikeness, and it was as if I heard Your voice from on high: "I am the food of the full-grown; grow, and you will feed on Me. And you will not change Me into yourself, as you do the food of your flesh; you will be changed into Me." And I understood that You correct man for iniquity, and You made my soul waste away like a spider. And I said, "Is Truth then nothing, since it is not spread out through space, whether finite or infinite?" And You called to me from far away, "Yes, truly, I AM that I AM." I heard it the way one hears in the heart, and there was no longer any ground at all for doubt. I could more easily doubt that I am alive than doubt that Truth exists, Truth which is clearly seen, being understood by the things that are made.

@@ 16
Then I looked at the other things below You, and I saw that they neither fully are nor fully are not. They are, since they come from You; but they are not, because they are not what You are. For what truly is, is what remains unchangeably. So it is good for me to cling to God; for if I do not remain in Him, I cannot remain in myself either. But He, remaining in Himself, makes all things new. And You are my Lord, since You have no need of my goodness.

@@ 17
And it became clear to me that things which are corrupted are good. They could not be corrupted if they were the supreme good, nor could they be corrupted unless they were good. If they were the supreme good, they would be incorruptible; and if they were not good at all, there would be nothing in them to corrupt. For corruption does harm, and it could do no harm unless it lessened some good. So either corruption does no harm, which is impossible, or — and this is absolutely certain — everything that is corrupted is deprived of some good. But if things are deprived of all good, they will not exist at all. For if they went on existing and could no longer be corrupted, they would be better than before, since they would continue incorruptibly. And what could be more absurd than to claim that things become better by losing all their good? So if they are deprived of all good, they will be nothing at all. Therefore, as long as they exist, they are good. Therefore whatever exists is good; and that evil whose origin I was looking for is not a substance, because if it were a substance it would be good. For it would be either an incorruptible substance, and so a great good, or a corruptible substance, which could not be corrupted unless it were good. So I saw, and it was made plain to me, that You made all things good, and that there are no substances whatever that You did not make. And because You did not make all things equal, therefore all things are: each one is good, and all together they are very good, because our God made all things very good.

@@ 18
And for You there is no evil at all — and not only for You, but for Your creation as a whole as well, because there is nothing outside it that could break in and corrupt the order You have laid on it. But within its parts, some things are thought to be evil because they do not fit with certain other things; yet those same things fit with other things and are good, and in themselves they are good. And all these things that do not fit with one another do fit with the lower part of the world, which we call the earth, and which has its own cloudy and windy sky suited to it. Far be it from me, then, to say, "These things should not exist." Even if I saw nothing but these, I would indeed long for better things, but even for these alone I would still owe You praise. For that You are to be praised is shown from the earth by dragons and all deeps, fire, hail, snow, ice and stormy wind, which fulfill Your word; mountains and all hills, fruitful trees and all cedars; beasts and all cattle, creeping things and winged birds; kings of the earth and all peoples, princes and all judges of the earth; young men and maidens, old men and children, praise Your name. And since from the heavens too they praise You, praise You, our God, in the heights, all Your angels, all Your hosts, sun and moon, all the stars and light, the heaven of heavens and the waters that are above the heavens, praise Your name — I no longer longed for better things, because I was thinking of them all. And with a sounder judgment I weighed it up: the higher things are indeed better than the lower, but all things together are better than the higher things alone.
