@@ 23
So I looked for a way to gain the strength I needed to enjoy You, and I did not find it until I embraced that Mediator between God and men, the Man Christ Jesus, who is over all, God blessed forever, who calls to me and says, I am the way, the truth, and the life, and who mixed with our flesh the food I was too weak to take. For the Word was made flesh so that Your wisdom, through which You created all things, might become milk for our infancy. For I did not yet hold on to my Lord Jesus Christ — I was not humble enough to hold the Humble One — and I did not yet know what His weakness was meant to teach. For Your Word, the eternal Truth, towering above the higher parts of Your creation, raises up to Itself those who submit to It. But here in the lower world It built Itself a humble house out of our clay, in order to bring down from themselves those who were to be made subject, and carry them across to Himself — healing their swelling and nourishing their love — so that they would not go any further in trusting themselves, but would rather become weak, seeing at their feet the Godhead made weak by sharing our garment of skin; and so that, worn out, they would throw themselves down upon It, and It would rise and lift them up.

@@ 24
But I thought otherwise. I thought of my Lord Christ only as a man of outstanding wisdom whom no one could equal; especially since, having been born of a virgin in a wonderful way, to give us an example of despising temporal things in order to gain immortality, He seemed through God's care for us to have earned such great authority as a teacher. But what mystery was contained in "The Word was made flesh," I could not even guess. I had only gathered from what has been handed down in writing about Him that He ate and drank, slept, walked, rejoiced, was sad and held conversations, and that the flesh was not joined to Your Word on its own but together with a human soul and mind. Everyone knows this who knows that Your Word is unchangeable, which I now knew as far as I was able, and I had no doubt about it at all. For now to move the limbs of the body by an act of will and now not to move them, now to be stirred by some feeling and now not, now to speak wise sayings through signs and now to stay silent — these are the marks of a soul and mind that are subject to change. If these things had been written about Him falsely, everything else would be under suspicion of being false too, and there would be no saving faith left in those writings for the human race. So, since they were written truthfully, I recognized in Christ a whole man: not just the body of a man, nor a body together with an animal soul lacking a rational mind, but a real man. Yet I judged that He was to be ranked above other men not because He was the very Person of Truth, but because of some great excellence of His human nature and a more perfect sharing in wisdom. Alypius, for his part, supposed that Catholics believed God was clothed in flesh in such a way that in Christ there was nothing besides God and flesh; he did not think they held that He had a human soul and mind. And because he was fully convinced that the actions recorded of Him could not have been done without a living and rational creature, he moved all the more slowly toward the Christian faith itself. But afterward, when he learned that this was the error of the Apollinarian heretics, he rejoiced in the Catholic faith and came into agreement with it. For my part, I admit that it was somewhat later that I learned how, in the words The Word was made flesh, the Catholic truth is distinguished from the falsehood of Photinus. For refuting heretics makes what Your Church holds and what sound doctrine contains stand out clearly. For there must also be heresies, so that those who are approved may be made manifest among the weak.

@@ 25
But at that time, having read those books of the Platonists and been prompted by them to look for truth that is not bodily, I saw Your invisible things, understood by the things that are made. And though I was thrown back, I sensed what it was that the darkness of my mind would not let me contemplate. I was certain "that You exist, and are infinite, yet are not spread out through space, whether finite or infinite; that You truly are, since You are always the same, not different or otherwise in any part or by any movement; and that all other things come from You, on this one most certain proof alone, that they exist." Of these things I was certain, but I was far too weak to enjoy You. I chattered away like an expert; but if I had not sought Your way in Christ our Savior, I would have proved to be not skilled, but killed. For I had now begun to want to be thought wise. I was full of my own punishment, and yet I did not weep over it; I was puffed up with knowledge instead. For where was that love which builds on the foundation of humility, which is Christ Jesus? When would those books ever have taught me that? I believe You wanted me to come across them before I studied Your Scriptures precisely so that it would be stamped on my memory how they had affected me. Then later, when I had been tamed by Your books and my wounds had been touched by Your healing fingers, I would be able to see and tell apart the difference between presumption and confession: between those who see where they must go but do not see the way, and the way that leads to the blessed homeland, not only to see it but to live in it. For if I had first been shaped by Your holy Scriptures, and You had grown sweet to me through my familiarity with them, and I had only afterward come upon those volumes, they might have torn me away from the solid ground of devotion. Or, if I had held on to the wholesome disposition I had drunk in from Scripture, I might have thought that someone could acquire it from those books alone, if he studied nothing else.

@@ 26
So I seized with the greatest eagerness on the venerable writings of Your Spirit, and above all on the Apostle Paul. And those problems disappeared in which he had once seemed to me to contradict himself, and in which the text of his words had seemed not to agree with the testimonies of the Law and the Prophets. The face of those pure words now appeared to me as one and the same, and I learned to rejoice with trembling. I began to read, and I found that whatever truth I had read in those other books is said here with praise for Your grace. It is said so that whoever sees should not boast as if he had not received — not only what he sees, but even the power to see (for what does he have that he has not received?); so that he may be not only urged to see You, who are always the same, but also healed so that he may hold You; and so that whoever cannot see from far away may still walk on the road by which he can come and see and hold You. For though a man delights in the law of God according to the inner man, what will he do about that other law in his members, which wars against the law of his mind and leads him captive to the law of sin that is in his members? For You are righteous, Lord, but we have sinned and committed iniquity and done wickedly, and Your hand has grown heavy upon us. We have been justly handed over to that ancient sinner, the ruler of death, because he persuaded our will to become like his own will, by which he did not stand firm in Your truth. What will wretched man do? Who will deliver him from the body of this death, except Your grace, through Jesus Christ our Lord, whom You begot co-eternal with You and formed in the beginning of Your ways, in whom the prince of this world found nothing worthy of death, and yet he killed Him; and the handwriting that was against us was blotted out? This those writings do not contain. Those pages do not show the face of this devotion: the tears of confession, Your sacrifice, a troubled spirit, a broken and a contrite heart, the salvation of the people, the Bridal City, the pledge of the Holy Spirit, the Cup of our Redemption. No one there sings, Shall not my soul be subject to God? For from Him comes my salvation. For He is my God and my salvation, my protector; I shall be moved no more. No one there hears Him calling, Come to Me, all you who labor. They disdain to learn from Him, because He is meek and lowly in heart; for You have hidden these things from the wise and prudent and revealed them to little ones. For it is one thing to see the homeland of peace from a wooded mountaintop, and to find no road to it, and to struggle in vain through trackless country, surrounded and ambushed by runaways and deserters under their leader, the lion and the dragon. It is another thing to keep to the road that leads there, guarded by the care of the heavenly Commander, where no one who has deserted the heavenly army lies in wait to rob, for they shun that road like torture. All this sank into my inmost being in wonderful ways as I read the least of Your apostles; and I had considered Your works, and trembled greatly.
