@@ 0
I want now to call to mind my past foulness and the carnal corruptions of my soul, not because I love them, but so that I may love You, O my God. I do it for love of Your love, going back over my most wicked ways in the bitterness of remembering them, so that You may grow sweet to me (You sweetness that never fails, You happy and secure sweetness), and so that You may gather me up again out of the scattered state in which I was torn to pieces when I turned away from You, the One Good, and lost myself among many things. For there was a time in my youth when I burned to have my fill of things below, and I dared to run wild in various shadowy loves. My beauty wasted away, and I stank in Your eyes, pleasing myself and eager to please in the eyes of men.

@@ 1
And what was it that delighted me, except to love and to be loved? But I did not keep to the measure of love that runs from mind to mind, the bright boundary line of friendship. Instead, out of the muddy concupiscence of the flesh and the bubbling springs of youth, mists rose up that clouded and darkened my heart, until I could not tell the clear light of love from the fog of lust. The two boiled together in confusion inside me, swept my unsteady youth over the cliffs of unholy desires, and sank me in a whirlpool of shameful deeds. Your anger had gathered strength over me, and I did not know it. I had been deafened by the clanking of the chain of my mortality, the punishment for my soul's pride, and I went further away from You, and You let me go. I was tossed about, poured out, scattered, and I boiled over in my fornications, and You kept silent, O my joy so slow in coming! You kept silent then, and I went further and further from You, into more and more barren seedbeds of sorrow, with a proud dejection and a restless weariness.

@@ 2
Oh, if only someone had brought order to my distress, and turned to good use the fleeting beauties of these lowest things in Your creation, and set a limit to the pleasure they give! Then the surging tides of my youth might have spent themselves on the shore of marriage, if they could not be calmed, and been kept to the purpose of raising a family, as Your law prescribes, O Lord. For in this way You shape the offspring of this death of ours, since You are able with a gentle hand to blunt the thorns that were shut out of Your paradise. For Your omnipotence is not far from us, even when we are far from You. Otherwise, I ought to have listened more carefully to the voice from the clouds: Nevertheless such shall have trouble in the flesh, but I spare you. And, It is good for a man not to touch a woman. And, He that is unmarried thinks about the things of the Lord, how he may please the Lord; but he that is married cares about the things of this world, how he may please his wife.

@@ 3
I should have paid closer attention to these words, and, cut off for the kingdom of heaven's sake, waited more happily for Your embraces. But I, poor wretch, foamed like a stormy sea, following the rush of my own tide and abandoning You, and I broke through all Your limits; yet I did not escape Your scourges. For what mortal can? You were always there, severe in Your mercy, sprinkling the bitterest disappointment over all my unlawful pleasures, so that I would look for pleasure without disappointment. But where to find that I could not discover, except in You, O Lord, who teach us through sorrow, who wound us in order to heal, and who kill us so that we may not die away from You. Where was I, and how far was I exiled from the delights of Your house, in that sixteenth year of the age of my flesh, when the madness of lust took command over me (a madness that human shamelessness gives free license, though Your laws do not license it), and I surrendered myself to it completely? Meanwhile my family took no care to catch me as I fell by means of marriage; their only concern was that I should learn to speak superbly and become a persuasive orator.

@@ 4
For that year my studies were interrupted. I had come back from Madaura, a neighboring town where I had gone to study grammar and rhetoric, and the money for a longer stay away, in Carthage, was being put together for me; and that was due more to my father's determination than to his means, since he was only a poor freeman of Thagaste. To whom am I telling this? Not to You, my God; but in Your presence I am telling it to my own kind, to the human race, or to whatever small part of it may come across these writings of mine. And to what end? So that whoever reads this may reflect on the depths from which we must cry to You. For what is closer to Your ears than a heart that confesses and a life of faith? Who did not praise my father at the time, because he went beyond what his household could afford to give his son everything he needed for a long journey for the sake of his studies? Many citizens far richer than he did nothing of the kind for their children. And yet this same father did not care how I was growing toward You, or how chaste I was, as long as I was fluent in speech, however barren I remained of Your cultivation, O God, who are the one true and good Lord of Your field, my heart.
