@@ 5
But in that sixteenth year, when I was out of school for a time and living with my parents (a period of idleness forced on us by my family's narrow means), the brambles of unclean desires grew up over my head, and there was no hand to pull them out. What is more, when my father saw me at the baths, growing into manhood and clothed in restless youth, he told my mother about it with delight, as if already looking forward to grandchildren from this. He was rejoicing in that tumult of the senses in which the world forgets You, its Creator, and falls in love with Your creature instead of You, drunk on the invisible wine of its own will, which turns aside and bends down to the very lowest things. But in my mother's breast You had already begun Your temple and laid the foundation of Your holy dwelling, whereas my father was still only a catechumen, and a recent one at that. So she was shaken with a holy fear and trembling; and though I was not yet baptized, she feared for me the crooked ways in which people walk who turn their backs to You and not their faces.

@@ 6
Alas for me! Do I dare to say that You kept silent, O my God, while I wandered further away from You? Were You really silent to me then? And whose words were they, if not Yours, that You sang in my ears through my mother, Your faithful one? None of them sank into my heart so as to make me act on them. For she wanted me, and I remember how she warned me in private with great anxiety, "not to commit fornication, and above all never to defile another man's wife." This seemed to me a woman's advice, which I would have blushed to follow. But the words were Yours, and I did not know it. I thought You were silent and that it was she who was speaking, when through her You were not silent to me at all; and in her You were despised by me, her son, the son of Your handmaid, Your servant. But I did not know it, and I rushed headlong in such blindness that among boys my own age I was ashamed of being less shameless than they were. I heard them boasting of their disgraceful deeds, and the more degraded they themselves were, the more they boasted; and I took pleasure not only in the pleasure of the act but in the praise it won. What deserves blame, if not vice? Yet I made myself worse than I was so as not to be blamed; and when I had not sinned in some way that would put me level with the depraved, I would claim to have done what I had not done, so as not to seem more contemptible for being more innocent, or of less account for being more chaste.

@@ 7
See what companions I walked the streets of Babylon with, and how I rolled in its mud as if it were a bed of spices and precious ointments. And to make me stick all the faster at its very center, the invisible enemy trampled on me and seduced me, because I was easy to seduce. The mother of my flesh had by now fled from the center of Babylon, though she still moved more slowly in its outskirts; but though she had urged me to be chaste, she did not take the same care over what she had heard about me from her husband, so as to keep within the bounds of married love what she sensed was harmful now and dangerous for the future, if it could not be cut back to the quick. She did not see to this, because she was afraid that a wife would be a shackle and a hindrance to my hopes. Not the hopes of the world to come, which my mother placed in You, but my hopes of learning, which both my parents were too eager for me to attain: my father, because he hardly thought about You at all, and about me only empty dreams; my mother, because she reckoned that the usual course of study would not only do me no harm, but would even help me somewhat toward attaining You. That, at least, is my guess, as I recall my parents' characters as best I can. Meanwhile the reins were loosened for me, far beyond any proper severity, to spend my time in amusement, and even to run to dissipation in whatever took my fancy. And over everything there was a mist, cutting me off, O my God, from the brightness of Your truth; and my iniquity burst out as if from very fatness.

@@ 8
Theft is certainly punished by Your law, O Lord, and by the law written in human hearts, which not even wickedness itself can erase. For what thief calmly puts up with another thief? Not even a rich thief will put up with one who steals out of need. Yet I wanted to steal, and I did it, driven not by hunger or poverty but by being sick of doing right and glutted with wickedness. For I stole something I already had plenty of, and of much better quality. Nor did I want to enjoy the thing I stole; what I enjoyed was the theft itself, and the sin. There was a pear tree near our vineyard, loaded with fruit that was tempting neither in looks nor in taste. A gang of us good-for-nothing youths set out late one night to shake it and strip it (we had kept up our games in the streets until then, as was our pernicious habit), and we carried off huge loads, not to eat ourselves but just to throw to the pigs, though we did taste a few. We did it simply for the sake of doing what we liked, because it was forbidden. Look at my heart, O God, look at my heart, which You pitied at the bottom of the bottomless pit. Now let my heart tell You what it was looking for there, so that I was evil for nothing, with no motive for wrongdoing except the wrongdoing itself. It was foul, and I loved it. I loved to perish; I loved my own fault, not the thing for which I was at fault, but the fault itself. Foul soul, leaping down from Your firmament to utter destruction, seeking nothing from the shameful act but the shame itself!
