@@ 9
For beautiful bodies have their attraction, and so do gold and silver and all things; in bodily touch the harmony of one body with another counts for a great deal, and each of the other senses has its own object, suitably matched to it. Worldly honor too has its splendor, and so does the power to command and to overcome others, which is also where the thirst for revenge comes from. And yet, to obtain all these, we must not leave You, O Lord, or turn aside from Your law. The life we live here also has its own charm, because of a certain measure of beauty it has and its harmony with all the beautiful things here below. Human friendship, too, is made sweet by a precious bond, because it makes one out of many souls. Sin is committed for the sake of all these and things like them, when, through an excessive leaning toward these goods of the lowest order, the better and higher goods are abandoned: You, O Lord our God, and Your truth, and Your law. For these lower things have their delights, but not like my God, who made all things; for in Him the righteous delights, and He is the joy of the upright in heart.

@@ 10
So when we ask why a crime was committed, we do not usually believe the answer unless it turns out that there could have been a desire to gain one of those goods we called lower, or a fear of losing one. For they are beautiful and attractive, even though, compared with the higher goods that bring happiness, they are poor and lowly. A man has committed murder. Why? He was in love with the victim's wife or with his estate; or he wanted to rob him to make a living; or he was afraid of losing something of the kind to him; or he had been wronged and was burning for revenge. Would anyone commit murder for no reason, simply for the pleasure of murdering? Who would believe it? Even that raging and savage man, of whom it was said that he was evil and cruel for no reason at all, still has a reason given for it: "so that," the writer says, "his hand or heart should not grow slack through idleness." And to what end? So that, by keeping in practice at crime, he could take the city and win honors, power and riches, and be free from fear of the laws and from the troubles caused by his household's needs and by his awareness of his crimes. So not even Catiline himself loved his crimes; what he loved was something else, for the sake of which he committed them.

@@ 11
What was it, then, that I loved in you, wretch that I was, you theft of mine, you deed of darkness in my sixteenth year? You were not lovely, because you were a theft. But are you anything at all, that I should speak to you like this? The pears we stole were beautiful, because they were Your creation, You most beautiful of all, Creator of all, O good God, God the highest good and my true good. Those pears were beautiful, but it was not them that my wretched soul wanted; I had plenty of better ones, and I picked those only in order to steal. Once I had picked them, I threw them away, and my only feast from them was my own sin, which I relished with pleasure. For if any bit of those pears got into my mouth, what gave it its flavor was the sin. And now, O Lord my God, I ask what it was in that theft that delighted me; and look, there is no beauty in it at all. I do not mean the kind of beauty there is in justice and wisdom; nor the kind that is in the mind and memory and senses and bodily life of a human being; nor the way the stars are glorious and beautiful in their spheres, or the earth and the sea, teeming with young life that is born to take the place of what dies away; no, not even that false and shadowy beauty that belongs to the vices that deceive us.

@@ 12
For pride imitates loftiness, whereas You alone are God, exalted over all. And ambition, what does it seek but honor and glory, whereas You alone are to be honored above all, and glorious forever? The cruelty of the powerful wants to be feared; but who is to be feared except God alone? What can be seized from His power or slipped out of it, and when, or where, or by what route, or by whom? The caresses of the lustful want to be taken for love; yet nothing is more tender than Your charity, and nothing is loved more healthily than that truth of Yours, bright and beautiful beyond all things. Curiosity poses as a desire for knowledge, whereas You know all things supremely. Even ignorance and foolishness hide under the names of simplicity and harmlessness, because nothing is found simpler than You; and what is more harmless than You, since it is the sinner's own works that harm him? Laziness pretends to want rest; but what sure rest is there apart from the Lord? Extravagance likes to be called plenty and abundance; but You are the fullness and never-failing wealth of incorruptible pleasures. Wastefulness casts a shadow of generosity; but You are the most lavish Giver of every good. Greed wants to own many things; and You own all things. Envy fights for excellence; what is more excellent than You? Anger seeks revenge; who takes revenge more justly than You? Fear shrinks from anything unusual or sudden that threatens the things it loves, and it takes precautions for their safety; but to You what is unusual or sudden? Or who can separate from You what You love? Or where, except with You, is there unshaken safety? Grief pines away over lost things that its desires took pleasure in, because it would like nothing to be taken away from it, just as nothing can be taken away from You.

@@ 13
This is how the soul commits fornication: she turns away from You and looks outside You for what she cannot find pure and untainted until she comes back to You. So all who put themselves far from You and set themselves up against You are imitating You in a perverse way. But even by imitating You like this, they show that You are the Creator of all nature, and so there is nowhere they can go to get away from You altogether. What, then, did I love in that theft? In what way did I imitate my Lord, even if corruptly and perversely? Did I want to break Your law at least by stealth, since I could not do it by power, so that, a prisoner, I could mimic a crippled freedom by doing with impunity what I was not allowed to do, a darkened likeness of Your omnipotence? Look: here is Your servant, running away from his Lord and catching hold of a shadow. What rottenness! What a monstrous life, what a depth of death! Could I take pleasure in what was not allowed, for no other reason than that it was not allowed?
