CANDIDUS; 
O R. 


ALL FOR THE BEST. 


PART IL 


Tranſlated from the _— of 


M. DE VOLTAIRE. 


EDINBURGH: 
Printed in the Vear MDCCLXI. 


[Price Eight Pence. } 


"WED £5552 * 27 WW: £2203 
C O N T. E N T 8. 


IW UL 


10 ]Candidus paried from = — and 


, what reſulted from. it age 3 

EH AP. . 55 
IV hat happened to Candi des 7 in this houſs, and how 
he leſt it 111 . . 5 
"CHAP. m. d v1 
Candidus's reception at court, and what allowed 8 

. A 
Cc H A P. IV. 


Condidus receives new fawurs. His elevation I 0 


4 5 1 1 * 
« +4 ATLAS J * 


CHAP. V...., 
How .  Condidus Was a "a grebt, Privics, but not + Sid 


23 Linn —_ 
ic H A P. VI. 11 
Condidu's Pleaſures .. + TRI 5 7 
0 H-. A p. vu. | 
The Ihen of i Eis 47 
CHAP. vin. Io, 
Candidus's diſguſt. A muetin ing which be did not er- 
peck Xx 478 1 
n I. . 
Candidus 4 diſgrace, travels and bert 23 
4 CHAP, 


* ” 


: Fre, 8 — P 
th. 
* "2 4 * f 
5 * 
* 
” 


vi CONTENTS, 
Enka. 


The arrival of Candidus and Panglefe i in Propontis, 
what they ſaw theres. and what became of them 26 


W ending OR Pi RIC hn, 
cdl continues his journey; and in what wy 
city | 

CHAP. XII. 

Candidus continues his journey. New adventures 30 
2 CHAP. XIII. 

The flory of Zenaide. Flow Candidus betame ena- 
| n with ber, and the conſequences. 36 
e 
Continuation of Candidus's anbuj  W 

= Hab. KV. | 

The arrival of V. olhall. ms to | Copenhagen 42 

. c HA P. KI. 


ns How Candidus found his wife again. 3 * ff 


his miftreſs 44 
C HAP. KVH. 

| How Candidus intended to kill him elf, and did not 

eectuate it. What happened to him at an inn 47 


C HAP. XVIII. 
Candidus and Cacambo retire to an hoſpital, Adven- 
ture there 30 


C H A p. XIX. | 
New adventures 28 52 


CHA P. xX. 8 
The continuation of Candiduss misfortunes ; ; how he 
und his miſtreſs Kain, and what was the can. 
Yequence , | 56 
8 A N- 


* 


* 


> 


gx ND 1D 01 


O R, 
ALL FOR THE BEST. 
SEETASANSATSETASA 7TH @ 222648 
F-:4. K. 1-8. . 


CELEEALEECEIIEEEE ELIE EEE ED 


e 


How Candidus parted from his company, and what 
reſulted from it, 


AN ſoon grows weary of every thing 
in life; riches are-a burthen to the 
poſſeſſor; ambition, when ſated, leaves 
regrets ; the {weets of love loſe their 
delight; and Candidus, born to experience all 
the viciflitudes of fortune, at laſt was tired of 
cultivating his garden, Maſter Panglofs, ſaid 
he, if we are in the beſt of poſſible worlds, you 
muſt confeſs at leaſt that 1 do not enjoy 2 
ſuitable proportion of poſſible happineſs, fince 1 
live unknown in a ſmall corner of the Propontis, 
having no other ſupport than that of my hands, 
which may ſoon loſe their ſtrength ; no other plea- 
ſure than that which I have from Miſs Cunegon- 
da, who is very ugly, and, what is worſt of all, 
ihe is my wife; no other company than yours, 

5 — A which 


. - — 2 
. 
3 2 2 44— — 
; ” 
i ” 
”. : 
"of * 


for the beſt with reſpe 


* 


2 c AN DID Us; or, Chap. 1. 
which often tires me; or that of Madtin, which 


- makes me dull; or that of Girofflee, who lately has 


turned good; or that of Paquette, which, you 
know, is very dangerous; or that of the old wo- 
man with one buttock, who tells me a parcel of 
long-ſpun ſtories. + N 

Then Pangloſs replied: Philoſophy teaches us, 
that the monades, infinitely diviſible, arrange them- 
ſelves with a wonderful intelligence to form the 
different bodies that we remark in nature. The 
heavenly bodies are what they owght to be; they 
are placed where they aght to be placed; they de- 
ſcribe the circles that they «ug/t to deſcribe ; man 
follows the inclination that he ought to follow, he 
is what he ozght to be, he does what he ought to 
do. Youare-caſt down and complain, O Candi- 
dus, becauſe the monade of your ſoul is weary; 
but this wearineſs is a modification of the ſoul, 
and is no argument againſt every thing bein 
to yourſelf and others. 
When you ſaw me over-run with ulcers, I ſtood 
firm to my opinion: for if Miſs Paquette had not 
given me a reliſh. for the pleaſures of love, and its 


poiſon, I ſhould not have met with you iy Hol- 


land; I ſhould not have given an occaſton to Wome? 
the Anabaptiſt to do a meritorious action; I ſhould 
not have been hanged at Liſbon. far the edification 
of our neighbour ; I ſhould not be here to comfort 
you with my advices, to live and die in the opinion 
of Leibuitz, Yes! my dear Candidus, the whole 
is a concatenation, every thing is neceſſary in the 
beſt of poſſible worlds. There is an abſolute neceſ- 
ſity for the burgeſs of Montauban to inſtruct kings, 
and the worm of Quimper-Corentin to critciſe, exit 
ticiſe, criticiſe. Ihe impeacher of philoſophers is 
neceſſitated to be crucified in St Denis's ſtreet; 
and the ſame neceſſity obliges the flogging pedant 
of the Recollets and the archdean of St 12 Ho 
PEST | I 


Cha 
diſt] 
nals. 
peac 
pher 
kind 
that 
you 
der 
exer. 
effec 
bon 
inqu 
the ] 
if ye 
mitie 
nts 
main 
that 
eſtabl 
eſt t 
great 
him. 
2: 
of al 
kille 


a « 


Chap. 1. ALL FOR THE BEST. 3 
diſtil gall and calumny from their Chriſtian Jour- 


nals. Philoſophy lies under the neceſſity to be im- 


peached at the tribunal of Melpomene. Philoſo- 
phers are obliged to continue to enlighten man- 
kind, notwithſtanding the ſnarling envious brutes 
that grovel in the mud of literature. And were 
you to be kicked from the fineſt of caſtles, and un- 
der the neceſſity of learning again the Bulgarian 
exerciſe; run the gaunklet, ſuffer once more the 
effects of a Dutch frow, and be ſent back to Liſ- 
bon to be cruelly ſcourged by order of the holy 
inquiſition, to undergo the ſame dangers among 
the PADRES, the OR EILLONSs, and the FRENCH ; 
if you. were, in ſhort, to bear all poſſible cala- 
mities, and though you did not underftand Leib- 
nitæ better than J do myſelf, you would always 
maintain that every thing is right, and for the beſt ; 
that the plenum, and the materia ſubtilis, the pre- 
eſtabliſhed harmony, and the monades, are the pretti- 
eſt things in the world; and that Leibnitz is a 
great man, even to thoſe who- do not underſtand: 
him. _ 

To this fine diſcourſe, Candidus, the mildeſt 
of all the beings of nature, though indeed he had 


killed three men, two of whom were prieſts, did 


not give an anſwer ; but being weary of the Doctor 
and his company, he ſet out, the next morning 
by break of * day, with. a white ſtick in his hand, 
not knowing whither he was going, in ſearch of a. 
place devoid-of wearineſs, and where men ſhould: 

not be men, as in the good country of Eldorado. 
Candidus, leſs unhappy ſince he no longer was 
in love with Miſs Cunegonda, got his ſubſiſtence 
from the liberality of different people, who were 
not Chriſtians, but were charitable. He arrived, 
after à very tedious and painful march, at Tauris, 
a city on the frontiers: of Perſia, famous for the 
Fat e a - cruelties 


147 3 
TY 
f 1 
* 
3 * P 
4 > 


U 


— 


4 
— — _ 
* Wing -? BT 
5 o 


_——  ——— 


7ie5 a dos 
r _ 
n 


— nn. ATSC 


* 


7 — * 


r 


. * "_ 
a - 4 4 > 
3 - 
ä — — 8 


— — — ; | 
- 


* "4 _ 
. 1 
* 
2 — — þ4 
— bs Ag — 


- 


— CANDID U 53. oy. Chaps. 
cruelties exerciſed there alternately by Turks and 
Perſians. | 
Candidus being quite fpent with. fatigue, having 
ſcarcely as many cloaths as could cover the dz/t:z- 
guiſbing mark of man, and what man calls his 
ſhame, was beginning to doubt whether he ſhould 
believe Pangloſs, when a Perſian made up to him 
in a very polite manner, and intreated him to en- 
noble his houſe by his preſence. You joke, ſure- 
ly, faid Candidus; I am a poor devil, who have 
left a wretched habitation that-I had at the Pro- 
pontis, becauſe I married Miſs Cunegonda, who 
is become very ugly,. and becauſe I was weary. I 
am not indeed fit to ennoble any one's houſe, I am 
not noble myſelf, thanks be to God; if I had the 
honour to be ſo, the Honourable Baron of Thun- 
der-ten-tronckh fhould have paid very dearly for 
the kicks on the breech he thought proper to give 
me, or I ſhould have died for ſhame,. which would 
have been too philoſophical. Beſides, I was ſcour- 
ged very ignominiouſly by the executioners of the 
holy inquiſition, and by two thouſand heroes, whoſe 
pay is three pence three farthings a-day. Give me 
whatever you pleaſe, but do not inſult me in my 
diſtreſs by banters that would depretiate the me- 
rit of your favours. My Lord, replied the Perſian, 
you may be a beggar, and that is pretty viſible 
you are ſo; but my religion obliges me to be ho- 
ſpitable. You are a fellow- creature, and in want, 
therefore the apple of my eye ſhall be your path. 
Deign to ennoble my houſe by your radiant pre- 
ſence. I ſhall do as you pleaſe, replied Candidus. 
Step in, ſaid the Perſian. They walk in; and 
Candidus, full of admiration, was qulte aſtoniſh- 
ed at the reſpect that his landlord ſhewed him. 


The ſlaves anticipated all his deſires- The whole 
houſe ſeemed intent to procure him full ſatisfaction. 
Provided this continues, ſaid Candidus, matters 
| 2 „ 3 


Chap. 2. AI FOR THE BEST, $ 


are not ſo bad in this country. Three days had e- 
lapſed, and the Perſian generoſity ſtill laſts as us 


ſual. Candidus begins to exclaim, O Maſter Pan- 


gloſs, I ſuſpected always that you was in the right; 
tor you are a great philoſopher! 


| CHAP. II. 
hat happened to Candidus in this houſe, and how 
he left it. | 


Andidus well fed, well clothed, and in high 
ſpirits, ſoon became again as ruddy, as freſh, 
and as pretty, as when he was in Weſtphalia. 
This change gave no ſmall pleaſure to Iſhmael 
Rahab, his landlord. This man, who was ſix 
feet high, had two ſmall red ſparkling eyes; and 
his pimpled noſe, of a pretty large ſize, was a 
ſufficient indication that he infringed the law of 
Mahomet. His whiſkers were renowned in the pro- 
vince,. and mothers were earneſtly praying that 
their ſons might have the like muſtaches. R 
had wives, becauſe he was rich; but he was of 
an Opinion that prevails but too commonly in the 
Eaſt, and in ſome colleges of Europe. Your Ex- 
cellence is more beautiful than the ſtars, ſaid the 
artful Perſian, one day, to our unſuſpecting hero, 
gently ſtroking him under the chin; your charms 
muſt have captivated many hearts; you were born to 
give and to enjoy happineſs. Alas! replied Can- 


didus, I was but half happy behind the ſcreen, for 
I was far from being at my eaſe. Cunegonda was 


then handſome 


Cunegonda,. poor innocent! 


Follow me, my Lord, ſaid the Perſian; and Can- . 


didus followed him. | 

They came to a moſt inchanting incloſure at the 
bottom of a wood, where ſilence and voluptuouſ- 
neſs fremed to reign. There Iſhmael Rabab; 
; ET 4 3 tenderly 


ahab 


* 


4 — 
— A A 


v 
— 


8 — N « i — = 
- * 983 — wr — 2 — - - 1 _ 1 * — - * * 
r KN Sint cc —— 9 8 . — 


_— -* 
— F 
- 


-” - 
Err, — — * - 


. 


* 
1 ono — —„—„—-— 
— 


* 
* 
o — 
. —— 
9 4 


1 —-— _ 


— 1 2 
* 


— - » 
WP 
— - 
* $ 
EST. F P 
hed „L! „„ 
N 


. 3 K 3 3 . 
— 0 = - ax ; : * 1 
- » ©, f 
* * 
4 G 
4 

2» » 

* * 
F ” 3 
- 


6 CANDIDUS; or, Chap. 2 C 
tenderly embracing Candidus, in few words de- A 
clared a paſſion for him, like that whieh the beau- ſe 
tiful Alexis ſo feelingly deſeribes in the Bucolics ſu 
of Virgil. Candidus was unable to recover from ſe 
his aſtoniſhment. No, cried he, I will never ſub- in 
mit to ſuch infamy! What a ſtrange cauſe, and 
what a ſhocking effect! I had rather ſuffer death. ſt 
Thou ſhalt die then, ſaid the furious Iſhmael. fi 
How ! Chriſtian dog, becauſe I very politely meant tr 
to give thee pleaſure !:— Reſolve to ſatisfy me, or te 
to endure the moſt cruel death. Candidus did not by 
long heſitate, - The Perfian's powerful arguments 
were ſufficient to make him tremble ; but he: feared ſe 
death like a philoſopher. ar 
Ciuſtom ſoon reconciles us to any thing. Can- be 
didus, well fed, well inſtructed, though confined, R 
was not abſolutely diſſatisfied with his Sination, hi 
Good living, and the various entertainments ex- hi 
hibited by the ſlaves of Iſhmael, gave ſome inter- ſe 
miſſion to his griefs ; he was unhappy only when he di 
reflected; and ſo are the greateſt part of mankind. e\ 
About this time one of the chicf ſupports of the ye 
church militant of Perſia, the moſt learned of all th 
the Mahometan doctors, who underſtood Arabic fo 
at his fingers ends, and even the Greek which is th 
at this day ſpoken in the country of Demoſthenes a 
and Sophocles, the Rev. Ed-Ivan-Baal-Denk re- 1 
turned from Conſtantinople, Where he had been a 
diſputing with the Rev. Mamoud-Ahram, on a ſc 
very delicate point of doctrine, namely; Whether W ir 
the prophet had plucked the quill with which he ol 
wrote the Alcoran, out of the wing of the angel ol 


Gabriel, or whether Gabriel had preſented it to T 
him? They had diſputed, during three days and ec 
three nights, with a zeal worthy of the ages moſt hi 
renowned for controverſy, when the Doctor re- * 
turned perſuaded, like all the diſciples of Ali; that tk 
Mahomet had plucked the NE] and: Mamoud — * 

| ONE'S; "om e 

5% © De +8 22 


| "4 - Fa | bs; 
. N 45-4 | 
4 & 1 + - * — * 
3 "A I, . e Ly 


Chap. 2. ALL FOR THE BEST. 7 


Abram remained convinced, like the reſt of the 
ſet of Omar, that the prophet was incapable of 
ſuch a piece of rudeneſs, and that the angel pre- 
ſented it to him with the moſt becoming grace 
imaginable. _ 

It was reported; that there had been, at Con- 
ſtantinople, a kind of freesthinker, who had in- 
ſinuated, that it was proper to inquire into the 
truth of the Alcoran's having been actually writ- 
ten with a quill taken from the angel Gabriel; 
but he was ſtoned. | 

Candidus's arrival made a great noiſe in Tauris ; 
ſeveral perſons who had heard of contingent effects, 
and effects not contingent, began to doubt of his 
being a philoſopher. They mentioned it to the 
Rev. Ed-Ivan-Baal-Denk ; he was curious to ſee 
him; and Rahab, who could not refuſe a perſon of 
his conſideration, ordered Candidus into his pre- 
ſence. He ſeemed entirely ſatisfied with Candi- 


> dus's manner of reaſoning on phyſical and moral 
evil, on things active and paſſive. I underſtand 
P you are a philoſopher, and that is ſufficient, ſaid 
1 the Venerable Cenobite: it is very improper that 
0 fo great a man as you are ſhould be tteated un wor- 
8 thily, which I am informed is the caſe. You are 
$ a ſtranger, Iſhmael Rahab has no right over you. 
- J wilt take you to court, where you will meet with 
n a favourable reception: the Sophi is fond of the 
a ſciences. Iſhmael], deliver this young philoſopher 
r WH into my hands, or you will incur the diſpleaſure 
e of your prince, and draw upon you the vengeance 
el of heaven, but more eſpecially of its miniſters. 
to Theſe laſt words terrifzgd the intrepid Perſian; he 
1d conſented to every thing; and Candidus, bleſſing 
ft heaven and the prieſthood, ſet out from Tauris that 


e- very day with the Mahometan doctor. They took 
at the road to Iſpahan, where they arrived amidſt the 
d- Neffings and acclamations ef the people. 
"1 Fs CHAP, 


. « 


; * I C AN DID U 8; or, Chap, 3. 


4 +* 4 
vw 4b 


| CHAT ob | 
- Candidus's reception at court, and what followed. 


IHE Rev. Ed-Ivan-Baal-Denk made no de- 
: lay in preſenting Candidus to the King. 
His Majeſty took a ſingular pleaſure in liſtening to 
his diſcourſe, and placed him among the learned 
men of his court; but theſe learned men treated 
him as an ignorant fool, and an idiot, which very 
much contributed to perſuade his Majeſty that he 
was a great man. Becauſe, ſaid he to them, gou 
cannot comprehend Candidus's arguments, you 
affront him; but, for my part, though 1 A 
ſtand them no better- than you, I aſſure you that 
he is a great philoſopher; I ſwear it by my 
whiſkers. Theſe words impoſed ſilence on the 
learned. | 

Candidus was lodged in the palace, and allowed. 
flaves for his ſervice; he was clothed in a mag- 
nificent ſuit, and the Sophi commanded, that, let 
him ſay what he would, no one ſhould dare to- 
prove him in the wrong. His Majeſty did not ſtop 
here. The venerable prieſt ceaſed not to impor- 
tune him in favour of Candidus ; and he reſolved, 
at laſt, to rank him with his moſt intimate fa- 
vourites. | 

God be praiſed and our holy prophet, ſaid the 
Iman, addrefling Candidus, I ne brought you a 
moſt agreeable piece of intelligence. How happy. 
are you, my dear Candidus | How will you be en- 
vied | You will ſwim in opulence ; you may aſpire 
to the moſt illuſtrious employments of the empire. 
Forget me not, however, my dear friend; remem- 
ber that you are obliged to me for the favours with 
which you will ſoon be honoured. The King will 

beſtow, upon you a kindneſs which is greatly 
„„ HG eſteemed, 


— 


«a 


Chap. 3. ABL For THE'BestT, } ' 


eſteemed, and you will ſhortly exhibit an enter- 
tainment which. the court has not enjoyed this two- 
years. And pray, what are the honours deſigned 
me by the prince? ſaid Candidus. This very day, 
replied the prieſt, quite delighted, you will receive 
fifty ſtrokes , upon the ſoles of your feet, with a 
bull's pizzle, in the preſence of his Majeſty. The 
eunuchs, who are to perfume you, will be here 
immediately ; prepare to ſupport, with becoming 
reſolution, this little trial, and make yourſelf wor- 
thy of the king of kings. Let the king of kings 
keep his favours, cried Candidus, if, to deſerve 
them, I muſt receive fifty ſtrokes with a bull's- 
pizzle. It is his cuſtom, replied the Doctor coldly, 
with thoſe on. whom he would beſtow his favours. 
I eſteem-you too much to report your reluctance, 
and I will make you happy in ſpite of yourſelf. 
They had ſcarce done ſpeaking when the eu- 
nuchs entered, preceded. by the executor of his 
Majeſty's minute pleaſures, who was one of the 
talleſt and moſt robuſt lords of the court. Candi- 
dus would rather have been excuſed; but, in ſpite 
of all he could ſay or do, they perfumed his legs 
and feet according to cuſtom. Four eunuchs con- 
ducted him to the place appointed for the ceremo- 
ny, in the midſt of a double rank of ſoldiers, to the 
ſound of muſical inſtruments, cannon, and the 
ringing of bells. The Sophi was already there, 
attended by his principal officers, and the moſt 
intelligent of his courtiers. Candidus was ſtretch- 
ed in a moment on a gilded bench, and the excgu- 
tor of the minute pleaſures was preparing to enter 
upon his office. O Pangloſs, Pangloſs, if you were 
here] — ſaid Candidus, crying and weeping with 
all his might; which would have been thought 
very tndecent, if the prieſt had not aſſerted, that 
his favourite behaved in this manner . to 
gixe his Majeſty. more entertainment. In Huth, 


4 „ 
5 


N 


\ 


10 C AND ID US; or, Chap. 4. 


*. this great king laughed moſt ĩmmoderately; he was 


ſioo pleaſed with the fight, that, when the fifty ſtrokes 

were given, he ordered fifty more. But his prime 
miniſter having repreſented, with uncommon bold- 
neſs, that this favour, conferred on à ſtranger, 
might alienate the hearts of his ſubjects, he revo- 
ked his order, and Candidus was remanded back 
to his apartment. WI 

They put him to bed, having bathed his feet 
with vinegar. The nobility came, one after ano- 
ther, to congratulate him ;. even the Sophi honour- 
ed him with his preſence; he not only ſuffered him 
to kiſs his hand, but gave him a deviliſh drive in 
the chaps: with his 'fiſt, The politicians thence 
conjectured that his fortune was made; and, what 


is more extraordinary, though politicians, ' they 


were not miſtaken. 


eic do CHAP. Iv. : 
Candidus receives new favorrs. His elevation. 
UR hero was no ſooner recovered, than he 
was preſented to the King, in order to ex- 
preſs his gratitudt for the favours with which he 
had been honouteds The monarch received him 
graciouſly ; moremper, he deigned to give him two 
or three ſlaps in face during the converſation 
and when he tool His leave, condeſcended to kick 
his a as he wat 
room: the courts were all ready to die with 
envy. Since the/fime his Majeſty had firſt begun 
to bruiſe his ſpecial favourites, no one had ever had 
the honour to be ſo thoroughly bruiſed as Candi- 
Three days after this audience, our philoſo- 


pher, who was ready to go mad at the favours he 


had received, and began to think that things went 
8.42 | | „ fen 


along, even as far as the guard- 


0 


Chap. 4. ALI ror THE BES r. 11 
very ill, yas named governor of Chuſiſtan, with 
deſpotic power. He was decorated with a fur cap, 
which in Perſia is a mark of high diſtin ion.” Ha- 
ving taken leave of the Sophi, Who hoftoured him 
with the repetition of ſome favours, he ſet out for 
Sus, the capital of the province. From the mo- 
ment Candidus bad appeared at court, the gran- 
dees of the empire conſpired his deſtruction. The 
exceſſive favours which the Sophi had fo laviſhly 
beſtowed on him, ſerved only to increafe the ſtorm 
which was ready to burſt over his head. Never- 
theleſs, he rejoiced in his good fortune, and eſpe- 
cially in his remote ſituation his ideas anticipa- 
ted the pleaſures of ſupremacy, and he ſaid from 
the bottom of his heart, 


Thrice happy they who from their ſevercign dwell 
Far diſtant ! | 


Scarce had he travelled twenty miles from Iſ- 
pahan, when, on a ſudden, a body of five, hundred 
cavalry ſaluted him with a furious diſchgrge of 
their carbines. Candidus thought at firſt it was 
intended as a compliment ; but a ball which ſhat- 
tered his leg to pieces, ſoon convinced him of his 
miſtake. His people threw down their arms, and 
Candidus, almoſt dead, was carried to a deſolate 
caſtle, His baggage, his camels, his ſlaves, his 
white eunuchs, his black eunuchs, and thirty-fix 
wives which the Sophi had given him for his own 
uſe, altbecame the ſpoil of the conquerors. They cut 
off the leg of our hero to prevent a mortification, 
and endeavoured to preſerve his life to the intent 
that he might ſuffer a more cruel death. N 

O Pangloſs, Pangloſs ! what would become of 
your optimiſm, if you now beheld me, with only 
one leg, in the hands of my moit cruel enemies ? 
' When I had juſt entered the path of felicity ; 
juſt made governor, or rather king, of one of the 


molt -- 


22 CAN D1/D-U-$; er, 


moſt conſiderable provinces of the empire of an- 
cient Media; when I became poſſeſſed of camels, 
ſlaves, white eunuchs and black eunuchs, and 
thirty-ſix wives for my own uſe, and of which I 


Chap. g. 


had yet made no uſe 
when he was able to ſpeak. 

But whilſt he thus bewailed his übe fortune 
ſtood his friend. The prime miniſter being in- 


Thus Candidus ſpoke 


formed of the violence which had been committed, 


had diſpatched a ſufficient body of veterans in pur- 
ſuit of the rebels; and the prieſt Ed-Ivan-Baal- 
Denk, had publiſhed, by 'means of other. prieſts, 
that Candidus being favoured by the prieſts, was 
.conſequently a favourite with God. Beſides, thoſe 
| who were acquainted with the conſpiracy, were 
the more impatient to diſcover it, ſince the mini- 
ſters of religion had declared in the name of Ma- 
homet, that if any one had eaten ſwine's fleſh, 
drank wine, paſted ſeveral days without bathing, 
or viſited a woman at an improper time, contra 
to the expreſs commands of the Alcoran, ſhould, 
upon declaring what be knew of the conſpiracy, 
be ipſo facto ablolved. Candidus's priſon was ſoon 
diſcovered ; it was inſtantly forced open, and, as 
religion was concerned, the vanquiſhed were, ac- 
. cording to rule, exterminited. andidus, march- 
ing over heaps of dead bodies, triumphed over the 
.greateſt, danger he had ever yet experienced, and, 
together with his attendants, continued his route 
towards his government, where he was received 
as a peculiar favourite who had been horfoured 


with the baſtinado i in the ge of the hen of 
* | 


Cnet Hh 8 P. 


Cha 


'# 1 


phil. 
hate 
ſcal 
Hor 
hith 
Don 
then 
to a 
wiſe 
ture 
war 
and 
with 
con! 
chat 
be h 
mar 
tiou 
ed / 
Ing 

orat 
gove 


the. 


my 
Cun 
has 


xuri 


Chap. 5. ALL FOR THE BEST, 13 


CHAP V. 


As how Candidus was a great prince, but not ſatiſ- 
- —_ 


Hiloſophy inſpires men with the love of their 
fellow-creatures : Paſcal is almoſt the only 
philoſopher who ſeems endeavouring to make us 
hate them. Happily Candidus had never read Pa- 
ſcal : he loved poor humanity with all his ſoul. 
Honeſt men perceived his diſpoſition : they had 
hitherto been kept at a diſtance from the Miſſi 
Dominici of Perſia; but it was not difficult for 
them to aſſemble in the preſence of. Candidus, and 
to aſſiſt him with their counſel. He made many 
wiſe regulations for the encouragement of * 
ture, population, commerce, and the arts. He re- 
warded thoſe who had made uſeful experiments; 
and even thoſe who had only written books, met 
with encouragement. When all my ſubjects are 
contented, (ſaid Candidus to himſelf with the moſt 
charming candour imaginable), then poſſibly I may 
$ be happy. He was but little acquainted with hu- 


- man nature. His reputation was attacked in ſedi- 
= tious libels, and he was caluminated in a work call- 
e ed ! Ami des hommes. He found, that, by endeavour- 
l, ing to make men happy, he did but excite their in- 
te gratitude. O, cried Candidus, how difficult it is to 
d govern theſe unfledged animals which vegetate on 


d the, face of the earth! Why did I not remain on 
of WM ny little farm, in the company of Maſter Pangl6ſs, 
Cunegonda, the daughter of Pope Urban X. who 
has but one buttock, Friar Girofflee, and the lu- 
>, WW xurious Paquette! > 


B CHAP. 


6 — 
— I pg "= * 
- - 2 — 


(edt woe tn 


_— 
- 


oO 8 LICE. - 


* 
—= 
: 

—_ 

. 
— — 2 7 ORD ——_  W_—_ — — — 

2 5 . 

aw ; 


14 CAN DID US; or, Chap. 6. 


CHAP. VI. 
Candidus's plraſures. 


Andidus, in the extremity of his grief, wrote 
a moſt pathetic letter to the Right Reverend » 


Ed-Ivan-Baal-Denk; who was fo exceedingly 


moved with the ſad picture of his miſery, that he 


perſuaded the Sophy to diſmiſs Candidus. from his 


employment. His Majeſty, in recompenſe for his 


ſervices, granted him a very conſiderable penſion, 


Thus eaſed of the weight of grandeur, our philo- 
ſopher ſought the optimiſm of Pangloſs in the 
pleaſures of private life, Hitherto he ſeemed to 
have lived for others, and to have forgot that he had 
a ſeraglio. He now recollected this circumſtance 
with that emotion which the very idea of a ſeraglio 
inſpires. Let all things be prepared, faid he to 
his prime eunuch, for my entrance among my 


Wives. My Lord, replied the 8 gentle- 
© 


man, it is now that your Excellence deſerves the 
name of wiſe, Men, for whom you have done fo 
much, were unworthy your attention; but wo- 
men It may be io, ſaid Candidus very modeſt- 
ly. | 
: In the-centre of a garden, in which nature was 
aſſiſted by art to devon her charms, ſtood a ſmall 
fabric whoſe ſtructure was ſimple, yet elegant, 
and therefore quite different from thoſe which are 
ſeen in the ſuburbs of the moſt magnificent citics 
in Europe. Candidus approached this temple, but 
not without a bluſh. "The ſoft air ſpread a deli- 
cious fragrance round the peaceful manſion. The! 
flowers amorouſly entwined, ſeemed guided by the 
inſtinct of pleaſure; nor were they anly-ithe 


flowers of a day: the roſe never loſt its vermilion, 
- "The remote view of a ſhaggy rock, whence fell a 


rapid 
= 


Chap. 6. ALL For THE BIST. 13 


rapid torrent, ſeemed calculated to invite the ſoul 
to that ſweet melancholy which precedes enjoy- 
ment. Candidus trembling, entered the ſaloon, 
where taſte and magnificence were elegantly dif- || 
played; a ſecret charm thrilled through every _ 
ſenſe. He beholds, breathing upon the canvas, 8 
the youthful Telemachus in the midſt of the $ 
nymphs of Calypſo's court. He then turns his eyes 11 
to a hal- naked Diana flying into the arms of En- 19 
dymion. But his agitation increaſed, when he 
beheld a Venus faithfully copied from that of Me- 

dicis. All at once he is ſtruck with the found of 

divine muſic ; a number of young Circaſſian wo- 

men appear covered with their veils ; they form a- 

round him a dance apreeably imagined, and more 

veritable than thoſe which are exhibited upon the 

ſtage after the death of your Cæſars and your 

Pompeys. | 

At a certain ſignal, their veils dropt : their ex- \” 

preſſive features add new life to the entertainment: 

they practiſe every bewitching attitude, but with- 

out any apparent deſign : one by her lecring eyes 

expreſſed a boundleſs paſſion; another in a ſoft lan- 

guor ſeemed to expect pleaſure without ſeeking it; 

a third bends forward, but raiſed herſelf immediate- 

ly ſo as to afford a tranſient glance at thoſe raviſh- 
ing charms, which at Paris the fair ſex ſo profuſe- 

1 MW | diſplay; a fourtk careleſsly throws back the ſkirt 
5 of her robe, and diſcovers a leg, which of itſelf was \ 


„( ith 8.06. - oh I te end 


* ſufficient to inflame a man of delicacy. The dance 
wy ceaſes,” and'the beauties ſtand motionleſs. | 
mY The ſilence that reigned recalls, Candidus to 
5 himſelf; the fury of love ruſhes into his heart; his 
hel inſatiable looks wander on all ſides; he kiſſes the 
fag inflaming lips and moiſtened- eyes; he puts his 


55 hand on balls whiter than alabaſter; their heaving / 
and elaſtic motion makes the hand recoil; he ad- 
1 2 mires the due proportions; he bbſerves the ruddy 
des like the buds of = new-ſpringing roſe, mw 

| 2 (0) 


"IC. 


16 CAN DID US; or, Chap. 6. 


do not blow till recreated by the beneficent rays 
of the fun; he kiſſes them with ecſtaſy, and his 
mouth ſticks cloſe to them. | 

Our philoſopher contemplates with attention 
one of a more delicate ſhape and majeftic deport- 
ment than the reſt ; but throws his handkerchief 
to a young nymph whoſe languiſhing eyes ſeemed 
peculiarly to court his affection, and whoſe beauty 
was improved by her bluſnes. The eunuch in- 
ſtantly opened the door of an apartment which was 
conſecrated to the myſteries of love. The lovers 
entered, and the eunuch ſaid to his maſter, You 
are now going to be happy. Oh, replied Candi- 
dus, I hope I am. | | ; 

The cicling and the walls of this delightful 


chamber were covered with mirrors, and in the 


middle ſtood a couch of black ſatin. Here he ſeat- 
ed the fair Circaſhan, and began to undreſs her 
with inconceivable alertneſs. - Fhe&pogd creature 
did not interrupt him, except to expreſs her affec- 
tion by her kiſſes. O, my Lord, ſaid ſhe, like a 
true Mahometan, how happy you have made your 
fave! Ho you honour her by your tranſports! 
Theſe few words charmed our philoſopher. He 
was loſt in ecſtaly, and every thing he beheld was 
entirely new to him. What ene between 
Cunegonda g:own ugly, and violated by Bulgarian 
heroes, and a young Circaſſian cf eighteen, who 
was never raviſhed f This was the firſt time that 
poor Candidus had taſted pleaſure, The objects 
which he devoured, were repeated in the glaſs. 
Which way ſoever he turned his eyes, he ſaw the 


black fatin contraſted with the whiteſt ſkin in the 


univerſe, H2 beheld - but -I am obliged to 


comply with the falſe delicacy of our language. 

Let it ſuffice to ſay, that our philoſopher was com- 

pletely happy. 8 5 

O Maſter, my dear Maſter Pangloſs ! cried — 
| dus 


Chap. 7. ALL FOR THE BEST. 17 


didus quite enrapt, all is full as well here as 12 


Eldorado; nothing but a fine woman can ſatisfy -+ 


the deſires of man. I am as happy as it is poſſible 
to be. Leibnitz is in the right, and you are a great 
philoſopher : for inſtance, L make no doubt but 
you, my lovely angel, are inclined towards opti- 
miſm, as you have always been happy. Alas! re- 
plied the — y angel, I know not what you mean 
by optimiſm ; but your ſlave was never happy be- 
fore to-day.. If my Lord will deign to hear me, I 


will convince: him of this by a conciſe relation of 


my adventures. With all my heart, ſaid Candi- 
dus: I am in a proper ſtate of tranquillity to liſten 
toa ſtory: and ſo the charming ſlave began her 
tale, as in the following chapter. 


CHAP. VII. 
The chiſtory of Zirza. 


father was a Chriſtian, and I alſo am a 
Chriſtian, as he told me. He lived in a little 
hermitage in the neighbourhood of Cotatis, where 
he attracted the veneration of the faithful, by his 
fervent devotion, and an auſterity of manners, 
which was ſhocking to human nature. The wo- 
men came in crouds to pay him homage, and took 
a ſingular pleaſure in kiſſing his backſide, which 
was every day gored with {ſtripes of diſcipline. I 
certainly owe my being to one of the moſt devout 
of them. I was brought up in a ſubterraneous cave 
near my father's cell. I was twelve yeatsold, without 
having once iſſued from this tomb, as I may call it, 
moon the earth trembled, with a terrible noiſe : the 
vault where I lay ſunk down, and I was with diffi- 
culty taken from under the rubbiſh. Iwas half dead, 
when, for the firſt time in my life, my eyes were 


ſtruck with the light of day. My father took me 
into his hermitage as a predeſtined child: the 


B 3 2 Whole 


"8 CANDIDU sz or, Chap. 7. 
whole affair appeared ſtrange to the people. My 


father cried out a miracle, and the people joined 


in the cry. . 

I was named Zirza, which, in the Perſian lan- 

guage ſignifies, child of Providence. It was not 

3 before the beauty of your poor flave excited 
the curioſity of the public. The women began to 

viſit the hermitage leſs frequently, and the men 

much oftener. One of them ſaid he loved me. 


Wicked wretch, cried my father, art thou quali- 


fed to love her? She is a treaſure which God hath 
committed to my care: he appeared to me laſt 
night in the figure of a venerable hermit, and com- 
manded me not to part with her for leſs than two 
thouſand crowns. Be gone, vile beggar, leſt thy 
impure breath ſhould contaminate her charms. 
I confeſs, anſwered the youth, that I have only a 
heart to offer her; but, monſfer, art thou not a- 
ſhamed to proftitute the name of the Deity to thy 
avarice? With what face, wretch as thou art, 
doſt thou dare to affert that God ſpake to thee ? 
It is degrading the Almighty to repreſent him con- 
verſing with men like thee. O blaſphemy ! cried 
my father in a violent paſſion : God himſelf com- 
manded that blaſphemers ſhould be ſtoned. Say- 
ing theſe words, he murdered my unhappy lover, 


and his blood fpurted in my face. Now, though! 


was yet unacquainted with love, I found myſelf 
fo far intereſted in the fate of my lover, that the 

fight of my father became inſupportable to me. I 
reſolved to leave him: he perceived my deſign. 
Ungrateful girl, ſaid he, it is to me thou art indebt- 
<d for thy bog ; thou art my daughter; and yet 
thou hateſt me but thou ſhalt no longer hate me 
without cauſe. He kept his word but too reli- 
-giouſly. During five ſad years which J paſſed in 
tears and groans, neither my youth nor faded 
beauty had power to relax his ſeverity. — 

3 | , 2 27 55 168; er SOT 


* 


＋ 


— * 


Ferne . 


Lord, replied Zirza. 
means to eſcape; and not daring to confi 


* 


Chap. 7. AI I TOR THE BIS. 1 
times he would thruſt a thouſand pins into r 
part of my body; then with his diſcipline heywault: 
cover my backſide with blood. That gave les 
pain than the pins, ſaid Candidus. Ide, my 


At laſt, however, I found 


de in any 


man, I hid myſelf in the woods. Three days 1 


fpent without food, and ſhould 
of hunger, but for a tyger to who 
fortune to be agreeable, and 


fhip ſo much pain and pleaſure. My food 


has "Ke have died 


had the good 
| was kind enough 
to divide his prey with me. But I was often 
dreadfully frightened by this terrible animal: the 
brute had once like to haue 
flower, the plucking of which has given your Lord- 


ve raviſhed from me the 


ga 


me the ſcurvy : but I was no ſooner cured than 1 
followed a ſlave-merchant who was travelling to 
Teflis, where the plagne then raged, and I . 


became infected. 


Theſe misfortunes, however, 


had fo little affected my charms, that the pur- 
veyor of the court thought fit to purchaſe me for 


our uſe. 


ſhort, 


I have not 


It. is now three months that I have 
nguiſhed among the reſt of your wives: we all 
began to imagine ourſelves deſpiſed. O, Sir, if 
you did but know how diſagreeable and impr 
theſe eunuchs are to conſole neglected girls. In 


t lived eighteen years, twelve 


of which 1 paſſed in a dungeon; I have felt an 


earthquake; I was ſprinkled with the blood of the 


firſt amiable man 1 had ſeen ; duri 


ng fe whole 


years I endured the moſt cruel torture; I have hzd 
the ſcurvy and the plague. Pining in the midſt of 


4 C 


tyger, and curfing my deſtiny, I ſpent three Jong 


months in this ſeraglio; and ſhould 
have died of the green ſickneſs, if your 


* 


* " 


>» I y 


. 
- 
. 
"I , 
o 


5 


TH 


ompany of black and white monſters, ſtill pre- 
ſerving that which I had ſaved from the fury of a 


2 Excellence 
Rad not honoured me with your embraces. 


— 


410 CAN DID Us; 07, Chap: 


O heavens ! ſaid Candidus, is it poſſible at your 
age to have experienced ſuch fad misfortunes ? 


What would Pangloſs ſay if he could hear your 


ſtory ? But your misfortunes are at an end as well 

as mine. Things are not now ſo bad; do you think 

they are? Saying theſe words he renewed his ca- 

reſſes, and became more and more confirmed in 
the opinions of Pangloſs. | | 


COTA EE, FIR 

Candidus's diſguſt. A meeting which he did not ex- 
UR philoſopher, in the midſt of his ſeraglio, 
| diſtributed his favours with tolerable impar- 
tiality : he enjoyed the pleaſure of variety, and 
returned with freſh ardour to the child of Provi- 
dence. But this did not continue long. He now 
began to feel violent pains in his loins, and was 
alſo frequently afflicted with the colic. In being 
happy he became emaciated, - Zirza's neck ap- 
peared neither ſo white nor ſo admirably turned; 
her ſhape loſt half its delicacy ; her eyes, in the 
eyes of Candidus, ſt emed leſs (oarkling her com- 
—— appeared leſs beautiful, and the raviſhing 
vermilion of her lips ſeemed quite faded. He per- 
ceived that ſhe did not walk well, and was not en- 
tirely ſatisfied with her breath. He alſo diſcovered 
a mole where he had conceived no blemiſh. The 
impetuoſity of her paſſion became troubleſome. In 
his other wives he coolly obſerved many defects, 
which, during his firſt tranſports, had 1 his 
notice: their lewdneſs grew offenſive, He was 
aſhamed to have followed the example of the 
wiſeſt of all men, et invenit amariorem morte muli- 

e rem. „ 
Candidus, ſtill firm in his Chriſtian ſentiments, 
ſaunte red 


„ „en Fon 


wea 


Ss UY 06 A 5 Ktws 8 


w cp we f 1 US 1 @ we 


if 


i 0 Oo © 


— 83 


Fs ys wy "OY WY 


Chap. 8. ALL For THE BEST. 21 


ſauntered for want of employment in the ſtreets of 
Sus; where, to his great barpriſe, a gentleman 
richly dreſſed, caught him in his arms, calling him 
by his name. Is it poſſible, ſaid Candidus, bleſs 
my ſpirit! It cannot be Vet there is fo ſtri- 
king a reſemblance Abbe Perigourdin It 
is even ſo, replied Perigourdin. Candidus ſtept 
back three paces, and ingenuouſly ſaid, Bug are 
you happy, my dear Sir f A fine queſtion truly, 
anſwered Perigourdin : the little trick which I 
put upon you at Paris, ſerved only to eſtabliſh m 

credit, The police employed me a while; but diſ- 
agreeing with them at laſt, I threw off the eccle- 


ſiaſtical habit, which was of no longer uſe to me, 


and went over to England, where thoſe of my 
profeſſion are better paid. I revealed all hag] 

knew, and all that I did not know, of the ſtrength 
and weakneſs of the country I had quitted. I ſwore 


that the French were a raſcally people, and that | 


London was the only magazine of gocd ſenſe ; 
in ſhort, I made a conſiderable fortune, and am 
come hither, to negotiate a treaty at the court of 
Perſia, in which the Sophi is bound to exterminate 
every European who ſhall enter his dominions in 
ſearch of cotton or filk, to the prejudice of the 
Engliſh. The object of your embaſſy, faid our 
philoſopher, is doubleſs very commendable ; but, 
Sir, you are a great raſcal : I do not like villany, 
and 1 have ſome intereſt at court: tremble, there- 
fore, for your proſperity is at an end; you will 
ſoon feel the puniſhment due to your crimes, C 
Moſt Noble Lord Candidus, ſaid Perigourdin, fall- 
ing on his knees, have mercy on me: I am dri- 
ven to wickedneſs by an irreſiſtible impulſe, in the 
fame manner as you are impelled to virtue. I per- 
ceived this fatal inclination the moment I was ac- 
quainted with Mr Walſp, and became a 7 


4214 


—— — 


22 CANDID US; or, Chap. 8. 


in the Feuille Feuilles | cries Candidus, 

what are thoſe ? They are, replied Perigourdin, _ 
certain pamphlets of feventy pages, in which the the 
public are periodically entertained with ſcandal, Ws 
fatire, and Billingſgate. It is an honeſt man, who FI 
having learned to read and write, and not being 7% 


able to continue Jeſuit ſo long as he could have pe 
wiſhed, ſet about this pretty little performance, in bir 
order to buy lace for his wife, and bring up his Ir 


children in the fear of God. There are alſo a ſet of 
honeſt gentlemen who for a few pence, and now and 
then a gill of bad wine, aſſiſt the other Hong man 

in carrying on his work. This Monſieur Walſp 

is a member of an extraordinary club, whoſe chief 
nmuſement is to make a few drunken people deny 
their God; or to affiſt ſome poor fool in ſpending 

his fortune, break his furniture, and then ſend 
him a challenge: theſe are no more than little 
gentilities, which theſe gentlemen call mi/tifications, 
and which nevertheleſs merit the notice of the po- b 
lice. In ſhort, this very honeſt Monſieur Walſp, 8 a 
who' denies his ever having been ſent to the galleys, * 

. is blefſed with a lethargy which renders him. inſen- p 
fle to the ſevereſt truth; and it is impoſſible to 2 


rouſe him but by certain violent means, which he 105 
endures with a magnanimity and reſignation be- oy 
yond all belief. I laboured ſome time under this 1 
celebrated author; I became famous in my turn, I 
and had juſt left Monſieur Walſp, with an intention 0 
to begin for myſelf, when I had the honour to pay 1 
my reſpects to you at Paris You are a vile 1 
rogue, ſaid Candidus; but your ſincerity moves y 
This one of the thirty or forty perigtical-papers printed at cr 
Paris. It is only known in France, where it meets with ſucceſa th 
amongſt all ranks. But theſe looſe ſheets of ſeventy-two'pages W. 

i} muſt not be mg with others, compriſed under the ſame ] 

| number of pages, wherein:the author is indulgent to himſelf; and . 

theſe papers, however, are much valued by philoſophers, . be 


"I... 
: : 


7 


ſed to condemn him only to perpetual bani 


Chap. 9. ALL FOR THE BEST. 27 


me. Go directly to court, and preſent yourſelf to 
the Right Reverend Ed-Ivan-Baal-Denk : I will 
write to him in your favour, on condition that 
you promiſe to become an honeſt man, and that 
you do not inſiſt on having thouſands of people 
murdered, for the ſake of a little filk and cotton. 
Perigourdin promiſed all that Candidus deſired of 
him, and they parted friends. a 


enn, 
Candidus's diſgrace, travels, and adventures. 


Erigourdin was- no ſooner arrived at court, 
than he uſed all his art to gain the miniſter, 
and ruin his benefactor. He reported that Candi- 
dus was a traitor, and that he had ſpoken diſre- 
ſpectfully of the ſacred: whiſkers of the king of 
kings. It was the general opinion of the courtiers, 


2 


that he ought to be roaſted at a ſlow fire; but the 


Sophi, with more humanity, was 1 

ent, 
after having kiſſed. the ſoles of his accuſer's feet, 
according to the cuſtom of Perſia. Perigourdin 
ſet out in order to put this ſentence in execution: 


he found our philoſopher in tolerable health, and 


almoſt diſpoſed to renew his happineſs. My dear 
friend, ſaid the Engliſh ambaſſador, with the ut- 
moſt regret I come te%aequaint you, that you 
muſt quit this kingdom with all poſſible expedi- 


tion, and alſo that you: muſt kiſs the ſoles of my 


feet with ſincere contrition, for the enormous 
crimes of which you have been guilty. — Kiſs 


the ſoles of your feet] cried Candidus; upon m 
word, Mr Abbe, you carry your jokes too far: 


I do not comprehend you. He had ſcarce ſpoken: 


before the mutes, which attended Perigourdin 


entered the room, and immediately took off his 
l | ſhoes, 


24 CAN DID US, or; Chap. 9. 
ſhoes. He was then told, that he muſt either ſub- 
mit to this humilation, or be impaled. Candidus, 
in virtue of his free agency, kiſſed the Abbe's 
feet. They clothed him in a robe of coarſe can- 
vas, and the hangman drove him out of the city, 
crying aloud, — He is a traitor! he has ſpoken diſ- 
reſpectfully of the Sophi's whiſkers, even of the 
whiſkers of the great king | 
But what was the officious Cenobite doing, 
whilſt his favourite was thus diſgraced ? I really 
cannot tell. Poſſibly he was grown weary of pa- 
tronizing Candidus. Who can depend on prieſts 
or princes | 
In the mean time, our hero trudged forrowfull 
along. I never in my life, ſaid he to himſelf, 
ſpoke of the king of Perſia's whiſkers. I am fall- 
en at once from the pinnacle of fortune into the a- 
byſs of miſery, becauſe I am accuſed, by a wretch, 
who has violated all laws, of a crime which I ne- 
ver committed; and this fellow, this perſecutor of 
virtue — is happy. 
Candidus, after ſeveral days march, found him- 
ſelf on the borders of Turky. He directed his 
ſteps towards Propontis, being determined to fix 
ere once” more, and to ſpend the remainder of 
is life in cultivating his garden. In paſſing 
through a ſmall town, he obſerved a multitude of 
people gathered together. He inquired the cauſe 
of this effect. Tis a.yery odd affair, anſwered an 
old man: you muſt know, that, ſome time ago, 
the rich Mehemet.obtained in marriage the daugh- 
ter of the Janiſary Zamoud : he found her not a 
virgin, and very naturally, according to law, cut 
off her noſe, and ſent her back to her father. Za- 
moud, enraged at the affront, as was quite natu- 
ral, in the firſt tranſport of his fury, cut off the 
head of his disfigured daughter, at one ſtroke of 
his ſcimitar, His eldeſt ſon, who had a great at- 
to N fection 


Chap. 9. ALL POR THE BIST. 28 


fection for his ſiſter, which you know is natural 
enough, in the violence of his paſſion, very natu- 
rally plunged a dagger into his father's breaſt ; then 
like a lion, whoſe rage increaſes at the fight df his 
own blood, the young Zamoud flew to the houſe 
of Mehemet, and having killed half a dozen flaves 
who oppoſed his entrance, he murdered Mehemet, 
his wives, and two children in the cradle; after 
which he put an end to his own life with the dag- 
ger, yet reeking with the blood of his father, and 
of his enemies, which, you know, was zlſo quite 
natura}.———.-Q horrible? cried Candilus. TF- 
Maſter Panglofs ! if theſe barbarities are natural, 
would you not confeſs that nature ts corrupted, 
and that all things are not — No, replied the 
old man; the pre-eſtabliſhed harmony. 
heavens! cried Candidus, am I deceived? Are 
you not Pangloſs himſelf? Tis even fo, ſaid the 
old man; I knew you at firſt, but I had a mind 
to penetrate into your ſentiments before I diſcover- 
ed myſelf, Come, let us reaſon a little upon con- 
tingent effects: let me fee what progreſs you have 
made in the ſchool of wiſdom. Truly, Maſter 
Pangloſs, ſaid Candidus, you time it very ill: in- 
form me rather what is become of Cunegonda, 
and where is Friar Girofflee, Paquette, and the 
daughter of Pope Urbag. I know nothing of the 
matter, replied Pangloſs; 'tis now two years ſince 
L left our habitation in ſearch of you. I have tra- 
yelled over all Furky, and was now going ſto the 
court of Perſia, where, as I was informed, you 
had made your fortune» I remained in this' town 
among thefe good people, only to recover a little 
1 in order to purſue my journey. What do 
L ſee ! ſaid Candidus in aſtoniſhment. You have 
loft an arm, my dear Pangloſs. That's nothing 
at all, replied Pangloſs; there is nothing more 
common than to fee people with but one eye and 


One 


26 CAN DID Us; or, Chap. 10. 


one arm in this beſt of worlds. The accident 
happened in my journey from Mecca. Our cara- 
van was attacked by a troop of Arabs; and as our 
eſcort made reſiſtance, the Arabs being ſtrongeſt, 
according to the laws of war maſſacred us all. 
There periſhed in this affair about five hundred 
people, among whom were about a dozen women 
with child. For my part, I eſcaped-with only a 
cloven ſcull, and with the loſs of an arm. ou 
ſee I am ſtill living, and have always found that 
every thing was for the beſt, But you yourſelf, 
my.dear Candidus, how happens it that_you have 
a wooden leg? Candidus then related his adven- 
tures. * Our philoſophers returned to Propontis, a- 


muſing themſelves as they went along with reaſon- 


ing on phyſical and moral evil, on free-will and 
predeſtination, on onades and pre-eſtabliſhed har- 
mony. 


Sr.. 


The arrival of Candidus and Pangloſs in Propontis, 
what they ſaw there, and what became of them. 


| 0 * dear Candidus, ſaid Pangloſs, why did 
* 


grow weary of cultivating your garden * 
Why could not we be content with our preſerved 
citron, and piſtachio nuts? Why were you tired 
of being happy? Why, . becauſe all things are ne- 
ceſſary in the beſt of worlds, it was therefore re- 
quiſite that you ſhould. undergo the baſtinado in 
the preſence of the king of 22 that you ſhould 


have your leg cut off to make the Suſians happy, 
to try the ingratitude of mankind, and to draw 
down puniſhment upon the heads of ſome villains 
who deſerved to ſuffer. Thus converſing, they 
arrived at their old habitation. The firſt objects 
which ſtruck their eyes, were Martin and Pa- 

9 quette, 


Chap. 10. ALL FOR THE BEST. 


quette, in the habit of -ſlaves. Whence comes 
this ſtrange metamorphoſe ? ſaid Candidus, ten- 
derly embracing them. Alas! they replied, figh- 
ing, You have no longer a place of abode ; ano- 
ther is ,intruſted with the cultivation of your gar- 
den; he eats your preſerved citron and piſtachio 
nuts, and ufes us like negrozs. Who is this o- 
ther? ſaid Candidus. Tis, ſaid they, the gene- 
ral of the marine, the leaſt humane of all human 
beings. The Sultan, willing to reward his ſervi- 
ces, without being at any expenſe, confiſcated all 
your poſſeſſions, under pretence that you were 
ole over to his enemy, and condemned us to 
Lava, Believe me, Candidus, added Martin, 
and proceed on your journey. I have always told 
you, that every thing is for the worſt ; the ſum of 
evil greatly exceeds the ſum of good; depart, and 
[ do not deſpair of your becoming a Manichean, it 
you are not one already. Pangloſs was going to 
argue in form; but Candidus interrupted him by 
inquiring after Cunegonda, the old woman, Friar 
Girofee, and of Cacambo. Cacambo is here, 
replied Martin; he is now buſy in cleaning the 
common ſewer. The old woman is dead of a kick 
in the breaſt which was given her by an eunuch. 
Friar GiroMee is entered among the Janiſaries. 
Madam Cunegonda is grown fat apain, and has 
recovered her former beauty; ſhe is in our ma- 
ſter's ſeraglio. What a firing of unhappy wretch- 
es! ſaid Candidus. Was it neceſſary that Cune- 
gonda ſhould recover her beauty to make me a 
cuckold ? It is of little importance, ſaid Pangloſs, 
whether Madam Cunegonda be handſome or ug- 
ly; whether ſhe is in your arms, or in thoſe of an- 
other; it makes no difference in the general ſy- 
ſtem: for my part, I wiſh her a numerous poſteri- 
ty. Philoſophers never concern themſelves b 
whom women have children, provided they have 


; C 2 them 


28 "C ANDID U.S; or, Chap. II, 


them at all, Population Alas, ſaid Martin, 


philoſophers had much better employ themſelves 


in contributing to the happineſs of a few individu- 
als, than undertake to multiply the ſuffering ſpe- 
Cles. While they were ſpeaking, they heard a 
great noiſe. *T was the genpral who had ordered 
a dozen ſlaves to be flogged for his amuſement, 
Pangloſs and Candidus terrified, left their friends, 
with tears in their eyes, and haſtily took the road 
to Conſtantinople. | 

Here they foundevery body in an uproar ; the fire 
began in the ſuburbs of Pera: it had already con- 
ſumed five or {ix hundred hpuſes, and two or three 
. thouſand people had periſſſed in the flames. What 
a ſhocking diſaſter | cried Candidus. All for the 
beſt, aid Pangloſs: theſe little accidents happen 
every year. It is very natural that fire ſhould 
catch wooden houſes, and that thoſe houſes ſhould 
durn. Beſides, it delivers many honeſt people from 
a miſerable ex iſtence What do I hear? ſaid one 
of the officers of the Sublime Port. How, wretch 
dareſt thou ſay it is all for the beſt, when half Con- 
ſtantinople is on fire? Go, dog, curſed prophet, 

receive the puniſhment due to thy preſumption, 
Th ſaying theſe words, he took Pangloſs by the 
middle, and threw him headlong into the flames, 
Candidus, half dead with fear, crept, as well as 
he could, into a neighbouring quarter, where 
things were more quiet z and what became of him, 
we {hall ſee in the next chapter. 


R 


Candidus continues his journey; and in what ca- 
| pacaty. * 


— 


Have now no other courſe to take, ſaid our 
I philoſopher, than to ſell myſelf for a flave, or 
turn 


b Chap. 11. ALL FOR THE BEST. 2 19 
ly turn Turk. Happineſs has abandoned me for e- 
'S, yer. A turban would corrupt all my pleaſures, 


N I feel myſelf incapable of enjoying peace of mind 
al in a religion full of impoſture, and which I ſhould © 
never embrace but from the baſe motive of inter- 
0 eſt, No, I ſhall never be content if I ceaſe to be 
an honeſt man: I will therefore become a flave. 
bg No ſooner had Candidus taken this reſolution, than 
d he determined to put it in practice. He fixed up- 
on an Armenian merchant for his maſter: his cha- 


re racter was very good, and he was reputed to have 
n as much virtue as an Armenian could poſfibl 
ce have. This Armenian was ready to ſail ſor Nor- 
at way: he took Candidus with him, hoping that a 
he philoſopher might be ſerviceable to him in his 
en trade. They imbarked, and the wind was fo fa- 
er vourable to them, that they made their paſſage in 
| 


half the time which is generally required. T hey 
my had no occaſion to purchaſe a wind of the Lapland 


ne magicians, and therefore thought it ſufficient: to- 
h give them ſome trifle, that they might not inter- 
n rupt their good fortune by their witchcraft ; which 
et, fometimes happens, if one may believe Moreri's 
he dictionary. | 


As ſoon as they were landed, the Armenian 


es. made his market of whale-blubber, and ordered 

a8 our philoſopher to traverſe the country in ſearch 

wee of dry fiſh. He acquitted himſelf of his commiſ- 

IM, ſion as well as he could, and was returning with a 
number of rein- deer loaded with this commodity,. - * 
reflecting deeply on the amazing difference which L.; 
he diſcovered between the Laplanders and other TY 
men, when he was accoſted by an extreme little 

* Laponeſe. Her head was rather larger than the . 
reſt of her body, her eyes red and fiery, her noſe —_ 
flat, and her mouth reached from ear to ear: ſhe Hi 

ou did bim good morrow, with the moſt engaging 9 

_ ait imaginable, My dear little Lord, faid this a- | 


C 3 nimal, i 


. 
0 


30 'CANDIDU 8; or, Chap. 12. 


nimal, who herſelf was but one foot ten inches 
high, you are exceedingly charming; be ſo kind 
as to love me a little. So ſaying, fe threw her 
arms about his neck. Candidus puſhed her from 
him with inexpreſſible horror. She cried out; her 
huſband advanced, accompanied by a number of 
his countrymen. What is the meaning of this 
noiſe ? ſaid. they, Tis, ſaid the little animal, on- 
ly this ſtranger alas! I cannot ſpeak for 
grief; he deſpiſes me. TI underſtand you, ſaid the 
huſband. Impolite, uncivil, brutal, infamous, cow- 
ardly raſcal, thou haſt brought ſhame upon my 
houſe; thou haſt done me the greateſt injury ; 
thou haſt refuſed to lie with my wife. Is the man 
mad? ſaid our hero. What would you have ſaid, 
had I Jain with her? TI ſhould have wifhed you 
all manner of proſperity, ſaid the enraged Lapland- 
er; but thou deſerveſt my utmoſt indignation. So 
ſaying, he exerciſed his ſtick upon the ſhoulders of 
Candidus without mercy. The rein-deer were 
ſeized by the relations of the affronted hufband ; 
and Candidus, fearing worſe treatment, was obli- 
ved to betake himſelf to his heels, and evermore 
to renounce his good maſter ; for he durſt not ap- 
pear before him without money, without fiſh, and 
without rein-deer. 


4 SL 
C HAP. III. 


Caundidus continues his journey. New adventures, 


NAndidus ſtrolled a long time, without even 
knowing whither he would go: he deter- 
mined, at laſt, to make the beſt of his way to 
Denmark, where, he had heard, things went well. 
He found himſelf poſſeſſed of ſome little money, 
which e "cy had given him; and, with 
this weak ſuppord, he hoped to accompliſh his 
| | 1 Journey. 


Ll 
— 


1 


— —_— 


12 AO A hk 


" oh uv ts ond 


= od mos . . Sweat PTY 


Chap. 12. ALL FOR THE BEST. Js 


journey. This hope kept up his ſpirits, and de 


ſtill enjoyed ſome happy moments. He chanced, 
one day, to meet, in an inn, with three travellers, 
who were talking with earneſtneſs of a plenum, and 
materia ſubtilis. Right, ſaid Candidus to himſelf, 
theſe are philoſophers. Gentlemen, ſaid he, as to. 
the plenum, it is inconteſtable: there is no vacuum. 
in nature, and the materia ſubtilis is well imagined,. 
Then you are a Carteſian, ſaid the travellers. 
Yes, ſaid Candidus ; and, what is ſtill more,.I am: 
a Leibnitzian. So much the worle for yourſelf, 
replied the philoſophers. Deſcartes and Leibnitz 
had not common ſenſe. As for us, we are New- 
tonians, and we glory in the diſtinction: if we. 
diſpute, it is only to ſtrengthen our own ſenti- 
ments, for we are all of the ſame mind. We 
ſeek the truth upon Newtonian principles, becauſe 


we are convinced that Newton. is a great man. — 


And ſo is Deſcartes, ſo is Leibnitz, ſo is Pangloſs, 
ſaid Candidus: theſe are great men worth all the 
others. You are very impertinent, friend, replied 
the philoſophers. Are you acquainted with. the 
laws of refrangibility, of attraction, and of motion? 
Have you read Doctor Clarke's refutation of your 
Leibnitz? Do you know what is meant by the 
centrifugal. and centripetal force ? Do you know 
that colours are formed by denſity? Have you any 
notion of the theory of light, and of gravitation? 
Are you ignorant of the period of 25, 920 years, 


which unfortunately does not agree with chro- 


nology? No; I warrant, your ideas of all theſe 
things are falſe and imperfect: learn to keep f1- 
lence therefore, for a pitiful Menade as you are; 
and be careful. how you affront gentlemen, by 
comparing them with pigmies. Gentlemen, faid 


Candidus, if Pangloſs was here, he would teach 


ou ſurpriſing things, for he is a great philoſopher : 
be has an abſolute contempt for your 2 
| and, 


— 


Fo — — — — 


—— ̃ —— 


— 


"2 CANDIDUS; or, Chap. 12. 


and, as I am his diſciple, Newton is no great fa- 

vourite of mine. The philoſophers, quite enraged, 
fell upon Candidus, and our poor hero was drub- 
bed moſt philoſophically. 

Their wrath appeaſing, they begged the hero 
pardon for their raſhneſs; then one of them began 
to ſpeak, and made a yery beautiful diſcourſe on 
mildneſs and moderation. 

During this converſation there happened to paſs 
by a very pompous funeral, whence our philoſo- 

. took occaſion to comment on the ridiculous 
vanity of mankind. Would it not, ſays one of 
them, be much more rational for the relations and 

friends of the deceaſed to carry, without pomp, 
the corpſe upon their own ſhoulders ? Would not 
the mournful employment more effectually excite 
the idea of death, and produce the moſt ſalutary 

And philoſophical effect? Would not this reflection 
naturally ariſe? This body which T carry is that of 
my friend, my relation; he is no more, and, like him, 
I muſt ceaſe to _ Might not ſuch a cuſtom, in 
ſome meaſure, diminiſh the crimes committed in 
this unhappy world, and reclaim beings which be- 
hevein the ſoul's immortality? Mankind are but 
too Willing to keep the thought of death at a di- 
ſtance, that we ſhould be afraid of reminding them 
of their mortality too often. Why are not the 
weeping mother or huſband preſent at this folem- 
nity? The plaintive accents of nature, the pier- 
eing cries of deſpair, would do more honour to 
the aſhes of the dead, than all thoſe ſable mutes, 
and that ftring of clergy, jovially ſinging pſalms 

which they do not underſtand. —— It is well ſaid, 
replied Candidus: if you did but always talk in 
this manner, without beating people, you would 
be a great philoſopher. FO NE 

Our travellers ſeparated with marks of mutual 
confidence and friendſhip. Candidus, ſteering His 

| courſe 


> 


wt. rnd. as a ms Om a> od tw Am > tas ans kin paw tne SS ens > tes nin. 4 Ao > OY 


om SI we Wwe . Tr” ws " wr T7 wc. wad & wc rt 


me * 


1 


— 43%: ts a Aa. 


3 


f — 


Chap. 12, ALL FOR THE BEST. 33 
courſe towards Denmark, ſoon ak himſelf in 


the middle of a wood: in ruminating on the miſ- 


fortunes which had befallen him in this beſt of 
worlds, he had loſt his way. The day had con- 
ſiderably declined when he-perceived his miſtake, 
His courage failed, and ſorrowfully lifting his eyes 
to heaven, our hero, leaning againſt a tree, ex- 
preſicd himſelf in. the following words: I have tra- 
verſed half this globe; I have ſeen fraud and ca- 
lumny triumphant: my ſole intention has been to 
be ſerviceable to mankind, yet I have been con- 
ſtantly perſecuted. A great king honours me with 
his favour, and the baſtinado. I am ſent to a de- 
lightful province, but with a wooden leg: there I 
taſted pleaſure after my misfortunes. An abbe ar- 
rives,. and I protect him: by my means he inſi- 
nuates himſelf at court, and I am obliged to kiſs 


the ſoles of his feet. I meet my poor Pangloſs 


again, only to ſee him burnt. I ſtumble upon a 
company of philoſophers, a ſpecies of animals the 
mildeſt and moſt ſociable of any that are ſpread 
upon the face of the earth, and they beat me moſt 
unmercifully. Yet all muſty be right, becauſe 
Pangloſs faid ſo; nevertheleſs I am the moſt mi- 
ſerable of all poſſible beings. - 

His meditations were ſuddenly interrupted by 
piercing cries, which ſeemed not far off. His curio- 


ſity led him on. He beheld a young woman tear- 


ing her hair in the moſt violent agitation of de- 
ſpair. Whoſoever you are, ſaid ſhe, if you have 
a heart, follow me. He followed her, and the 
firſt object he beheld was a man and a woman ex- 
tended on the graſs: their aſpect beſpoke the ele- 
vation of their minds and their diſtinguiſhed origin; 
their features, though disfigured by grief, expreſſ- 
ed ſomething ſo intereſting that Candidus ſympa- 
thiſed in their ſorrows, and could not help eagerly 
inquiring the cauſe of their misfortunes. * 
3 aid 


. F 


* 


_ - deſerve. Strike! 


2  CANDIDUS; or, Chap. 12. 


ſaid the young woman, are my parents; yes, they 
are the authors of my unhappy being, continued 
ſhe, throwing herſelf into their arms. They were 


forced to fly to avoid the rigour of an unjuſt ſen- 


tence: I attended them in their flight, and was 
contented to ſhare their misfortunes, in hopes that I 
might be of ſome ſervice in procuring nouriſhment 
for them in the deſert we were going to enter. 
We ſtopt here to repoſe a while, and unhappily 
diſcovering that tree, I was deceived in its fruit, 
O Sir! I am a moſt horrid criminal! Arm your- 
ſelf in defence of virtue, and puniſh me as I 
That fruit ] gave it to 
my parents; they eat of it with pleaſure: I re- 
Joiced that I had relieved them from the torment 
of thirſt, Unhappily, I preſented them with death: 
the fruit is poiſon. 
Candidus ſhook with horror; his hair ſtood up- 
right; a cold ſweat-covered his whole body. He 
immediately did all in his power to affiſt this 
wretched family; but the poiſon had already made 
fo much *progreſs, that the beſt antidote would 


now have been ineffectual. Dear, dear child, 


our only hope and comfort! ſaid the expiring pa- 
rents, * thyſelf; we ſincerely forgive thee; 
it was thy exceſſive tenderneſs which deprives us 
of life —— O generous. ſtranger | be careful of 
our daughter: her heart is noble and formed for 
virtue: it is a treafure Which we commit to thy 
care, infinitely more precious than our paſt for- 
tune. Deareſt Zenoide, receive our laſt em- 
braces ; mix thy tgars with ours. O heaven, what 
_ delightful moments are theſe! Thou haſt opened 
to us the door of the comfortleſs dungeon, in which 
we have lived forty tedious years. We bleſs thee 
with our laſt breath, praying that thou ma 


never forget the leſſons which our prudence dicta- 
ted; and that they may preſerve thee from the 
3 5 danger 


| 


* 


os ICS Ch Om 


Chap. 12. ALL FOR THE Ber, 35 


danger to which thou wilt neceſlarily be expo- 
ſed ! p41 6. 3j HSE 
Pronouncing theſe words, they expired. Can- 
didus had great difficulty. to bring Zenoide to 
herſelf. The ſolitude of the place, and the pale 
light of the moon, rendered the melancholy ſcene 
ſtill more affecting. The day began to dawn be- 


fore Zenoide recovered the uſe of her ſenſes. She 


no ſooner opened her eyes, than ſne deſired Candi- 
dus to dig a hole to inter the bodies: even ſhe her- 


ſelf aſſiſted with aſtoniſhing reſolution. This duty 


being diſcharged, ſhe gave vent to her tears. Our 
philoſopher perſuaded her to quit this fatal ſpot ; 
and they walked along for ſome time, without 
knowing whither they went. At length they per- 
ceived a little cottage, which was inhabited-by an 
old man and his wite, who, in the midſt of this 
deſert, were always ready to render all the ſerviee _ 
in their power to their diſtreſſed brethren. This 

couple were, in fact, what Philemon and Baucis 
are ſaid to have been. They had enjoyed the 


ſweets of Hymen, forty years, without one bitter 


draught. Conſtant health, the produce of tempe- 
rance and tranquillity; a pleaſing ſimplicity of 
manners; an exhauſtleſs fund of candour in their 
diſpoſition ; all the virtues for which man is in- 
debted to himſelf alone, compoſed the happy lot 
which heaven had been pleaſed to grant them. 
They were held in great veneration in the neigh- 
bouring hamlets, whoſe inhabitants, happy in their * 
1 might have paſſed for very honeſt people, 

if they had been Catholics. They conſidered it as 
their duty to ſupport Agaton and Suname, (ſuch 
were the names of this old couple); and they now 
extended their charity to the two ſtrangers,” Alas 
ſaid Candidus, what pity it was that you, my poor 
Pangloſs, were burnt: 1 know you were quite 
right; but it was not in thoſe parts of * 
N lay 


| 7 
CANDIDUS; or, Chap. 13. 
Aſia, ' which we traverſed together, that all is for 
the beſt: it is in Eldorado, which it is impoſfible 
to reach; and in a little cottage, fituated in the 
coldeſt, the moſt barren, and the moſt diſmal 
country in the whole world. What pleafure 
mould I have had to hear you, in this cabin, talk 
of pre- eſtabliſned harmony and monades / I ſhould 
like to ſpend the reſt of my days among theſe ho- 
neft Lutherans; but it would oblige me to-re- 
nounee going to maſs, and expoſe me to the laſh 
of the Journal Cbretien. i e 

Candidus was very anxious to know the adven- 
tures of Zenoide. Modeſty hindered him from 
inquiring. She obſerved him, and fatisfied his 


ampatience by the following narrative, 
7 


CHAP. XIII. 


The flory of Zemide. — How Candidus became ena- 
| moured with her, and the conſequences. 


AM deſcended from one of the moſt ancient 


' houſes of Denmark: one of my anceſtors pe- 
riſhed in that place where the wicked Chriſtiern 
eauſed ſuch a number of ſenators to be put to 
death. The accumulated riches and honours of 
my family ſerved only to render their misfortunes 
more illuſtrious. y father had the boldneſs to 
diſoblige a man in power, by ſpeaking the truth; 
he fuborned falfe accufers, who charged him with 
feveral imaginary crimes. The judges were de- 
ceived: Alas! what judge can always avoid the 


fnares which calumny ſpreads for innocence? My. 


father was condemned to loſe his head on a ſeaf- 
fold. Flight only could preferve him, and he 
took refuge with a friend, one whom he thought 
worthy of this amiable appellation, We continu- 
ed ſome time concealed: in a caſtle on the mn 
2 | whic 


»* | 
* 
** 2 
hv * 
2 
8 * 
* 
5 


a. . sm „0 „„ Y 


Chap. 13. ALL ron THE BEST. 35 8 2 


which belonged to him; and here we might have © 
been till ſecure, if the cruel wretch, taking ad 
vantage of our deplorable fituation, had not exact- 
ed a price for his friendſhip, which made us con- 
ſider him with deteſtation. The infamous crea- 
ture had conceived a violent paſſion for my mother 
and me: he made an attempt on our virtue by 
methods unworthy of a gentlemaft, and, to avoid 
the effects of his brutality, we were obliged to ex- 
poſe ourſelves to the moſt frightful dangers: we 
betook ourſelves. to flight a ſecond time, and you 
* know the reſt. Here Zenoide finiſhed her rela- 
n tion, and fhe began to weep afreſn. Candidus 
ig dried up her tears, and faid, in order to comfort 
her: It is all for the beſt, my dear Miſs; for, if 
your father had not been poiſoned, he would; moſt 
infallibly, have been diſcovered, and they would 
| have cut off his head: your mother would have 
2 died of grief, perhaps; and we ſhould not now be 
in this poor cottage, where all things axe much 
better, than in the moſt charming caſtlè imagi- 


91 err 


. 3 RN 2 . — 
— bn 


nt nable. Alas! Sir, replied Zenoide, my father ne 

e- WW yer told me that all was for the beſt. We all be- 

rn long to one God, who loves us; but he will not 

to exempt us from the devouring cares, the cruel | 
of diſtempers, the innumerable evils to which human 
les nature is liable. In America, poiſon and the bark | 
to grow cloſe to each other. The happieft of mor- 

h; tals has ſhed tears. A mixture of pleaſures and 

ith pain conſtitutes what we call life; that is to ſay, 

le- a determined ſpite of time (always too long in the 

the opinion of wiſdom), which ought to be employed 


wy. in being uſeful to the ſociety of which we art mem- 


A bers, to rejoice in the works of the Almighty, 
he without foolifhly inquiring into their cauſes ; A. 
ght regulate our conduct upon the teſtimony of our 
Fu eonſcience; and, above all, to zeſpect our reli- 
Ire, | | _ gion: 
ich 


5 * 
he FE 
—_— CY 2 
811 * W 
tt : 


35 A N DID US; or, Chap. 13. 


gion: happy if we could always obſerve its pre- 
cepts 8 . | 

In this manner have I heard my honoured father 
frequently ſpeak. What preſumptuous wretches, 
would he ſay, arg thoſe raſh ſcribblers who ſeek 
to penetrate into the ſecrets of the Almighty ? On 
the principle, that God expects to be honoured 


by the numberleſs atoms to whom he has given ex- 


iſtence, mankind have united ridiculous chime- 


ras, with the moſt reſpectable truths. The Der- 
viſe among the Turks, the Bramin in Perſia, the 
Bonze in China, the Talapoin in India, all wor- 
ſhip the Deity in a different manner; nevertheleſs 
they enjoy peace of mind, though bewildered in 
obſcurity ; thoſe who would endeavour to diſpel 
the miſt, would do them no ſervice ; he cannot be 
ſaid to iove mankind, who would remove their 
prejudices. a „„ 
You ſpeak like a philoſopher, ſaid Candidus: 
may I preſume to aſk you, my deareſt young lady, 
of what religion you are. 1 was brought up a 
Lutheran, replied Zenoide ; it is the religion of 
my country. Every thing you ſay, continued 
Candidus, is a ray of light which penetrates my 
ſoul: you fill me with eſteem and admiration. — 
Ho is it poſſible that ſo much ſenſe ſhould inha- 
Shit ſo fair a body? Indeed, my dear Miſs, I love 
And admire you to ſuch a degree Candidus 
ſtammered out ſomething more; but Zenoide, 
perceiving his confuſion, retired: from that mo- 
ment, ſhe avoided all occaſions of being alone 
with him, and Candidus ſought every opportunity 
of being either alone with her, or entirely by him- 
ſelf. He was ſeized with a melancholy, which, 
however, was not unpleaſing: he was violently in 
love with Zenoide, yet endeaveured to diſſemble 
his paſſion ; but his looks betrayed the ſecret of 
his heart. A ſaid he, if Pangloſs was here, 


7 
= 


* 


r a as ad ce. 


— 


Py — 2 > —B 2 — 


re 


buy 


4 


Chap. 14. ALL For THE BesrwT, 39 

he would give me good advice, for he was a great 

philoſopher. ; * 
r | 
: C H:A P. XIV. | | 
; Continuation of Candidus's amour. N 
— {Andidus was forced to be content with the ö 


„ poor conſolation of converſing with the 1 
[= beautiful Zenoide in the preſence of the old man 4 
je and his wife. And was it poſſible, ſaid he one if 
r- day to the miſtreſs of his heart, that the king, 1 
ls whom you were allowed to approach, could pe- 3 


mit ſuch a flagrant act of injuſtice to your family? 
You have great reaſon to hate him. Alas! re- 
plied Zenoide, who can hate their king ? 

Who can avoid loving him who is intruſted with 
the glittering blade of the law? Kings are the 
viſible images of the Deity; we ought never to 
condemn their conduct: obedience and reſpect are 
the duties of good ſubjects. I admire you more 
and more, anſwered Candidus : pray, Miſs, are 
you acquainted with the great Leibnitz, and the 
great Pangloſs, who was burnt, after having e- 
ſcaped hanging? Do you know the manades, the 
materia ſubtilis, and the vortices? No, Sir, faid 
Zenoide ; my father — any of theſe 
things; he gave me only a ſlight notion of expe- 
rimental philoſophy, and taught me to deſpiſe e- 
very kind of philoſophy which did not directly 
tend to promote the happineſs of mankind; which 
inſpires him with falſe notions of his duty to him- 
ſelf and to his neighbour; which does not teach 
tim how to regulate his manners; which ſerves 
only to fill his mind with unintelligible words, and 
raſh” conjeCtures ; which cannot give a clearer idea 
of the author of our being, than that which we 
form from his works, and the miracles which are 

W 92 daily 


— 


4 
4 


= 
96 wy * 
apt tenet. O2 — 
. 


— 


„ Cc AN DID us; e, Chap. 14. 


daily perſormed before our eyes. Upon my 
word, Miſs, ſaid Candidus, 1 admire you beyond 
expreſſion ; I am inchanted; I am raviſhed ; you 
are certainly an angel ſent from heaven to confute 
the ſophiſms of Mafter Pangloſs. Ignorant animal 
that I was! After having endured a prodigious 
number of kicks on the backſide, of ſtripes acrcſs 
my ſhoulders, of ſtrokes with a bull's pizzle on 
the ſoles of my feet; after having felt an earth- 
quake; after having been preſent at the hanging 
of Doctor Pangloſs, and lately ſeen him burnt a- 
live; after having been ignominiouſly uſed by a 
vile Perſian ; after having been plundered by order 
of the diven, and drubbed by a company of phi- 
Joſophers; notwithſtanding all this, I believed 
that all was for the beſt; but I am now entirely 
undeceived. Nevertheleſs, nature never appeared 
to me ſo beautiful as fince I have beheld you. The 
rural cencerts of birds ſtrike my. ears with a har- 
mony, to which, till now, I was quite inſenſible. 
All nature blooms, and the beauty of your ſenti- 
ments ſeems to animate every object. I feel none 
of that voluptuous languor which I experienced in 
my garden at Sus; the paſſion you inſpire, is quite 
different. Forbear, ſaid Zenoide, left you offend 
that delicacy which you ought to reſpect. I will be 
filent then, ſaid Candidus,but that will only aug- 
ment my paſfi6n.. He looked earneſtly at Zenoide, 
as he pronounced thefe words; he perceived that 
ſhe bluſhed, and. thence, like a man of experience, 
he conceived. the moſt flattering hopes. | 
The young Dane continued for ſome time to 


Mun her lover. One day as he was. walking, ha- 


ſtily in the garden, he cried out in a tranſport ef 
love, O that I had but my Eldoradonian ſheep! 
Why am I not able to buy a little kingdom ! 


What would you make me ? ſaid a voice that ſhot 
through. the heart of our philoſopher. Is it you, 
ly. charming 


©, a - a 2 © 44> a THe Bo WET $cos To 


charming Zenoide? ſaid he, falling upon his 
knees at her feet, I thought myſelf alone. The 
few words you ſpoke ſeemed to flatter my hopes. 
I ſhall never be a king, and poſſibly never ſhall be 
rich; but if I were beloved by you O do not 
turn away thoſe charming eyes, but let me read in 
them a confeſſion which alone can make me hap- 
py. Beautiful Zenoide, I adore you: for heaven's 
ſake be merciful. Ah! what do I ſee? You 
weep. Gods, I am too happy. Yes, ſaid Ze- 
noide, you are happy; nothing obliges me to 


conceal my ſenſibility from a perſon who deſerves 


it. Hitherto you have been attached to my deſti- 


ny by the ties of humanity only: it is now time to 


ſtrengthen our union with more holy bonds. I 


have deliberately conſulted my own heart; do you 
alſo maturely reflect, and above all things remem- 
ber, that by marrying me you engage to become 


my protector; to ſoften and participate the miſeries 
which fate may ſtill have reſerved for me. Marry 
you? ſaid Candidus; theſe words have at once o- 
pened my eyes, and ſhewn me the imprudence of 
= conduct. Alas] ſweet lady, I am unworthy: 
of your goodneſs :: Cunegonda is yet living 


| Cunegonda, who is ſhe? My wife, replied Can- 


didus, with his uſual ingenuity. 

Our lovers ſtood ſilent for ſome moments; they 
would have ſpoken, but the words expired upon 
their lips: their eyes ſwam in tears. Candidus 
held both her hands in his; he preſſed them to his 
heart ; he devoured them with: kifſes. He had the 
courage to- touch her heaving breaſt, and found 
that ſhe breathed with. difficulty. His ſoul roſe up 


to his lips, which by preſſing thoſe of Zenoide, 


brought her to herſelf. Candidus thought he 
ſaw his pardon written in her eyes. Dear Candi- 
dus, ſaid ſhe, my diſpleaſure would but ill repay 
thoſe tranſports which my heart in ſpite of me ap- 

D 3 proves. 


Chap. 14. ALL FOR THE BEST. 4 


p 


42 CAN DID Us; or, Chap. 15. 


proves. Vet hold; you will tuin me in the opinion 
of mankind, and you will ceaſe to love me when I 
am become the object of their contempt. Stop 
then, and reſpect my weakneſs, What! faid 
Candidus, becauſe the ſtupid vulgar ſay that a girl 
is diſhonoured in making her lover happy in fol- 
- © Jowing the generous dictates of nature, which in 
the early ages of the world 
We ſhall not relate all this intereſting conver- 
ſation ; we ſhall content ourſelves with ſaying that 
Candidus's eloquence, embelliſhed by the expreſ- 
ſions of love, had all the effect that he could ex- 
pe, on a young and tender-hearted female phi- 
loſopher. 
Our lovers, who had hitherto paſſed their time — 
in diſquietude and affliction, were now continual- 
ly intoxicated with pleaſure. The ſilence of the 
foreſt, the mountains covered with brambles and 
ſurrounded with precipices; the frozen waters, and 
barren fields with which they were environed, 
ſerved but to perſuade them of the neceſſity of 
love: they reſolved never to quit this frightful ſo- 
litude; but deſtiny was not yet weary of her per- 
ſecutions, as we ſhall ſee in the next chapter. 


g 
— ai - p 
A — - * 
* — — 
= Fx 


"ER * 4 6 
* 4 Ss \ my * 
Fol I 


- PR — 3 - N — — _ = \ — 3 
* - 1 — 5 — 2 — g — = 
1 „ nit d Er — N * o bal 
* — >. . — — a — 2 . — 
* - Y : — MC * 5 8 y * 
— Sree = gre V2" r 5 EAA 2 we” G 6 4 — — 2 „ — an 2-8 2 S & 
— * A LY << * 
— — SS 2 —.— ů — — — —- Ra . ¾¹⁰m!ẽ²˙ů aan -; 4 * — . —ö——— — — = 
— F b . n 1 
” 1-4 En 2 4 + E 4 
» * 
. , 


N n 
_ : 


Kn 


r 
The arrival of Volball. Journey to Copenhagen. 


Andidus:andg his miſtreſs amuſed themſelves 

with reafoning on the works of the Creator, 
on the worſhip due to him from mankind, on the 
duties of ſociety, more eſpecially on charity, which, 
of all other virtues, is the moſt uſeful to our fel- 
low creatures. They were not content with vain 
declamations : Candidus taught youth to reſpect 
the ſacred reſtrictions of the law, and Zenoide in- 
ſtructed young maidens in their duty to their pa- 
a rents; 


5 * do. wn Mat 
45 - oo" 
__ 2 — 


— — 


* 0 
VD * # * * 
4 _ 
— — — 
— — —— 


—— 
4 3 
— <A 


r iy: 


A 
a 


-_ . 
- — —ä—œ 


— 


Chap. 15. ALL FOR THE BEsrT. 43 


rents; they united their endeavours to ſow the 
prolific ſeeds of __ in juvenile minds. One 


day as they were buſied in this pious employment, 
Suname acquainted Zenoide, that an old gentle- 
man, with ſeveral attendants, was juſt come, and 
inquired for a perſon, who, ſhe was convinced by 
his deſcription, could be no other than the beauti- 
ful Zenoide. The gentleman who followed her 
cloſe, entered almoſt at the ſame inſtant. 

Zenoide fainted away as ſoon as ſhe ſaw him; 


but Volhall, unmoved at this affecting ſight, took 


her by the hand, and dragged her with ſo much 
violence that ſhe came to herſelf ; but it was only 
to ſhed a torrent of tears. It is very well, niece, 
faid he, with a ſevere ſmile, I have caught you in 
fine company ; no wonder you ſhould prefer it to 
the capital, to my houſe, and to your own family. 


Yes, Sir, *replied Zenoide, I prefer the habitation 


of truth and candour to that of treachery and im- 
poſture. I ſhall never behold, without horror, the 
place where my misfortunes began, where I have 
had ſuch convincing proofs of your baſeneſs, and 


where you are the only relation I have. No mat- 


ter, Miſs, replied Volhall, you ſhall follow me, 
if you pleaſe, though you were to have another fit. 
So ſaying, he dragged her along, and put her into 
a Chaiſe. She had but juſt time_to bid Candidus 
follow her, to bleſs her kind hoſt and hoftefs, pro- 


miſing to reward them for their generous hoſpita- 
lity. 


One of Volhall's ' ſervants, being moved with | 


Candidus's affliction, and believing he had no o- 
ther intereſt in the young lady than what virtue 


in diſtreſs might inſpire, adviſed him to take a 


journey to Copenhagen. He told him, he could 


probably get him admitted into Volhall's family, 


if he had no other reſource. Candidus accepted 
his offer, and being arrived, his future comrade 
| preſented 


44 CANDIDUS; or, Chap. 16. 
preſented him as a relation for whoſe fidelity he 
would anſwer. Maraut, ſaid Volhall, I conſent: 
you ſhall have the honour of waiting en a man of 
my rank and diſtinction ; but be careful always to 
pay an implicit obedience to my will : anticipate 
my commands if you are endowed with ſufficient 
penetration: remember that a man of my diſtinc- 
tion degrades himſelf by converſing with ſuch a 
wretch as you. Our ohilofopher * with great 
ſubmiſſion to this impertinent harangue, and that 
very day he was dreſſed in his maſter's livery. 

One may eaſily imagine Zenoide's aſtoniſhment 
and joy, when ſhe recollected her lover among 
her uncle's ſervants. She gave him all the oppor- 
tunities ſhe could, which Candidus judiciouſly 
improved to their mutual ſatisfaction. They vow- 
ed an eternal conſtancy; nevertheleſs Zenoide was 
far from being quite oy : ſhe ſometimes condem- 
ned her paſſion for Candidus, and would now and 
then afflict him for amuſment; but Candidus 
adored her; he knew that perfection did not fall 
to the lot of man, much lefs of woman. Zenoide 
recovered her good humour in his arms; the con- 
ſtraint they were obliged to obſerve increaſed their 
enjoy ment, and they were yet happy. 


How Candidus found his wife again. How he bt 


His nitreſs. 
UR hero had no hatdſhip to bear but the 


haughtineſs of his maſter, and this was not 
purchaſing at too dear a rate the fayours of his 
miſtreſs. Happy lovers cannot eonceal their paſ- 
ſion ſo eaſily as is generally imagined ; they ſoon 


betrayed: their own ſecret; heir c nnection was 


no longer a myſtery to any one in the houſe, ex- 
| x cept 


* 
0 1 1 _—_— R — ” Ts a 


a 
„ 


* 
. » 7 wo 


Chap. 16. ALL FOR THE BEST. 45 


cept to Volhall himfelf. Candidus was honoured 
with felicitations that made him tremble ; he ex- 
pected the ſtorm which was about to burſt over his 
head, and was in no doubt that the perſon who 
had been ſo dear to him, was upon the point of 
accelerating his misfortunes. | 
For ſome days paſt Candidus had obſerved a wo- 
man, wile ace bore a ſtrong reſemblance to that 


of Cunegonda]: he now ſaw her again in the court- 


yard, but her garb was mean; beſides, there was 
not the leaſt probability that the favourite miſtreſs 
of a rich Mahometan ſhould appear in the court- 
yard of an inn at Copenhagen. Nevertheleſs, this 


diſagreeable object fixed her eyes on Candidus 


with great attention. She now precipitately ap- 
proached, and faluted him with the moſt violent 
box on the ear he ever received in his life. I was 


not deceived, cried our philoſopher; O heavens, 
who could have thought it! What buſineſs have 
| you here, after ſuffering yourſelf to be raviſhed by 


a Mahometan? Go, perfidious ſpouſe, I know no- 
thing of you. "Thou ſhalt know me by my fury, 
ſaid Cunegonda. I know all thy wicked courſes, 
thy intrigue with thy maſter's niece, thy contempt 
of me. Alas! it is three months ſince 1 was turn- 
ed out of the ſeraglio, becauſe I was no lon 
uſeful. A merchant bought me to mend his linen, 
and having occaſion to make a Voyage to theſe 
parts, brought me along with him. Martin, Ca- 
cambo, and Paquette, whom he alſo purchaſed, 
are of the party. Doctor Pangloſs alſo, by the 
greateſt chance imaginable, was a paſſenger in the 
ſame ſhip: we were caft away a few miles from 
hence; I eſcaped with honeſt Cacambo, whoſe 
fleſh, I aſſure thee, is as firm as thine; and I have 
found thee again to my forrow, for thy infidelity 
is manifeſt. ' Tremble therefore, and dread the 
vengeance of an injured woman, 
| Candidus 


44 CANDFDU:'S; or, Chap. 16. 


pe. * 


o 


Candidus was ſo ſo ſtupified with this moving 
ſcene, that he ſuffered Cunegonda to depart with- 
out conſidering how neceſſary it is to keep terms 


with thoſe who are in our ſecrets, when all at once 
Cacambo preſented himſelf to his view. They 


tenderly embraced. Candidus inquired into the 


truth of what he had heard, and was extremely 
afflicted for the loſs of the great Pangloſs, who, 
after having been hanged and burnt, was moſt 


miſerably drowned. He ſpoke of him with that 
effuſion of heart, which true friendſhip inſpires. A 


Billet which Zenoide threw out of the window, put 
an end to their converſation. Candidus opened it, 
and read as follows: b 1 
„ Fly, my dear lover, every thing is diſcovered. 
An innocent and natural inclination, which does 
no injury to ſociety, is a crime in the eſtimation 


of credulous and cruel men: Volhall has this mo- 


ment left my chamber, after treating me with the 
utmoſt inhumanity : he is gone to obtain an order 
to have you immured in a dungeon. Fly, there- 
fore, my dear, dear lover, and fave. a life which 1 
am no * ſuffered to enjoy. Thoſe happy days 
are paſt, when our mutual tenderneſs — Ah 
wretched Zenoide, what haſt thou done to deſerve 
the wrath of heaven | But I wander: O do not 
forget = dear Zenoide. Dear Candidus, thy 
image will 

No, thou never knew how much I loved thee. — 
Oh that thou couldſt receive from my burning lipo, 
my laſt farewell, and my laſt ſigh ! I feel that 1 
am ready to follow my unhappy father : I hold the 


never be effaced from my heart. 


world in abhorrence ; it is all treachery and guilt.” 
Cacambo, always retaining his wiſdom and 


prudence, drew along with him Candidus, who 


had loſt all the power of his ſenfitive faculties. 
They went, by. the ſhorteſt way, out. of the city. 
Candidus did not open his- mouth; and they had 

| | got 


3 


At 
ny. 
- 


Chap. 179. ALL FOR THE BEST. 


Wo 
got at a pretty conſiderable diſtance from Copen- 
hagen, before he was rouſed from his lethargy ;- 


but, at laſt ſtaring on his faithful Cacambo, he 
ſpoke what follows. | 


CHAP. XVI. 


How Candidus intended to kill himſelf, and did not 
effeftuate it. What happened to, him in an inn. 


Ta Cacambo, formerly my ſervant, now my 
equal and always my friend, thou haſt parta- 
ken fome of my misfortunes, thou haſt given me ſa- 
lutary advices, thou haſt ſeen my love for Miſs Cu- 
negonda. Alas ! my dear old Maſter, faid Cacam- 
bo, it is ſhe who played you this moſt baſe trick. 
Being informed by your companions, that you. 
was as deep in loye with Zenoide, as ſhe was with 
ou, ſhe revealed the whole ſcene to the barbarous 

Volball. Since this is the caſe, ſaid Candidus, 
death is my only refuge. Our philoſopher then 
taking a penknife out of his pocket, began to 
whet it with a compoſure worthy of an ancient 
Roman, or of an Engliſnman. What do you 
mean? ſaid Cacambo. To cut my throat, ſaid 
Candidus. An excellent thought, replied Cacam- 
bo; but wiſdom ſhould never determine, till after- 
mature deliberation: the means of death will be 
always in your own power, if you continue in the 
ſame mind. Be adviſed, my dear maſter, and put 
it off till to-morrow ; the longer you defer it, the 
more courageous will be the action. I like thy 
reaſoning, Bid Candidus ; beſides, if I ſhould cut 
my throat now, the gazetteer of Trevoux would 
inſult my memory: it is then determined, I will 
not cut my throat for this two or three days at 

leaſt, Thus converſing they arrived at Elſineur, 
a pretty conſiderable town, at a little diſtance from 
: | Copenhagen : 


\ 


43 CANDIDUS, or; Chap. 1. 
Copenhagen: here they reſted that night, and Ca- 
cambo applauded himſelf for the good effect which 
ſleep had produced in the mind of Candidus. 
They took their leave of this town at break of 
day; and Candidus, always a philoſopher, for the 
prejudices of youth are not eaſily effaced, enter- 
tained his friend Cacambo with a diſſertation on 
moral and phyſical good, with the diſcourſes of 
the wiſe Zenoide, and the true lights he had recei- 
ved from her learned converſation. If Pangloſs 
was not dead, faid he, I would confute his ſyſtem 
beyond contradiction. God preſerve me from be- 
coming a Manichean. My dear miſtreſs has 
taught me to reſpect the impenetrable veil by 
which the _ chuſes to eonceal his deſigns from 
mankind. Perhaps man himſelf is the cauſe of the 
misfortunes. under which he groans: fruit-eaters 
are become carnivorous animals. The ſavages we 
have ſeen devour only the Jeſuits, yet they. live in 
perfect harmony among themſelves ; and thoſe 
*which, by chance, are ſcattered through the de- 
ſert, ard feed only upon roots and herbs, are cer- 
- tainly happy. Society has given birth to the moſt 
hainous erimes. There are people, whoy from 
their ſituation, ſeem as it were obliged to deſire 
the death of their fellow- creatures. The ſhip- 
wreck of a veſſel, the burning of a houſe, and the 
loſs of a battle, is the — of grief to-ſome, 
and of joy to others, Things go very ill, my dear 
Cacambo, and a wiſe man has nothing to do but 
to cut his throat as gently as poffible? "You are in 
the right, ſaig:Caeambo; but I perceive an inn, 
you muſt be thfiſty; come, my old maſter, let us 
take a glaſs, and then we will proceed in our phi- 
loſophical diſquiſitions. 2 
They entered the inn, where a croud of pea- 
ſants were daneing in the middle of the court, to 
the ſound of very bad inſtruments. A — 
- «4 Mi (a 


Chap. 17. ALL Fox The BEST. 49 


ſmile ſat on every face: it was a picture worthy 
the pencil of Vatau. As ſoon as they perceived 
Candidus, a young girl took him by the hand, in- 
treating him to dance. My ſwect laſs, replied 
Candidus, when a man has loſt his miſtreſs, found 
kis wife, and but juſt heard of the death of the 
great Pangloſs, he can have no inclination to cut 
capers : beſides, I intend to kill myſelf to-morrow 
and you know, when a perſon has but a few hours 
to live, he ſhould not waſte his time-in dancing. 
Cacambo then advanced, and expreſſed himſelf 
in the following mgnner : Great philoſophers have 
always had a paſilon for glory. Cato of Utica 
killed himſelf after having ſlept ſoundly ; Socrates 
ſwallowed hemlock after 1 with 
his friends; ſeveral Engliſhmen have blown out 
their brains after coming from an entertainment: 
but I have never heard of any great man who cut 
his throat after dancing. No, my dear maſter, 
this glory is reſerved for you. Let us dance our 
bellies full to-day, and we will kill ourſelves to- 
morrow. Doſt thou not obſerve, replied Candi- 
dus, that pretty lively wench ? There is ſomething 
vaſtly ſtriking in her countenance, ſaid Cacam- 
bo. She ſqueezed my hand, replied our philoſo- 
pher. Did you take notice, ſaid Cacambo, of her 


little round breaſts, when her handkerchief flew. . -_- 


back as the was dancing? Yes, I obſerved them 
well, faid Candid: if my heart was not full of the 
charms of Miſs Zenoide But the little black 
girl interrupted Cacambo, and again beſought him 
to dance. Our hero was at laſt perſuaded, and 
danced with the genteeleſt air imaginable. He 
then embraced the pretty peaſant, and retired to 
his ſeat without aſking the queen of the ball to 
dance. Immediately · there was a confuſed mur - 
mur; both the actors and ſpectators were ſhocked 
at ſuch a manifeſt — Candidus was igno- 
Sour rant 


50 CANDID-US; or, Chap. 18. 


rant of his fault, and therefore could make no a- 
pology. At length a great clown came forward, 
and gave him a flap in the face, which was return- 
ed by Cacambo with a kick in the belly. The in- 
ſtruments were ſcattered about in an inſtant, the 


women loſt their caps. Candidus and Cacambo 
behaved like heroes ; but they were forced to be- 
take themſelves to their heels, though quite crip- 
pled. with the blows they had — Bins 

I am very unlucky, ſaid Candidus, leaning on 
his friend 
misfortunes, but I never expected to have had my 
bones broke for dancing with a®peaſant at her own 
requeſt. 1 


| CHAP. XVII. 


 Candidus and Cacambo retire to an hoſpital. Adven- 
ture there. 


Acambo and his quondam maſter were unable 
| to proceed ; they began to give way to that 
malady of the ſoul which deſtroys all its faculties, 
dejection and deſpair : when looking up, they eſpi- 
ed an hoſpital built for travellers. 8 en- 
tered, and Candidus followed him; they were 
treated in the manner in which people are gene- 
rally treated for the love of God. Their wounds 
were ſpeedily healed; but they both got the itch, 
which was not to be cured in à few days. This 
idea drew tears from the eyes of our philoſopher, 
and, ſcratching himſelf, he ſaid, O my dear Ca- 
cambo, why didſt thou hinder me from cutting my 
throat? Thy pernicious counſel hath plunged me 
again into diſgrace: and misfortune : if I ſhould 
now cut my throat, they would ſay, in the Jour- 
nal of Trevoux, He was a coward ; he killed him- 
ſelf becauſe he had the itch, See to a 
7 5 ha 


* 


Fa 


acambo; I have experienced great 


BL_end io co. 


Den- 


Chap. 17. The OPT IMIS r. 51 


nary beauty, and drawn with great ſwiftneſs, by; 
large red ſheep, which for fleetneſs ſurpaſſed the 
fineſt horſes of Andaluſia, Tetuan, or Mequinez. © 

This certainly,“ ſaid Candidus, is. a better 
country than Weſtphalia.” He and Cacambo got 
on ſhore near the firſt village they came to. "The 
very children of the village were dreſſed in gold 
brocades, all tattered, playing at quoits at the en- 


trance of the town. Our two travellers from the 
other world amuſed themſelves with Jooking at 


them. The quoits were made of lache round 


pieces, yellow, red, and green, and alta ſur- 
priſing light. Our travellers hands itched pro- 
digiouſly to be fingering ſome of them: för they 
were almoſt certain, that they were either gold, 
emeralds, or rubies, the leaſt of which would have 
been no ſmall ornament to the throne of the Great 
Mogul. To be ſure,” ſaid Cacambo; '* theſe 
mull be the children of the king of the country, 
diverting themſelves at quoits.“ The maſter of 
the village coming at that inſtant to call them to 
ſchool: * That's the preceptor to the Royal fa- 


. mily,? cried Candidus. 


The little brats immediately quitted their play, 


f leaving their quoits and other playthings behind 


them. Candidus picked them up, run to the ſchool- 
maſter, and preſented them to him with. a great 
deal of humility, aequainting him, by ſigns, that 


their Royal Highneſſes had forgot their gold and 


jewels. The walter of the village ſmiled, and flung 
them upon the ground; and having ſtared at Can- 
didus with ſome degree of ſurpriſe, walked off. 

Our travellers did not fail immediately to pick 
up the gold, rubies, and emeralds. '« Where are 
we got to now?“ cried Candidus. The princes 
of the blood muſt certainly be well educated here, 
ſince they are taught to make ſo light of gold and 
Jewels,” Cacambo was as much (arpriſed as Can- 


xv S p 
. 
* 5 


be * * ** 
CRF 
#3 


_ 


52 CANDIDU S; or, Chap. 17. 
didus. At length they drew near to the firſt houſe 
in the village, which was built like one of our Eu- 
Fopean palaces. There was a vaſt croud of people 
at the door, and ſtill a greater within, They heard 
very good mulic, and their noſtrils were ſaluted by 
a moſt refreſhing ſmell from the kitchen, 

Cacambo went up to the door, and heard they 
were ſpeaking the Peruvian language, which was 
his mother-tongue ; for every one knows that Ca- 
cambo was born at Tucuman, in a village where 
they make uſe of no other language. I'll be your 
interpreter, maſter, maſter,” cries Cacambo, in the 
greateſt raptures, this is an inn; in with you, in 
with you.” 0 

Immediately two waiters and two maids that be- 
longed to the houſe, dreſſed in cloaths of gold 

tiſſue, and having their hair tied back with ribands, 
invited them to fit down to table with the landlord. 
They ferved up four ſoups, each garniſhed with two 
parroquets, a large diſh of bouille, that weighed a- 
bout two hundred weight ; two apes roaſted, of an 
excellent taſte, three hundred humming-birds in 

one plate, and fix hundred fly - birds in another; to- 
gether. with exquiſite ragouts, and the moſt deli- 
cious tarts, all upon plates of a ſpecies of rock- 
cryſtal, After which the lads and maids ferved 
them with a great variety of liquors made from the 
ſugar-canes. N 

I be gueſts were moſtly tradeſmen and carriers, 

all extremely polite; who aſked ſome queſtions of 
Cacambo with the greateſt diſcretion and circum; 
ſpection, and received as ſatisfaftory anſwers, ... 
When the repaſt was ended, Cacambo thought, 
as well as Candidus, to diſcharge their e 
by putting down two of the large pieces gf gole 
which they had picked up. But the landen aud 
landlady burſt out into a prodigious kt of langhing, 
and could not reſtrain it for ſome time. , Recover- 


4. » 


2 . 
. . 
* 1 w 

- 2 


Sa 4 


Chap. 16. The O PTIM IST. 33 


ing themſelves at laſt » « Gentlemen,” ſays the 
landlord, we can ſee pretty well that you are 
ſtrangers ; we are not-much uſed to ſuch gueſts here, 


Pardon us, if we fell a- laughing, when you offered 
us the ſtones of our highways in diſcharge of your 


reckoning. It is plain you have got none of the 
money of this kingdom; but there is no octafion 
for it, in order to dine here. All the inns, whieh 
are eſtabliſhed for the conveniency of trade, arg 
maintained by the government. You have had but 
ſorry entertainment here, becauſe this is but 'a poor 


village; but any where elſe you will be ſure to be 


received in a manner ſuitable to your merit.“ 
Cacambo explained the hoſt's ſpeech to Candi- 


dus, who heard it with as much aſtoniſhment and 


wonder as his friend Cacambo interpreted it. What 
country can this be,” faid they to each other,“ whick 
is unknown to the Teſt of the earth, and of ſo dif- 
ferent a nature from ours? It is probably that 
country where every thing is right; for it is neceſ- 
ſary that there ſhould be one of that fort. And for 
all Doctor Pangloſs has ſaid, I could not help ta- 
king notice many a time that things were very bad 
at * ” | 


G B.A.F; -.. £YOL 
What they faw in the country of Eldorado. 


Acambo could not conceal his curioſity from 

his landlord, “For my part,” faid the land- 

lord to him, „ am very ignorant, but not the 
worſe on that acepunt: but we have an old man 


here, who has retired from court, and is reckoned 


both the wiſeſt and the moſt communicative perſon 
in the kingdom.” And ſaying this, without | 
more ado, he conducted Cacambo to the old man's 
Faun 8 acted now only a ſecond character 


4. E 3 . | in 
N 4 % p - + —_ 
b 9 — N q N > , N 


4; © who are inſpired with an inconceivable rage forthe 


„% CANDIDUS; & Chap. 18. 
in the play, and followed his ſervant. They en- 
tered into a very plain houſe 5 for the door was no- 

+ - thing bot ſilver, and the eeilings nothing but gold, 
but finiſhed with ſo much taſte, that the richeſt 


 ecilings of Europe could not ſurpaſs them. The 
anti-chamber- was indeed only covered with rubies 


dad emeralds, but the order in which every thing 


wes arranged, made amends for this great fim- 

plieity. 58 : 

The old gentleman: received the two ſtrangers on 
a ſopha ſtuffed with the feathers of humming-birds, 
and ordered them to be ſerved with liquors in veſſels 
of diamond; after which he ſatisfied their curioſity 

in the following manner. \ 

I am now in my hundredth and ſeventy-ſecond 
year; and I have heard my deceaſed father, who 
was groom to his Majeſty, mention. the ſurpriſing 
revolutions of Peru, of which he was an eye · wit · 
neſs. The kingdom we are in at preſent, is the an- 
cient country of the Incas, who left it very indiſ-. 
ereetly in order to conquer one part of the world; 
inſtead of which, they themſelves were all deſtroyed 
dy the Spaniards. 5 | 

The princes of their family who. remained in 
their native country, were more wiſe ; they made 

a law, by the unanimous, conſent of the whole na- 

tion, that none of our inhabitants ſhould ever go 

out of our little kingdom; and it is owing to this, 
that we have preſerved both our innocence and our 
happineſs. The Spaniards have had ſome confuſed 
idea of this country, and have called it EI Dorado; 
and an Engliſnman, named Sir Walter Raleigh, has 
likewiſe. been on our coaſts aboye a hundred years 
age: but as we are ſurrounded: by inacceſſible 
 _ Fotks and precipices; we have always been hitherto 
heltered from the rapacity of the European nations, 


ſtones and dirt of our land, and who, to poſſeſs 1 
805 „ _-. Jeives 


— 


+. 


cheap The OP TLMIST. 55 
ſelves of them, would murder us all, to the very: * 


man, C 


| Their conference was pre | long, and turned. | 
at, their mannets, 
their women, their public ſhews, and their arts, 


At laſt Candidus, who had always a taſte for meta- 


upon the form of their gover 


phyſics, bid Cacambo aſk, if there was any reli- 


gion in that country? 


The old gentleman reddening a little, How is 


it poſſible,” ſaid he, © that you ſhould queſlion it? 


Do you take us for ungrateful wretches ? ? Ca- 
cambo then humbly aſked him, what the religion 
of Eldorado was? This made the old gentleman 
redden again. 


gion of the whole world; we worſhip the Deity 
from evening to morning.” © Do you worſhip, but 


one God?“ ſaid Cacambo,” who ſtill ated as in- 


terpreter in repreſenting Candidus's doubts. You 
may be ſure we do,” ſaid the old man; © ſince it 
is evident there can be neither two, nor three, nor 
four. I muſt confeſs, that the people of your 
world propoſe very odd queſtions?” Candidus was 
not yet wearied in interrogating the good old man: 
he wanted to know how they prayed to God in El- 


dorado. © We never pray at all, ſaid the good 


“Can there be more religions than 
one?“ ſaid he: We profels, 1 believe, the reli - 


reſpectable ſage ; & we have nothing to aſk of him: 


he has given us all we need, and we inceſſantly re- 
turn him thanks.“ | 


Candidus had a curiolity to ſee their prieſts, and 
bid Cacambo aſk, where they were. This made 
the old gentleman ſmile. My friends,” ſaid he, 
<4 wwe are all of us prieſts; the King, and the heads 
of every family, ſing their ſolemn ſongs of thank 
giving every morning, accompanied. by five or ſix 
1 muſicians.” © What!” ſaid Cacambo, 


BE. have you no monks to preach, to diſpute, to ty- 
ranniſe, to ſet people together by the cars, nm os 


4 - IR LY 


56 CAN DID US; or, Chap. 18. 


thoſe burnt who are not of the ſame ſentiments as 
themſelves? ” „ We muſt be very fools indeed 
if we had,” ſaid the old gentleman ; - * we are all 
of us of the ſame opinion here, and we don't 
underſtand what you mean by your monks.” “ 
Candidus was in an ecſtaſy during all this dif. 
*. courſe, and ſaid to himſelf, © This place is vaſtly 
different from Weſtphalia, and my Lord the Ba» 
ron's caſtle. If our friend Pangloſs had ſeen Eldo- 
rado, he would never. have maintained, that 2 
upon earth could ſurpaſs the caſtle of Thund 
tronckh. It is plain every body ſhould travel?**- 
After this long converſation was finiſhed; we 
good old man ordered a coach and fix ſheep to be 
got ready, and twelve of his domeſtics to conduct 
the travellers to the court. © Excuſe me,” ſays he 
to them, © if my age deprives me of the honour 
of attending you. The King will receive you in a 
manner that you will not be diſpleaſed with; and 
vou will, I doubt not, make allowance for the eu- 
ſtoms of the country, if you ſhould meet with 
any thing that you diſapprove of.” ; 

Candidus and Cacambo got into the coach; ; the 
ſix ſheep flew, and in leſs than four hours they | 
reached the King's palace, which was ſituated at 
one end of the metropolis. The gate was two hun- 
dred and twenty feet high; and one hundred broad; 
it is impoſſible to deſcribe the materials i it Was com- 
poſed of. But one may eaſily gueſs, chat it muſt 
have prodigiouſly ſurpaſſed thoſe Ranes- and the land 
which we call gold and jewels. - 

Candidus and Cacambo, on their aligbting frat 
the coach, were received by twenty maids of ho- 
nour, of an exquiſite beauty, who conducted them 
to the baths, and ꝓreſented them with robes made 
of the down of the humming birds; after which 

the great officers and their ladies introduced them 
into "bis Majeſty's apartment, between two rows of 
| eh mulicians, 


SS 7 


Chap. 18, The OP TIMIST. 37 
muſicians, conſiſting of a thouſand in each, accor- 


ding to the cuſtom of the country. 
When they approached the foot of the throne, 


Cacambs aſked one of the great officers, in what 


manner they were to behave when they went to pay 
their reſpects to his Majeſty, whether they were to 
fall down on their knees or their bellies ; whether 
they were to put their hands upon their heads or 
upon their backſides; whether they were to lick up 
the duſt of the room; and, in a word, what the 


ceremony was? The cuſtom is,” ſaid the great 


officer, “to embrace the King, and kiſs him on 
e both ſides.” Candidus and Cacambo according- 
ly claſped his Majeſty round the neck, who re- 
ceived them in the moſt polite manner imaginable, 
and very genteelly invited them to ſup with him. 

In the interim, they ſhewed them the city, the 
public edifices, that reach almoſt as high as the 
clouds, the market-places embelliſhed with a thou- 
ſand columns; fountains of pure water, beſides 
others of roſe water, and the liquors that are ex- 
tracted from the mn which played inceſ- 
ſantly in the ſquares, which were paved with a kind 
of precious ſtones, that Fuſe a fragrance hke 
that of cloves or cinnamon. Candidus aſking them 
to ſhew them one of their courts of juſtice, and 
their parliament-houſe ; they told bim they had 
none, and that they were ſtrangers to lawsſuits. 
He then inquired if they had any priſons, and was 
told they had not. What ſurpriſed him moſt, and 
gave him the greateſt pleaſure,” was the palace of 
ſciences, in which he ſaw a gallery of two thoufand 
paces, full of inſtruments for making experiments 


in philoſophy. 


After having gone 9055 about a thouſandth part 
of the city in the afternoon; they were reconducted 
to the palace. Candidus ſeated himſelf at table with 


ladies. 


10 . his valet . and à great many 


: 8 8 45 | f | 


ladies. Never was there a better entertainment ſeen ; 
and never was more wit ſhewn at. table, than what 
his . Majeſty diſplayed. Cacambo interpreted the 
King's repartees to Candidus ; and though they were 
tranſlated, they appeared repartees ſtill : A thing 
which ſurpriſed Candidus more than any thing elſe, 
They ſpent a whole month in this hoſpitable 
manner. Candidus was continually ſaying to Ca- 
cambo, I muſt ſay it again and again, my friend, 
that the caſtle where I was born was nothing in 
compariſon of this country where we are now; but 
yet Miſs Cunegonda is not here ; and, without 
doubt, you have left a ſweetheart behind you in 
Europe. If we ſtay. where we are, we. ſhall be 
looked upon only like other folks; whereas if we 
return to our own world only with twelve ſheep © 
loaded with the pebbles of Eldorado, we ſhall be richer 
than all the kings put together; we ſhall have no 
need to be afraid of the inquiſitors ; and we may 
. eaſily recover Miſs Cunegonda.” | | 
Ik, his propoſal was extremely agreeable to Cacam- 
bo; ſo Fo are we of running about, of making a 
figure among our countrymen, and of making o- 

' rations. on what we have ſeen in our travels, that 
theſe two really happy men reſolved to be no longer 
fo, and accordingly aſked his Majeſty's leave to de- 

4 « You are guilty of a very great weakneſs,” ſaid 
his Majeſty to them: © 1 am not ignorant that my 
country is a trifling place; but providing it be but 
paſſable, you had better ſtay in it. I muſt indeed 
confeſs, that 1 have no right to detain people of an- 
other nation ; it-is a degree of tyranny inconſiſtent - 
with our cuſtoms and laws; all men are free + yo 
a; may go when you pleaſe; but you ought kill to 
as - be informed, that you cannot leave ùs without - 
203 4 ſome difficulty. It is impoſlible to go. againſt the 
current up the rapid river which, runs under wy | 
Nie: 5 don 


. 
: W 


e : 
Ti 4 4 
9 — - ” - 
6 
y 7 1 o 
, #$. 4%; 2 


Chap. 18. The OPTIMIST. "3d... 


rocks ; your paſſage hither was a kind of miracle. 


The mountains which ſurround my kingdom are a 
thouſand feet high, and as ſteep as a wall; they 
are at leaſt ten leagues over, and their deſcent is 
nothing but precipices. However, ſince you ſeem 
determined to leave us, I will give orders imme- 
diately to the conſtructors of my machines, to 
contrive one to tranſport you with the greateſt eaſe. 
When they have conveyed you to the other ſide of 
the mountains, no one muſt attend you; becauſe 
my ſubjects have made a vow never to paſs beyond 
them, and they are too wiſe to break it. There is 
nothing elſe you can aſk of me, which ſhall not be 
1 We aſk your Majeſty,“ ſaid Cacam- 
„very eagerly, „only a few ſheep loaded with 
proviſions, together with ſome of the common 
ſtones and dirt of your country.” 
The King ſmiled heartily : “I cannot,” faid he, 
« conceive what pleaſure you Europeans find in 
our yellow clay ; but you are welcome to take as 
much of it as you pleaſe, and rauch good may it 
do you? © | N 
He gave immediate orders to his engineers to 
eonſtruct a machine to hoiſt up and tranfport theſe 
two extraordinary perſons out of his kingdom, 
Three thouſand able mechanics ſet to work; and 
in a fortnight's time the machine was. completed, 


which coſt no more than twenty millions Sterling 


of their currency. e el 

Candidus and Cacambo were both placed in the 
machine, together with two large red ſheep bridlted 
and ſaddled for them to ride on, when they were 
got clear of the mountains; twenty ſheep of bur- 
den loaded with proviſions ; thirty with the greateſt 
curioſities of the country, by way of preſent 5 and 
fifty with gold, precious ſtones, and. diamonds. 
The King took his leave of our two - vagabonds, 
With the greateſt marks of affection. = th 


Ie 


Pn 


60 AN DIDus; or, 3 


It was a very fine ſight to ſee them depart, and 
e ingenious manner in which they and the ſheep 
Were ſlung over the mountains. The philoſophers 
took their leave of them, after having got them 
ſafe over; and now Candidus had no other deſire, 
no other aim, than to go to preſent his ſheep to 
Miſs Cunegonda. We have new got enough,” 
ſaid he, © to pay for the ranſom. of Miſs Cunegon- 
da, if the governor of Buenos-Ayres will but par 

with her. Let us march towards Cayenne, there 
take ſhipping, and then we will look out for ſome 


- favg kingdom to make a purchaſe of“ 


20-7 c H A P. XX. 


| What happened to them at 3 and how Can- 
didus got acquainted with Martin. 


HE firſt day's journey of our two travellers 

was vety agreeable, being elated with the i- 

dea of finding themſelves maſters of more treaſure 
Han Aſia, Europe, or Africa could ſcrape together. 
Candidus was-ſo tranſported, that he cut out the 


name of Cunegonda upon almoſt every tree that he 


came to. The ſec6nd day two of their ſheep ſunk 
in a moraſs, and were loſt with all that they car- 
ried : two others died of fatigue a few days after ; 
ſeven or eight died at once for want in a deſert ; 
and ſome few days after, ſome others fell down a 
recipice. - To be ſhort, after a march of one 
3 days, their whole ſtock amounted to no 
more than two ſheep. 
Says Candidus, then, to Cacambo, © My f End 
you ſee how periſhable the riches of this world.are; 
there is nothing durable, nothing to be depended 
on but virtue, and the happineſs of once more 
log Miss Cunegonda,” 4 I grant it,“ fuld ene 


| = 93. ae but we have ſtill two ſheep left, beſides 


re 


47 * 


Chap. 19. The OPTIMIST. Oo Mn 
more treaſure than ever the King of Spain was ma» s 
ſter of; and I fee a town a good way off that bY 
take to be Surinam, belonging to the Dutch. We * 
are at the end of our troubles, and at the beginning 
of our happineſs.” I” 


As they drew to the city, they ſaw a negro 
ſtretched on the — . one half of Ris 
habit, that is to ſay, having only a pair of drawers ' 
of blue cloth; the poor fellow had loſt his left | 
and his right hand. Good God !” faid Candidu 
to him in Duteh, * friend, what do you do here, 
in this terrible condition ?” I am waiting for 
my maſter Mynheer Vanderdendur, the great mer- 
chant,” replied the negro. © And was it Mynheer 
Vanderdendur that uſed you in this manner?“ faid 
Candidus. Yes, Sir,” ſaid the negro, . © it is the 
. cuſtom of the country. They give us a pair of li- 
nen drawers for our whole cloathing, twice a- year. 
If we ſhould” chance to have one of our fingers 
caught in the mill, as we are working in the ſugar» 
houſes, they cut off our hand; if we offer to row 
away, they cut off one of our legs; and I have had 
the misfortune to be found guilty of bath theſe 
charges. Such are the conditions on which you 
& eat ſugar in Europe! Tet, when my mother ſold 
- me for ten crowns of Patagon on the coaſt of Gui- 
nea, ſhe faid to me, My dear boy, bleſs our be- 
; nefactors, be always very dutiful to them, they 
a will make you live happily: you have the ho- 
e nour to be a ſlave to our ſords the whites, and will 
0 by that, means be in a way of making the for- 
tunes both of your father and mother. Alas! I 
d, do not know whether I have made their fortunes, 
but L am ſure they have not made mine. The dogs, 
2 monkeys, and parrots, are a thouſand times Teſs. 
. wre de than we. The Dutch miſſionaries Wo 


dE. © 
be 


* ed me, told me every Sunday, that we all 
les of Adam, both” blacks and whites. I am 
" N | F not 


- 


SL r oc Gre 
iY \ * . * * 4 


* 


62 c AN DID US; or, Chap. 19. 


not a groealogiſl myſelf; but if theſe preachers 
| ſpeak, the 
then you muſt own, that it is a ſhocking thing for 
them to uſe their relations in this barbarous man- 
—- a 
__ « Ah! Pangloſs,” cried Candidus, © you never 
dreamed of ſuch an abominable piece of villany ! 
there is an end. of the matter; I ſee I muſt at laſt 
renounce your optimiſm.” What do you mean 
by optimiſm?” ſaid Cacambo. © Why,” faid 
Candidus, © it is the folly of maintaining that eve- 
ry thing is right, when it is wrong.“ He then 
looked upon the negro, with tears in his eyes, and 
in that condition entered into Surinam. | 
The firſt thing they did here was, to inquire 
whether there was any veſſel in the harbour that 
might be hired for Buenos-Ayres. The perſon 
they applied themſelves to was no other than a Spa- 
niſh commander, who offered to make an honour- 


able bargain with them. He appointed to meet 


them at an inn, whither Candidus and the faithful 
Cacambo went to wait for him with their two 
ſheep. | : 

Candidus, who had his mind in his tongue, told 
the Spaniard all his adventures, and confeſſed. to 
bim that he was determined to run away with Miſs 
Cunegonda. © I ſhall take care how I carry you 
to Buenos-Ayres,. if that is the caſe,” - ſaid the cap- 


tain; © for I would be hanged, and ſo would you. 


The fair Cunegonda is my Lord's favourite mi- 
ſtreſs. ACRES | | 
This was a thunder-clap to Candidus ; he wept 
a long time; but at laſt, drawing,Cacambo aſide, 
J will tell you, my dear friend,” ſays he, © what 
T would have you da. We have each of us about 
five or ſix millions of diamonds in our pockets ;. and 
as you are a much cleverer fellow than I am, I 
would haye you go and fetch. Mi CNY from 


% 


truth, we are all couſin-germans; and 


Chap. 19g. The OPTIMIST. . 63 
Buenos-Ayres. If the Governor ſhould make any 
difficulties, give him a million of them; if that do 
no not ſueceed, give him two. As you did not 
murder the inquiſitor, they will have no ſuſpicion 
of you: in the mean time, I will fit out another 
veſſel, and go and wait for you at Venice; that is 
a ſafe place, and I need not be afraid there of Bul- 
garians, Abares, Jews, or inquiſitors.“ Cacambo 
cried up the wiſdom of this propoſal. He was 
indeed under great concern to leave ſo good 
a maſter, - who uſed him like a familiar friend; 
but the pleaſure of being ſerviceable to him ſoon 
got the better of the ſorrow he felt in parting with 
him. | | | 
They took leave of each other with tears ; Can- 
didus recommending to him at the ſame time not 
to forget their good old woman. The ſame day 
Cacambo ſet fail. ' This Cacambo was a very honeſt 
1 fellow. x f 
1 Candidus ſtaid ſome time at Surinam, waiting for 
another veſſel to carry him and the two ſheep which 
, remained to Italy. He hired ſervants, and purcha- 
1 ſed every thing neceſſary for a long voyage ; at laſt, 
| Mynheer Vanderdendur, the maſter of a large veſ- 
8 ſel, came and offered his ſervice. What will 
, you have,” ſaid he to our Dutchman, “ for carry- 


is ing me, my family, goods, and theſe two ſheep 
* you ſee here, directly to Venice?” The maſter of 
We the veſſel aſking ten thouſand piaſtres, Candidus 
* made no words, ; 

« Oh, ob,” ſaid the crafty Vanderdendur to him- 
pt ſelf, after he had left him, “ if this ſtranger can 
dey give {ix thouſand piaſtres, without making any 
hat words, me muſt be immenſely rich.” Returning a 
7 few minutes after, he let him know, that he could 
m not go for leſs than twenty thouſand. Well, 
1 you ſhall have them then,” ſaid Candidus. 
5 Nets Odſo'!” ſaid the — 18 with a low voice, 

Fi EN | 2 | 


this 
1 
„K 
* a L 


* | Aa. 


% 3" V. 1 * 


_ 


I. 


„% CANDIDUS; or, Chap 19 


4 this man makes no more of twenty thouſand pia- 
ſtres than he did of ten!” He then returned a ſe- 
cond time, and ſaid that he could not carry him to 
Venice for leſs than thirty thouſand piaſtres. V ou 
Mall have thirty thouſand then,“ replied Candidus. 
Ob, oh,“ faid the Dutch trader again to him- 
ſelf, “ this man makes nothing of thirty thouſand 
piaſtres, no doubt but the two ſheep are loaded 
with immenſe treaſures ; let us ſtand out no longer; 
let us however finger the thirty thouſand piaſtres 
fiſt, and then we ſhall ſee. 

Candidus ſold two ſmall diamonds, the leaſt of 
which was worth more than what the Captain had 
alked. He advanced him the money. The two 
ſheep were put on board the veſſel. Candidus fol- 
Jowed-in a fall wherry, intending to join the veſ- 
ſel in the road, But the Captain catched his op- 
portunity, unfurled his fails, unmoored, and met 
with a favourable gale. . Candidus, diſtracted and 
out of his wits, ſoon loſt ſight of him. Ab!” 
. ,cnied he, © this is a trick worthy of the old world.” 
He returned on ſhore overwhelmed with ſorrow; 
for he had certainly loſt more than would ſet up a 
{core of kings. 5 
Hie ran immediately to the Dutch judge; and as 
he was not quite maſter of himſelf, knocked very 
loud at the door; he went in, told his caſe, and 


TED e his voice a little louder than became him. 


The judge began with making him pay ten thou · 
and piaſtres for the noiſe he had made. After 

Which he heard: him very patiently, and promiſed 
to examine into the affair as ſoon as ever the trader 


. mould return, at the ſame time making him pay 
denn thouſand piaſtres as the expence of the . 
U !bis proceeding made Candidus ſtark mad. 


had indeed experienced misfortunes à thouſand 
times more affecting; but the coolneſs of the judge, 
and che knaviſh trick of the maſter of the 2 


oo 


* 


eee erg nn += 6, 


Chap. . The OP TIMIST 63 


who had robbed him, fired his ſpirits, and plutged * 


him into a profound melancholy. The. villany of 
mankind preſented itfelf to his mind in all its de- 
formity, nad he dwelt upon nothing but the moſt 


diſmal ideas. At laſt, a French veſſel being ready” * 


to ſail for Bourdeaux, as he had no ſheep loaded 
with diamonds to carry with him, he paid the com- 
mon price as a cabin- 


crier to give notice all over the city, that he would 


pay for the paſſage and diet of any honeſt man that | 


would go the voyage with him, and he would-give 


him two thouſand piaſtres beſides; on condition 


that he would make it appear, that he was the moſt 
diſſatisfied with his circumſtances, and the moſt un» 
fortunate perſon in that province. 


A vaſt multitude of candidates. preſented them · 


ſelves, enough to have manned a fleet. Candidus, 
deſirous to pick from among the beſt, marked out 
twenty, who ſecemed to him to have the beſt pre- 
tenſions, and to be the moſt ſociable. But as eve» 


ry one of them thought the preference due to him- 


ſelf, he invited them all to his inn, and gave them 
a ſupper, on condition that each of them ſhould 
take an oath, that he would rene, his adventures 
faithfully, promiſing to chuſe 


ſeemed to be the greateſt object of pity, and had 


the greateſt reaſon to be diſſatisfied with his lot, N 


and to give 4 ſmall preſent to the reſt; rn. 
cation for their trouble. 


The aſſembly continued 13ll four the bent morn- 
ing. As Candidus was employed in hearing.thelf = 


adventures, he coald not belp recollefting what the 
old woman had told bim in their voyage towards 


Buenos - Ayres, and the bargain the had made in 


caſe he met with a perſon in the ſhip; that 


upon Pangloſs at every incident that was v 
1% That Pangloſa,” adders {© would be hack putty 
1 this ſyſtem. I wiſh be was 2 


7 3 


— —— — ¹.mꝛ ES 


paſſenger, and ordered the 


at perſon bo 


Ad not eſteem bimſelf moſt miſerable. He * A 


> 9 
. & 8 % 4% 
„ 
n . 
* „* . * 


* 
. 
9 YT 9 
og f , 
i Py 
11 w _ 


* 
* 
* * 
* 
ys 1 
- R ＋ 4 8 5 1 < _— o A _ 
— { 7 & — 2 — 1 — - — 2 2 — — 2 — 
* r 
> » — — 
4 * * - — - pa " — + — - wm 
a 9 - > ”- - + hs 7 % I wy ” ” 4 1 1 — ky _ Py — _ 10 
* w*1 93 — 79 —— . 1 ® — 2 _ — - 
A a e * ow, N 4 = - = S . 7 * _ K — _ — 
WP wa Gd N - - a - * 1 7 0 1 — Dea * - ** — Hama + h 2 ” pm A 
\ - _ * K — 2 — By _ 3 8 5 a [4 _ * = = 
1 Pp A a - 1 
_ 


168 
1 
-- vo 


66 .CANDIDU'S; o, Chap 20. 


deed, if every thing is ordered for the beſt, it muſt 
be at Eldorado, but no where elſe on earth. At 
laſt, be determined in favour of a poor ſcholar, 
| who had wrote ten years for the bookſellers at 
Amſterdam. For he thought there could not be a 
more ente e on the face of the 
earth. 

This ſcholar, though in other reſpects a good 
fort of a man, had been robbed by his wife, beat 
by his fon, abandoned by his daughter, who got a 
Portugueſe to run away with her; had been ſtrip- 
ped of a ſmall employment, which was all he had 
to ſubſiſt on 5 and was perſecuted by the prieſts at 
Surinam, - becauſe they took him for a Socinian. 

It muſt indeed be confeſſed, that ſome of the o- 
ther candidates were at leaſt as unhappy as he; but 
he met with a preference, becauſe Candidus thought 
that a ſcholar would be the moſt proper perſon to 
divert bim during the voyage. All his competitors 
thought that Candidus did them a great piece of in- 
juſtice ;z but he foon convinced them to the contra- 
TY, by giving them a hundred piaſtres piece. 


ee OE oy *. : 
' What happened at fea to Candidus and Martin | 


HE old ſchotar, who was named Martin, im- 
barked for Bourdeaux along with Candidus 
They had both of them ſeen and ſuffered a great 
deal; and if the veſſel had been to ſail from Suri- 
nam to Japan, by the way of the Cape of Good 
Hope, they would have found enough to have en- 
tertained them on the ſubject of phyſical eng more 
evil during the whole voyage. 

Candidus, however, had one great advii over 
Martin, which was, that he ſtil} hoped to fee Mifs 
Conryonde ayala 5 dee fer TT be bad no- 


* WW 4 51 a& ching 


* - 
» - "I 


4a «i. — 


„ proce wes r .. 


q 
ö 
3 


Chap. 20 The OPTIMIST. 6 


thing to hope for : to which we may add, that Can 
didus had both gold and diamonds: and though he. 


had loſt a hundred large red ſheep loaded with the 


greateſt treaſure that the earth could produce, 


though the knavery of the Dutch captain was al- 


ways uppermoſt in his thoughts; yet when he re- 
flected upon what he had left in his pockets, and 
when he talked about Cunegonda, eſpecially to- 
wards the latter end of a hearty meal, he inclined. 


to Pangloſs's hypotheſis. 

„ But you, Mr Martin,” faid he to the ſcholar, 
« what is your opinion? what is your notion of 
moral and phyſical evil?” *© Sir,” replied Martin, 
« the prieſts have accuſed me of being a Socinian z 
but the truth is, I am a Manichean.” Lou are 


in jeſt ſure,” (aid Candidus; © there is not one 
Manichean in the world!“ “ am one though,” 


ſaid Martin; “I cannot well account for it, but 
yet I am not able to think otherwiſe.” The devil 
muſt be in you then,” ſaid Candidus. He con- 
cerns himſelf ſo much in the affairs of this world,” 
ſaid Martin, © that he may poſſibly be in me, as 
well as any where elſe; but I muſt profeſs, that 
when I caſt my eyes upon this globe, or rather ups 
on this globule, I cannot help thinking, that the 
Deity has abandoned it to ſome malignant being't 
I always except Eldorado. I never met with a'city 
that did not wiſh the deſtruQtion of its neighbours 
city, nor one family that did not deſire to extermĩ- 
nate another family. All over the world the 

curſe the rich, to whom they are obliged to cringe 
and the rich treat them like ſo many ſheep; whoſe 
wool and fleſh. is ſold-to the beſt bidder. A thous 
ſand aſſaſſins formed into regiments, running about 
from one extremity of Europe to another, practiſe 
murder and rapine according to diſcipline for their 
bread, "becauſe it is the moſt honourable profeſſion 
in the world; and in thoſe cities which ſem to en- 
Jay the Iweets of peace, and where thes 


£ 


r 


= 
» FS7s 
4 
: 
* — 
X 
* » 
* 


68 CAN DID Us; or, eee 


cultivated, mankind are devoured with greater en- 
vy, cares, and diſquietudes, than a city meets with 


troubles when it is beſieged. Private torments are 
ſtill more inſupportable than public calamities. Ia 


a word, I have ſeen and experienced ſo much, that 


J am 3 a Manichean.” 
There's ſome good for all that,” replied Can- 


dus. 4 That may be,” ſaid Martin, © but I do 


not know here to ſind it,” 


N In the middle of this diſpute, they aka the re- 


port of cannon. The'ngiſe increaling every mo- 
ment, each perſon took out his glaſs. By this 
means they eſpied two veſſels engaging each other, 
about three miles diſthnt. The wind brought the 
combatants fo neat French veſſel, that they had 
the pleaſure of {erp the fight very eaſily. At 


length, one of the veſſels gave the other a broad- 


fide berween, Wind and water, which ſunk it to the 


bottom adus and Martin plainly perceived a- 
+ bout 3 kindred men upon the deck of the ſhip 


which was*finking, lifting up their hands towards 
heaven, and making the moſt diſmal lamentations ; 


and in an inſtant they were all ſwallowed up by 


lea. - | 
8 Well, Kid Martin, 4 ſee how mankind treat 


11 one. another.“ It is true,” faid Candidus, there's 


thing diabolieal in it.“ As be was ſaying ſo, 


be perceived ſomtſhing red and ittering ſwimming 
pear his ſhip. They 2 


Candida ore joy at the re- 


his 2 8 1 at the loſs 


br is 2 French Captain * found, that Fas eaptain 
= of the conquering veſſel was a Spaniard, and that 


the commander of the veſſel which was ſack Was A 


* Nate, and the very fame who bad.robbed 
— Gapdicngy 


2 8 112 2 * A 85+ 8: Lge 1 + 


ſent the longboat 
to ſcg har i could be t proved to be one 


_ YT e 


to be wits, and in all of them, their ruling p 
is love, the next lying, and the third to talk, now. 


> 

* 

5 
£® 
p * 
J 
| 
F 
4 
8 
L4 
q 


3 


bad-amaſſed, were buried in the ſea along with him, 
and" there was only a ſingle ſheep ſaved. 


«You ſee,” ſaid Candidus to Martin, « that 


ment : that raſcal, the Dutch commander, has m 
with the fate he merited. « Yes,” ſaid Martin;? 
« but why ſhould the paſſengers on board his 1 
alſo periſh together with him? God indeed has pu- 


niſhed the villain, but the devil has drowned the 
rell... 


In the mean time, the Fenchingn * the Spa- oy” 


niard continued their courſe, and Candidus his de- 
bates with Martin. They diſputed fifteens days 
without intermiſſion; and, at the end of the fifteen 
days, they were no farther advanced than when 
they began. But they chatted, they communicated 
their ideas to each other, and comforted each other 
reciprocally, Candidus careſſing his ſheep, © Since 
I have found you,” ſaid he, © have ſome . 
of * Cunegonda.“ 


CHAP, Kn 
Candidus and Martin draw near to the colt 
of France, and diſpute. 


T length. they deſcried the coaſt of France, 
« Have you ever been in France, Mr Mar- 


in?” ſaid Candidus. Yes,” ſaid Martin, 4 1 


have run over ſeveral of its provinces. In ſome, 


one half of the inhabitants are mere fools. in - 28 nt 


chers they are too cunning z in others either very 
good natured or very brutiſh ; in others they, affect 


ſenſe. 4 But, Mr Martin, have you ever been at 


Pariat'®: Tes, I have been at Paris: thats: ape 


« wickedneſs ſometimes meets with condign _ i 


594 
S 


- 


Chap. 21+ The OPTIMIST. 6 © 
Candidus. The immenſe riches which the villain | 


7. 


| | = LS 
70 CAN DIDUS; or, Chap. 21. 
all theſe ſorts there; it is a mere chaos; a.ctoud 
in which every one is in ſearch after pleaſure, but 
no one finds it, as far as I have been able to diſeo- 


ver. I ſpent a few days there; and, at my wrival, 


was robbed of all I had by ſome ſharpers, at the 


fair of St Germain. Nay, I myſelf was taken up 


For a robber, and was eight days in priſon ; after 
which I turned corrector of the preſs, to get a 
ſmall matter to carry me on foot to Holland. I 
know the whole tribe of fcribblers, with malecon- 
tents, and fanatics. They ſay the people ate very 
polite in that city; I wiſh I could believe them.” 

« For my part, I have no curioſity to ſee France,” 
ſaid Candidus; “ you may eaſily fancy, that when 
'a perſon has once ſpent a month at Eldorado, he is 
very indifferent whether he ſees any thing elſe upon 
earth, except Miſs Cunegonda. I am going to 
Wait for her at Venice; we will go through France 
in our way towards Italy. Won't you bear me 
company? With all my heart,” ſaid Martin: 
they ſay that Venice is not fit for any but the 
Noble Venetians; but, for all that, they receive 
ſtrangers very well, provided they have a good 
deal of money. I have none; you have ; there - 
fore III follow you all the world over.“ „ Now 
I think of it,“ ſaid Candidus, do you imagine 
that the earth was originally nothing but water, as 
is aſſerted in the great book belonging to the Cap- 
tain? © J don't believe a word of it,” ſaid Mar- 
tin, © no more than I do of all the reveries that have 
been publiſhed for ſome time.” „But for what 
end was the world created then?“ ſaid Candidus. 
«To make one mad,” replied - Martin.“ Was 
not you vaſtly ſurpriſed,” continued Candidus, * at 
the paſſion which the two girls in the country of 

the Oreillons had for thoſe two «pes, whoſe * 


I related to you? “ Not at all,” ſaid Martin; 


I ſee nothing ſtrange in that paſſion ; for 2 


* 


— S $$ ©@ OA om wHw—_ Kh os _&- . I .  OIETeS 


\ 


— 


0 
hn 1 


Chap.2% The OP T I M s r. — 


ſeen ſo many. ſtrange things already, that I can 8 
look upon nothing as extraordinary, *© Do you 
believe,” ſaid Candidus, & that mankind always cut 
one another's throats ; that they were always liars, 
knaves, treacherous, and ungrateful; always thieves, 
ſharpers, highwaymen, lazy, envious, and gluttonsy 
always drunkards, miſers, ambitious, and blood» 
thirſty ; always backbiters, debauchees, fanatics, | 
hypocrites, and fools?” © Do you not believe, 

ſaid Martin, „that hawks have always preyed up- 
on pigeons, when they could light upon them? 
Certainly,” ſaid Candidus. Well then,” ſaid Mar- 

| tin,“ if the hawks have always had the ſame na- 
ture,, what reaſon can you give why mankind 


\ = 
—— — — I 
— med 1 2 9ꝙ6?Zl. —— 
u — hs = = 


IF 


* 
I — 7 


48 
— * 


wag % 


— * 
2a th. £6 —— . 


— — 


r 


5 ſhould have changed theirs??? ©« Aye,” ſaid Can» \ 

l didus, © there is a great deal of difference, becauſe 9 
free-will #,0. 6 050.9000. A 
f In the midſt of this diſpute, they arrived at. [1 
a Bourdeaux. : 1 
0 CHAP. XXI. 1 


What.  bappened in France to Candidus and Martin, 


\Andidus ſtaid no longer at Bourdeaux than un 
he could diſpoſe of ſome of the pebbles * 
Eldorado, and furniſh himſelf with a poſt-chaiſe. 
large enorfph to hold two perſons ; for he edud 
not part with his philoſopher Martin. He was in« 
deed very . ſorry to part with his ſheep, which he 
left at the academy of ſciences at Bourdeaux; who 
propoſed for the ſubject of this year's prize, the 
reaſon Why this ſheep's wool was red; and the 
prize was adjudged to a learned man in the North, 
who demonſtrated, by A plus B minus C divided * 
2, that the ſheep muſt be red, and die of the rat. 
In the mean time, all the travellers. whom. Can« 
Kune in the inns on the road, lng him they. 


a C4 
7 
r 
N 


— 


1 — 


* 
3 
£ 
»1 4 
' "* * © 
. : ” 41 
bh — 
| FR Ms if” | 
* — — — — — — — — — we. A 
1 * * N —— - 
Y « 1 I. * — 


8 
"3.4 


© 


7 CANDIDU'S; or, Chap. 22. 
were going to Paris, this general eagerneſs to ſee 
the capital, inſpired him at length with the ſame de- 
fire, as it was not much out of the way in his jour. 
ney towards Venice. | | 

+ He entered Paris by the ſuburb of St Marceau, 
and fancied himſelf to be in the dirtieſt village in 
Weſtphalia. rhe | 

- Candidus was ſcarce got to his inn, when he was 
ſeized by a flight indiſpoſition, cauſed by his fa- 
tigues. As he had a very large diamond on his 
finger, and the people had taken notice of a pretty 
heavy box among his baggage, in a moment's time 
he had no leſs than two phyſicians to attend him, 
who did not ſtay to be ſent for; a few intimate 
friends, that never left him, ſat up with him, to- 
gether with a couple of female friends that took 
care to have his broths warmed. Said Martin, I 
remember that when I was fick at Paris, in my 
firſt journey, I was very low in pocket, and could 
meet neither with friends, nurſes, nor phyſicians ; 
but I recovered.” : N 
In the mean while, what by medicines and bleed- 
ings, Candidus's diforder beginning to grow a ſe- 
rious affair, the clerk of the pariſh came, with great 
. modeſty, to aſk a bill for the other world, payable 
to the bearer. Candidus refuſing to accept it, the 
nurſes aſſured him that it was a new faſhion. Can- 
didus replied, that he was reſolved not to-follow the 
faſhion. Martin was going to throw the prieſt out 
of the window. The clerk ſwore, that Candidus 
ſhould not be buried. Martin ſwore that he would 
bury the clerk, if he continued to be troubleſome. 


The quarrel grew high, and Martin took the prieſt 
by the ſhoulders, and puſhed him out of doors. 
This occaſioning a great deal of ſcandal, an action 


was commenced againſt him. 


 <*Tandidus recovered; and all the while he was 
Apen the mending hand, had the beſt of company 0 


G pos opp toe lk „„ „„ OE MO IN 


ſup with him. They gamed high; and Candidus | 
was very much ſurpriſed that he never could throw 
an ace ; but Martin was not ſurpriſed at all. 
Among thoſe who did him the honours of the 
town, was a little abbe of Perigord, one of thoſe 
people that are always buſy, always alert, always 
ready to do one ſervice, forward, fawning , and ac» 
commodating themſelves to every one's humour; 
who watch for ſtrangers on their journey, tell them 
the ſcandalous hiſtory of the rown, and offer them 
pleaſures at all prices. This man carried Candidus 
and Martin to the playhouſe, where a new tragedy 
was to be acted. Candidus found himſelf ſeated near 
me critics z but this did not keep him from cry- 
ing at ſome ſcenes that were well acted. One of 
theſe critics, who ſtood at his elbow, ſaid to him, 
| between one of the acts,“ You was in the wron 
| to ſhed tears; that's a ſhocking actreſs, the actor 


} who plays with her is worſe than ſhe, and the piece 

is ſtill worſe than the actors. The author does not 
underſtand a ſingle word of Arabic, and yet the 

- ſcene lies in Arabia: but beſides, he is a man who 

does not believe that our ideas are innate; ll 

t bring you twenty pamphlets againſt him by to- 

e morrow morning.” Sir,“ ſaid the abbe of Peri- 

e gord, “did you take notice of that young man 

- with the lively countenance and fine hape ? he will 

e not coſt you more than ten thouſand francs per 

It month, and fifty Thouſand crowns in diamonds!” 

13 I have not above a day or two to ſpare,” repliedtd 

d Candidus, “ becauſe I have one to meet at Venice, 

E. which hurries me.” . i 

ſt In the evening, after ſupper was over, the inſi- 

8. nuating Perigourdin redoubled his compliments of 

m ſerviee, and his officiouſneſs. Lou are then, 


Sir, ſaid he, under an engagement to go to Ve- 
nice? „ Yes, Mr Abbé,“ ſaid Catdidus, I am 
under a neceſſity to go to meet Miſs Cunegonda.” 
n G Being 


7% CANDIDUS; or, Cbap. 22. 


Being then invited with the pleaſure of ſpeaking a- 
bout the object he loved, he related, according to 


cuſtom, a part of his adventures with that illuſtrious 
Weſtphalian. 7 


& I fancy,” ſaid the Abbe, “that Miſs Cune- 


gonda is a lady of very great parts, and that ſhe 
writes charming letters?” © I never received a- 
ny from her,” ſaid Candidus : “ for figure to your- 
ſelf, that being driven out of the caſtle on account 
of my paſſion for her, I could not write to her; 
that ſoon after I heard ſhe was dead; that after- 
wards I found her, and loſt her; and that I have 
now ſent an expreſs to her about two thouſand 


five hundred leagues from hence, and wait for an 


anſwer.” 


The Abbe heard bim with great attention, and 


appeared to be a little thoughtful. He ſoon took 
leave of the two ſtrangers, after a moſt affectionate 
embrace. The next day, as ſoon as Candidus awa - 
ked, he received a letter, couched in the following 


terms, 4 . 
“ Sir, my deareſt love, I have been ill theſe 
eight days in this town, and have learned that you are 


here. 1 would fly to your arms, if I were able to 
ſtir. I knew of your paſſage to Bourdeaux, where 
I have left the faithful Cacambo and the old woman, 
who are to follow me very ſoon. The governor 
of Buenos-Ayres has taken all from me, but your 
heart is ſtill left me. Come and ſee me; for your 
. preſence will either reſtore me to life, or kill me 

with pleaſure,” Fin 


This charming, this unexpected letter, tranſ- 


ported Candidus with an inexpreflible joy; and 
the indiſpoſition of his dear Cunegonda overwhelm- 
ed him with ſorrow. Diſtracted between theſe two 


paſſions, he took his gold and diamonds, and got 


ſomebody to conduct him and Martin to the houſe 
where Miſs Cunegonda was lodged, N 


eee e 0 


£3  XVx<% gn aa. — = VS” OED” AE OW m . nn ns ON] 0 


SS Ef 2 kd = = 2 iow 


Chaps The OF TIMTS TT: Fs 
On his entrance he trembled in every limb, his 


heart beat quick, and his voice was choaked un 
with ſighs ; he was going to open the curtains of f 


the bed, and bid them bring him a light. Take 


care, Sir,” ſaid the nurſe, © ſhe can't bear light for 


the world, it would overpower her ;”” and immedi- 
ately ſhe drew the curtains cloſe again. My dear 


Cunegonda,” ſaid Candidus, diſſolved in tears, ho- 


do you find yourſelf? though you can't ſee me, you 


| may ſpeak to me at leaſt,” © She can't ſpeak,” 


ſaid the maid. The lady then put a plump hand 
out of the bed, which Candidus for ſome time 
bathed with his tears, and afterwards filled with 
diamonds, leaving a bag full of gold upon the eaſy 
chair, 

In the middle of his tranſports, came in a life- 
guard-man, followed by the Abbe Perigourdin and 
a file of ſoldiers. © There,” ſaid he, are the 
two ſuſpected foreigners.” He cauſed them be im- 
mediately ſeized, and ordered his men to drag them 
to priſon. © It is not thus they treat travellers at 
Eldorado,“ faid Candidus, © I am more a Mani- 
chean than ever,” ſaid Martin, © But, pray, Sir, 
where are you going to carry us?“ ſaid Candidus. 
« To a hole in the dungeon,” faid the lifeguard- 
man. | 

Martin now finding his blood grow ſomewhat 
cool, fancied that the laſs who pretended to be Cu- 


negonda, was a cheat ; that the Abbe Perigourdin | 


was a ſharper, who had taken advantage of Can- 
didus's ſimplicity ; and that the lifeguard-man was 
_— ſharper, whom they might eaſily get clear 


Rather than expoſe himſelf before a court of 
juſtice, Candidus, ſwayed by bis advice, and be- 
ſides very impatient to ſee the real Cunegonda, of- 
tered the lifeguard-man three: faiall diamonds, 


worth about 3000 piſtoles each. © Ah; Sir,” ſaid the} 


G 2 2 
. 3 


* 
Bots 


man 


. — — — OJ  — Ps 


—— — e or ior mms . _ - 
* * — . * 2 LES « 


* . 5 n 
— 


36 CANDIDUS; or, Chap. 22. 
man with the ivory baton, © though you had com- 


' mitted all the -crimes that can be imagined, this 


would make me think you are the honeſteſt gen- 


tleman in the world! Three diamonds! worth 


3000 piſtoles apiece! Sir, inſtead of putting you 
in a dungeon, I would loſe my life for you: all 


ſtrangers are arreſted here, but let me alone for 


that; I have a brother at Dieppe in Normandy ; 
Pl! conduct you thither; and if you have any dia- 
mond to give him, he will take as much care of 
you, as I myſelf.?__ | 

«And why do they put all ſtrangers under ar- 


"reſt? ” ſaid Candidus. The Abbe Perigourdin then 


put in his word: Becauſe,” ſaid he, a beggar 
of Atrebatia liſtened to ſome fooliſh ſtories, which 
made him guilty of a parricide, not like that in 
May 1616, but like that in December 1594; and 
juſt like thoſe that a great many other beggars 
have been guilty of, in other months and other 
years, after liſtening to fooliſh ſtories.” 

The lifeguard-man then gave him a more parti- 
cular account of their crimes. ©-Oh the monſters!” 
cried Candidus ; © are there then ſuch terrible crimes 
among people that can dance and ſing? Can I not 


immediately get out of this country, where mon- 


keys provoke tygers? I have ſeen bears in my 


own country, but J never met with men except at 
Eldorado. In the name of God, Mr Officer, con- 


duct me to Venice, where J am to wait for Miſs 
Cunegonda.” © I can conductꝰ you no where ex- 


cept to Lower Normandy,” faid our mock officer. 


Immediately he ordered his irons tobe ſtruck off, 


_  faid he was under a miſtake, diſcharged his men, 

conducted Candidus and Martin to Dieppe, and left 

- .themin the hands of his brother. . 
There was then a ſmall Holland trader in the 


harbour. The Norman, by means of three more 


diamonds, become the moſt ſerviceable man in the 


pa” wo A te as 


ud. 


oe S cs OR Aossp 5 


CY 


Chap. 23. The OPTIMIST. 77 


world, put Candidus and his attendants ſafe on 
board the: veſſel, which was ready to ſail for Porth: 7 
mouth in England. | 1 

This was not indeed the way to Venice; but >> 
Candidus thou _= he had eſcaped from hell, ang 8 
reſolved to reſume his voyage towards Venice the”. > þ 
firſt 14 PENA that offered. n 


A 


- (000: 8 A P. XXIII. 


Candidus and Martin go to the Engliſh coaſt, and 
what they ſaw there. 


H! Pangloſs! Pangloſs! ah! Martin! 
« Martin! ah! my dear Cunegonda! what 
a world is this !”? ſaid Candidus on board the Dutch 
ſhip. © A very fooliſh and abominable one in- 
deed,” replied Martin. You are acquainted with 
Eogland, ” ſaid Candidus to him;“ are they as 
great fools as the French?“ «© They have a dif- 
ferent kind of folly,” ſaid Martin; “ you know, 
that theſe two nations are at war about a few acres 


$ of ſnow towards Canada, and that they have ſpent 
t a great deal more upon this fine war, than all Cana- 
P da is worth. To tell you with preciſion whether 
y there are more people fit to ſend to a madhouſe in 
= one country than in the other, is more than my 
1 weak capacity is able to perform. I only know in = 
ſs general, that the people we are going to ſee are ve 
K ry melancholic. 8 
r. As they were talking in this manner, they: arrived 
ff, at Portſmouth. The ſhore was covered with a mul - 
o, titude of people, who were looking very attentively at 
ft - a pretty luſty man who was kneeling, with ſomething 
tied before his eyes, on the deck of one of the men 
he of war; four ſoldiers, that were placed oppoſite to 
Te bim, lodged three balls apiece in his head, with 
he 


the en coolneſs imaginable, and the whole aſ⸗ 
5 G 3 ſembly 


* 


. 
- - 'L * 8 " 5 * Nr 
? 1 
4 * 
© 
— 2 o 
4 ” 
0 >] 
4 : 
* 
9 R 
” 
% 
1 7 


bh 78 AN DDs; of, Chag 23. 


ſembly went away very well ſatisſied. What is 

the meaning of this?” ſaid Candidus; 6 and what 
demon is it that exerciſes his dominion all over the 
globe? 


He inquired who the lofty anden was that 

was killed with ſo much ceremony. “ He is an 
admiral *,” replied ſome of them. “ And why 
was this admiral killed?“ « Becauſe,” ſaid they, 
he did not kill men enough himſelf. He engaged 
the French admiral; and was found guilty of not 
being near enough to him.” „ But then, ſaid. 
Candidus, © was not the French admiral as far off 
from the  Englifh admiral, as he was from him?“ 
« That is what cannot be doubted,” replied they. 
«- But in this country it is of very great ſervice, to 
execute an admiral now and then, in order to make 
the reſt fight the better. 

Candidus was ſo aſtoniſhed and ſhocked at what 
he bad ſeen and heard, that he would not ſet foot 
on ſhore, but agreed with the maſter of the Dutch 
veſſel (though he was ſure to be robbed by him, as 

well as by his countryman at eee to earry him 
directly to Venice. 

The maſter was ready. in two days. They 
coaſted it all along France. Faſling within fight of 
Liſbon, Candidus gave a very deep groan. - They 
paſſed the Streights, made the Mediterranean, and at 
laſt arrived at Venice. 

*The Lord be praiſed,” ſaid Candidus, em- 
bracing Martin,“ it is here that I fhall ſee the fair 
Cunegonda again! I have as good an opinion of Ca- 
cambo, as of myſelf, Every thing is right, every 


thing goes well ; every . is the 23 that it can 
poſlibly be. | 


* The author alludes to the alk of Adm. , who was ſhot on 
board the Monargue man pw war — Portſmout ; March! {+ 757. 


Vas p. | 


; | : 2 > a; dds 
. 4 28 4 
g The DPTFIMNIST 3 
24» | . 79 27 
. 1 . k 


CHA P. XXIV. 
Concerning Paquetta, and Father Giro flees. 


8 ſoon as they kd at Venice, he kl | 
ſearch for Cacambo in all the inns, in all the 


ene and among all the ladies of pleaſure, 
but could not find him. He ſent every day to all 


the ſhips and barques that arrived; but no news of 
Cacambo. Well!“ ſaid he to Martin, « I] have 
had time enough to go from Surinam to Bourdeaux, 
from Bourdeaux to Paris, from Paris to Dieppe, 
from Dieppe to Portſmouth; after that I have 
coaſted along Portugal and Spain, and traverſed the 
Mediterranean, and have now been ſome months at 
Venice, and yet, for all that, the lovely Cunegonda 
is not come. Inſtead of her, I have only met with 
a bite, and an abbe of Perigord. Cunegonda is cer- 
tainly dead; and I have no more to do but to die too. 
Ah it would have been far better for me to have 
ſtaid in that Paradiſe, Dorado, than to have returned: 
again to this curſed Europe. You are certainly _ 
my dear Martin; all: is illufion and miſery here.“ 

- He fell into a deep melancholy; and never fo. 
quenthd: the opera, or the other diverſions: of the: 
carnival 5 nay he was proof againſt all the charms: 
of the fair ſex. Martin ſaid to him, © You are ve- 
ry ſimple indeed, to fancy that a mongrel valet, 
with five or (ix millions in his pocket, would go to 


the end of the world in queſt of your miſtreſs, and 
bring her to Venice. If he meets with __ he'll 


keep-her for himſelf: if he cannot find her, he'll 

get ſomebody elſe. Let me adviſe you to forget 

both your * Cacambo, and your miſtreſs Cune- 

gonda.“ Martin was a maſt: wretched. comforter. 

The melancholy of Candidus increaſed z and Mar- 

* never ceaſed preaching that there Was but Ly 
1 8 | 


50 CAN DID US; or, Chap-24. 


little virtue and as little happineſs to be found on 
earth, excepting, perhaps, at Eldorado, where it 
vas almoſt impoſſible for any one to go. 

As they were diſputing on this important ſub- 
je, and waiting for Cunegonda, Candidus percei- 
ved a young Theatin * in the place of St Mark, 
holding a girl under his arm: 'T be Theatin friar 
looked freſh, plump, and full of vigour ; his eyes 
were ſparkling, his air bold, his mien lofty, and 
his gait firm. This girl was tolerably handſome, 
and was ſinging a ſong : ſhe ogled her Theatin friar 
with a great deal of paſſion, and now and then 
would give his fat cheeks a pinch, 

& At leaſt you will grant me,” ſaid Candidus to 
Martin, “ that theſe folks are happy. I have never 
found any but unhappy wretches till now all over 
this habitable globe, excepting at Eldorado; but 
as for the girl and the Theatin, I will lay any wa- 
ger that they are as happy as happy can be.“ 4 1 


will lay they are not,” ſaid Martin.“ Only let” 


us invite them to dinner,“ ſaid Candidus, « and 
then you ſhall ſee if I am miſtaken or not.“ 

He immediately aceoſted them, made them a 
bow, -and invited them to his inn to eat macaroni, 
partridges of Lombaidy, and caviare, and to drink 
montepulciano, lachryma - Chriſti, Cyprus, and Sa- 

mos wine. The girl bluſſed; the Theatin accept- 
ed of the invitation, and the girl followed him, 
looking at Candidus with eyes of ſurpriſe and con- 
fuſion, from which the tears trickled. Scarce was 
ſhe entered into Candidus's room, when ſhe ſaid 
to him, What ! does not Mr Candidus know his 
old friend Paquetta again?“ At theſe words, Can - 


didus, who had not yet looked at het with any de - 
gtee of attention, becauſe Cunegonda ingroſſed all 
ks thoughts, ſaid to her, il 4 my poor. in, 


. . 2 — 4 * 
3 


; An order of religious. 3 2 


f ' TT . d % 
dere us, ; ; ':31:: 5 30M wn: 


at 
oy 
93 PF 
A 
1 95 
9 
> Tar” 4 
7 
* 


oer oe 


. A _ ad w@D17+S 88 RS 


Chap. 24. The OPTIMIS T. 


is it you who reduced Dr Pangloſs to the fine plight: , 
in which 1 ſaw him?“ i 25 
« Ah, Sir! 'tis 4 myſelf,” ſaid Paquetta; . I: 
find you know the whole ſtory ; and I have been 
informed of all the terrible diſaſters which have 
happened to the family of my Lady the Baroneſs, 
and the fair Cunegonda. My fate, I aſſure you, 
has not been leſs melancholy. 1 was very innocent 
when you knew me. A cordelier, who was my 
confeſſor, eaſily ſeduced me. The effects of it 
were terrible: I was obliged to leave the caſtle 
ſome time after the Baron kicked your backſide 
out of the door. If a celebrated quack had not 
taken pity on me, I ſhould have periſhed. I was 
the quack's miſtreſs for ſome time, by way of re- 
compenſe. His wife, who was as jealous as the devil, 
beat me every day moſt unmereifully; ſhe was a 
very fiend of hell. The Doctor was one of the ug- 
lieſt fellows 1 ever ſaw in my life, and I one of the 
moſt wretched creatures that ever exiſted, to be 
beat every day for the ſake of a man whom I hated. 
You know how dangerous it is for a ſcolding wo- 
man to be married to a doctor. $6ing quite exa- 
ſperated with his wife's behaviour, h gave her one 
day ſo efficacious a remedy to cure her of a ſlight 
cold ſhe had, that ſhe died two hours after in the 
moſt horrid convulſions. My miſtreſs's relations 
entered a criminal action againſt my maſter ;. he 
took to his heels, and I was carried to jail, My 
innocence would never have ſaved me, if I had not 
been pretty handſome. The judge acquitted me, 
on condition of his ſucceeding the Doctor. I was 
ſoon afterwards ſupplanted by a rival, driven out of 
doors without any recompenſe, and obliged to con- 
tinue this abominable occupation, which appears ſo. 
pleaſant to you men, while it is to us women the 
very abyſs of miſery. I am come to practiſe my; 
[7512 at Venice. Ah, Sir, if you could imagine, 


ny.” 


SORES IH a. ww vr” == 
wet © 2 all. et 
Sz „ * l 


82 CANDIDU'S; or, Chap. 24. 


what it is to be obliged to careſs indifferently an 
old merchant, a counſellor, a monk, a gondolier, or an 
abbe; to be expoſed to all ſorts of inſults and outra- 
ges; to be often reduced to borrow a petticoat, to have 


it lifted up by a diſagreeable raſcal ; to be robbed by 


one gallant of what one has got by another ; to be 
ranſomed by the peace-officer, and to have nothing 
elſe in proſpe& but a frightful old age, an hoſpital, 

or a dunghill ; you would confeſs that I am one of 
the moſt unfortunate creatures in the world.” 

Paquetta opened her mind in this manner to the 
good Candidus, in his cloſet, in the preſence of 
Martin; who ſaid to Candidus, You fee I have 
won one half of the wager already.“ 

Brother Girofflee waited in the dining-room, and 
drank a glaſs or two while he was waiting for din- 
ner. But,” ſaid Candidus to Paquetta, © you 
had an air ſo gay, ſo content, when I firſt met 
you, you ſung, and careſſed the Theatin with ſo. 
much warmth, that you ſeemed to me as happy 
then as you pretend to be miſerable now.” Ah, 
Sir,” replied Paquetta, “ this is one of the miſeries 
of the trade. Jeſterday I was robbed and beaten 
by an officer, ànd to-day I am obliged to appear in 
good humour to pleaſe a monk.” Candidus want- 


ed no more, to be ſatisfied, and owned that Martin 


was in the tight. They ſat down to table with Pa- 
quetta and the Theatin ; the repaſt was very enter» 


' taining, and, towards the end, they began to ſpeak 


to. each other with ſome degree of confidence. 
My Father,” ſaid Candidus to the monk, “ you 


ſeem to enjoy a ſtate that all the world might look 


on with envy. The flower of health bloſſoms on 
your countenance, and your phyfiognomy ſpeaks 


nothing but happineſs. ; you have a very pretty girl 


to divert you, and you ſeem to be well ſatisfied with 
your ſtation as a Theatin monk.” 


„ Faith, Sir,“ ſaid Brother de „ein. 


-- = RS EZ 7 = .,7 


„ IT. O'S 


* 
; 


* 


u 
k 
n 
KS 
730 
th 
n 


Chap. 24. The OPTIMIS T. 863 
chat all the Theatins were at the bottom of the ſea. 
I have been tempted an hundred times to ſet fire to 
the convent, and to go and turn Turk. My pa» 
rents forced me, at the age of fifteen, to put on 
this curſed habit, to increaſe the fortune of an 
elder brother of mine, whom God confound, jea- 
louſy, diſcord, and fury, reſide in the convent. It 
is true indeed, I have preached a few paltry ſer- 
mons, which brought me in a little money; one 
part of which the prior robs me of, the remainder 
ſerves me to ſpend upon the ladies; but every even- 
ing, when I enter the monaſtery, I am ready to 
daſh out my brains againſt the wall of the dormi- 
tory 3+ and. all the brotherhood are in the ſame 
cale,” a | 

Martin turning towards Candidus, with his uſual 
coolneſs, © Well,” ſaid he to bim, have not I 
won the whole wager now? Candidus gave two 
thouſand piaſtres to Paquetta, and one thouſand to 
Brother Girofflee, © Pll anſwer for it,” ſaid he, 
« this will make them happy.” © I don't believe 
a word of it,” ſaid Martin; “ you may perhaps 
make them a great deal more miſerable by your 
piaſtres,” «4 Be that as it may,” ſaid Candidus: 
« but one thing comforts me, I ſee that one often 
finds thoſe perſons whom one never expected to 
find any more ; and as I have found my red ſheep 
and Paquetta again, it may be I may find Cune- 
gonda again too.” „I with,” ſaid Martin, © that 
ſhe may one day make you happy; but it is what 
I very, much queſtion.” Lou are very ineredu · 
lous, ſaid Candidus. That is what I always 
was,“ faid Martin. 36 | 

« But only look on thoſe gondoliers,” ſaid Can- 
didus; are they not perpetually ſinging? © Yau 
don't ſee them at home, with their wives, and their 
monkeys of children,” ſaid Martin.“ The Doge 
has his inquietudes, and the gondoliers have 1 
Ep: | Indeed, 


84 CAN DID US; or, Chap. 25. 


Indeed, generally ſpeaking, the condition of a gon- 


dolier is preferable to that of a doge; but I believe 


that the difference is ſo ſmall, that it is not worth 


the trouble of examining into.” 


People ſpeak,” ſaid Candidus, “ of Seignior | 


Pococurante, who lives in that fine palace upon the 
Brenta ; and who entertains ſtrangers in the moſt 


polite manner. They pretend that this man never 


felt any uneaſineſs.” * I ſhould be glad to ſee fo 
extraordinary a phenomenon,” / ſaid Martin. On 
which Candidus inſtantly ſent to Seignior Pococu- 
rante, to get permiſſion to pay him a viſit the 
next day. 4 £5: wet} 


„ 


De viſit to Seignior Pococurante, the Noble Ve- 
eee. | 


Andidus and Martin went in a gondola on the 
4A Brenta, and arrived at the palace of the Noble 
Pococurante. His gardens were very ſpacious, and 
ornamented with fine ſtatues of marble, and the pa- 
lace itſelf was a piece of excellent architecture. The 
maſter of the houſe, a very rich man, /about'three- 
\ ſcore, received our two inquiſitives very politely, but 
with very little heartineſs; which, though it con- 
foſed Candidus, did not give the leaſt uneaſineſs to 
Martin. „ B05 DET ene 
At firſt two young girls, handſome, and very 
neatly dreſſed; ſerved them vii chocolate, which 
vas frothed extremely well. Candidus could not 
help dropping them a compliment on their beauty, 
their politeneſs, and their addreſs; |< The crea- 
tures are well enough,” ſaid the ſenator Pococurante; 
e ſometimes make them lie in my bed, for IL am 
quite tired of the girls of the town, of their co- 
- quetty, their jealouſies, quatrels, humpurs, 2 
ul Key 


1 £ s p - 
e een 


Chap.25 The OPTIMIST, 85 


- key-tricks, pride, follies, and the ſonnets one is 
obliged to make, or hire others to make for them; 


but, after all, theſe two girls begin to grow tire- 
ſome to me.” 1 


After breakfaſt, Candidus taking a walk in his 
long gallery, was charmed with the beauty of the 
pictures. He aſked by what maſter were the two 
firſt. „ They are by Raphael,” ſaid the Senator; 


« I bought them at a very high price, merely out 
of vanity, ſome years ago. They are ſaid to be 
the fineſt paintings in Italy: but they do not 
pleaſe*me at all ; the colours are dead, the figures 
not finiſhed, and do not appear with relief enough; 
the drapery is very bad. In ſhort, let people ſay 
what they will, I do not find there a true imitation 


of nature. I do not like a piece unleſs it makes 


me think I ſee nature itſelf ; but there are no ſuch 
pieces to be met with. 1 have, indeed, a great 
many pictures, but I de not value them at all.” 
While they were waiting for dinner, Pococuran- 
te entertained them with a concert; - Candidus 


was quite charmed with the muſic. ' * This noiſe,” 


faid Pococurante, © might divert one for half an 


bour, or ſo; but if it were to laſt any longer, it 


would grow tireſome to every body, though no 
foul: durſt own it, Muſic is, now-a-days, nothing 
elſe but the art of executing, difficulties 3 and what 
has nothing but difficulty to recommend it, doe 
not pleaſe at the longrun. 


I might perhaps take more pleaſure in the ope- 
ra, if they had not found out the ſecret to make 
ſoeh a monſter of it as ſhocks- me. Let thoſe go 


that will to ſee wretched tragedies: ſet to muſic, 
. where the ſcenes ate compoſed for no other end than 


to ſug in dy the head and ears two or three ridicu- 
lous ach in order to ſet off the pipe of an actreſs. 


Let Who will, or who can, die away with pleatiure; 
at heating a eunuch 1 the part of 1 


te 


12925 


aan. 
eee. —— — 
L * — — 
« - 1 * ** 
FR * 7 N 


3 


— 


86 C AND ID US; or, Chap. 25. 


and Cato, and ſtrutting upon the ſtage with a ridicu- 
bus and affected air. For my part, I have long a- 
go bid adieu to thoſe paltty entertainments, which 
conſtitute the glory of Italy, and are purchaſed by 
crowned: heads fo extravagantly dear.“ Candidus 
diſputed the point a little, but with great difcre- 
tion. Martin was entely of the ſame ſentiments 
with the Senator. They ſat down to table, and, 
after an excellent dinner, went into the library. 
Candidus caſting his eyes upon a Homer very hand- 
ſomely bound, praiſed his High Mightineſs fgf the 
[| - goodneſs of his taſte. „ There,“ ſaid he, is a. 
p book that was the favourite of the great Pangloſs, 
i! the beſt philoſopher in Germany.” It is none of 
i mine, ſaid Pococurante, with great indifference ; 
It J was made to believe formerly that 1 took a 
I pleaſure in reading him. But that continued repe- 
| — HRition of battles that reſemble each other; his gods, 
who are always very buy without bringing any 
thing to a deciſion; his Helen, who is the ſubject 
of the war, and has ſcarce any thing to do in the 
LF - _whole'piece; that Troy, which is beſieged, but I 
Eh - never taken; I ſay, all theſe defects give me the W 
greateſt diſguſt, I have aſked ſome learned men, © tai 
if they peruſed him with as little pleaſure as I did? © m 
Thoſe who were ingenuous profeſſed to me, that ed 
they could not keep the, book in their hands; but tio 
that they were obliged to give it a place in their li-] 
braries, as a monument of antiquity, and as they the 
do old ruſty medals, which are of no uſe in com- rea 
merce. ? e! gert e - 41 Ver 
dee Your Excellence does not entertain the ſame Rab 
[5 opinion of Virgil?“ faid Candidus. “ confeſs,” O. 
EY _ replied Pococurante, * that the ſecond; the fourth; to t 
3 and the ſixth book of his neid are excellent j but don 
as for his pious Eneas, his brave Cloanthus, his mac 
friend Achates, the little Aſcanius, the infirm King {can 
Latinus, the burgeſs Amata, and the inſipid Lavi! = 


What ſuits my own-taſte.” Candidus, having been 


Chap. 25- The OPTI M1ST. . 87 


nia, 1 do not think any thing-can be more frigid, 
or more diſagreeable. I prefer Taſſo, and Ane 
ſopor iferous tales far before him.“ | 
4 Shall I preſume to aſk. you, Sir,” ſaid Candidus, 

ee whether you do not enjoy a great deal of pleaſure 
in peruſing Horace h There are ſome ma- 
xims,” ſaid Pococurante, **which may be of ſome 
ſervice to a man ho knows the world, and being 
delivered in expreflive numbers are imprinted more 
eaſily on the memory. But I have little value for 
his voyage to Brunduſium, his deſcription; of his 
bad dinner, and the Billingſgate ſquabble between 
one Pupillus, -whoſe ſpeech he ſaid was full of fil- 
thy ſtuff, and another whoſe words were as ſharp 
as vinegar. I never could read without great diſ- 
guſt his indelicate lines againſt the old woman and 
witches; and I cannot ſee any merit in his telling 
his friend Meæcenas, that if he ſhould be ranked by 
him amongſt the lyric poets, he would knock the 
ſtars with his lofty brow. Some fools admire eve- 
ry thing in an author of reputation; for my part, 
I read only for myſelf; I approve. nothing but 


taught to judge of nothing for -himſelf,/ was very 
much ſurpriſed at what he heard; but Mattin look- 
ed _ the ſentiment of Pococurante as very ra- 
tion 
Oh, here's a Cicero,” ſaid Candidus, « here is 
the great man whom 1 fancy you are never tired of 
reading.” I never read him at all, replied the 
Venetian. What is it to me, whaahas he: pleads for 
Rabirius or Cluentius? I have trials enow -of 'my — 
own. I might indeed have been à gfeater-friend 
to his philoſophieal works, but when I found he 
doubted of every thing, I concluded I knew as 
much as he, and that I had no need; of a tutor to 
dean drauce. 5 
ell here are * and wwe volumes af 
H 2 the 


n 


N 4 
8 * 


did not corrupt all that was valuable 


Ds CAN DID US; or, Chap. 25. 


the academy of ſeienees, eried Martin; “ it is 


poſſible there may be fomething valuable i in them.” 
« There might,” "faid” Pococurante, © if' but one 


of the authors of this hodge-podge had been only 
the inventor of the art of making pins; but there 


is nothing in all thoſe volumes but chimerical ſy- 


ſtems, and ſcaree a ſingle article of real uſe.” 


« What a prodigious number of theatrical pieces 
you have got here,” ' faid Candidus, © in Italian, 
Spaniſh, and Freneh 1”? © Yes,” faid the Senator, 
there are about three thouſand, and not three do- 
zen good ones among them alt. As for that col- 
lection of fermons, which all together are not worth 
one page of Seneca, and all thofe huge volumes of 


divinity, you muſt think that they are never _ | 


ed either by me or any body elſe.” 
Martin perceiving ſome of the ſhelves filled with 


: Engliſh books; © I fancy,” ſaid he, © a republi - 


can, as you are, muſt generally be pleaſed with 
compoſitions that are writ with fo great a degree of 
freedom. Yes,” faid Pococurante, © it is eom- 
-mendable to write what one thinks; it is the privi- 
Age of man. But all over our Ltaly they write 
Mmothing but what they don't think, Thoſe who 
now (inhabit the country of the Cæſars and An- 


tonines, dare not have a fingle idea, without taking 


out a licence from a Jacobia. I ſhould be very 

tfatisfied with the freedom that breatkes in the 

nglith writers, if paſſion and the * irit of party 
it.. 

Candidus diſcovering a Milton, afked him, if he 

did not look upon that author as a great genius? 


„What! ſaid Pococurante, © that blockhead, 


that has made a long commentary in ten books, of 


rough verſe, on the firſt chapter of Geneſis; that 


ö F imitator of the Greeks, who has disfigured 
the creation, and who, when Moſes has repreſent- 

el the * Nan the world by a word, 
| Wakes 


— & © wa ©: wc. wc 


BY 85mm 


4 
+. P 
em — r bl 


% 
. 


de, The oN 16 Te. ot 


makes the Meſſiah take a ladke pair of compaſſes 
from the armory of God, to mark out his work. 
How can J have any eſteem for ons πhhO has ſpoilt 
the hell and devils of Taſſo; who turns Lucifer 
ſometimes into a toad, and ſometimes Into a pig- 
my; makes him deliver the ſame ſpeech a hundred 
times over; repreſents him diſputing in divinity ; 
and who, by a ferious imitation of Ariofto's comic 


invention of fire-arms, repreſents the devils letting 


off their cannon in heaven? Neither I, nor a 


one elſe in Italy, has it in his power to be pleaſed 270 


at theſe outrages againſt common ſenſe: but the 
marriage of Sin and Death, and the fnakes that 
proceed from her womb, are enough to make eve- 
ry perfon of the leaſt delicacy of tafte vomit. This 
obſcure, fantaſtical, and ifcuſting poem was de- 


ſpiſed at its firſt publication: and I only treat the au- 


thor now in the fame manner as he was treated in 
his own country by his cdtemporaries. By the 
by, I ſpeak what I think; and 1 give myſelf no 


| —_— whether or not other people think as 1 
1 0.27 r . | - 


Candidus was vexed at this diſcourſe ; for he re- 
ſpected Homer, and was fond of Mitgon. Ah!“ 
ſaid he, whiſpering to Martin, “ I am very much 


_ afraid, that this man here has a ſovereigh conternpt 


for our German poets.” - There would be no 
great harm in that,” ſaid Martin. Oh what an 


extraordinary man !” faid Candidus, muttering tèẽꝰ 
himſelf; whar a great genius is this Pococurate: 


te nothing can pleaſe him.” 


After having thus taken a view of all the books, 
garden. Candidus expa- 


they went down into the 
tiated upon alF its beauties. © F never knew any 
thing laid out in ſo bad a taſte,” ſaid the maſter ; 
« we have nothing but trifles here: but, a day or 
two hence, I ſhall have one laid out uꝑon & more 
e e e ID 
— 25 | H 3 


bp a 


= ws, 
* . 
l 
8 
56 
I 
8 


£00 CAND/1DV8;, , Chap. 26. 


- When our two inquilitives had taken their leave 
of his Excellency, © Now, fure,” ſaid Candidus to 
Martin, “you will confeſs that he is one of the 
bappieſt men upon earth, for he is above every 
thing that he has.” *<« Do not you ſee,“ {aid Mar- 
tin, © that he is diſguſted with every thing that he 
has? Plato has ſaid a long time ago, that the beſt 
ſtomachs are not thofe which. caſt up all forts of 
victuals. But, faid Candidus, © is not there a 
Pleaſure in criticiſing upon every thing? in percei- 
ving defects where other people fancy they ſee 
beauties ?” ( That is as much as to lay,” replied 
Martin, © that there is a great pleaſure in bavi 
no pleaſure.” If that is the caſe,” ſaid Candi- 
dus, © no perſon will be ſo happy as myſelf, when 
I ſee Miſs Cunegonda again.” © We ſhould en 
hope for the beſt,” ſaid Martin. 

In the mean time days and weeks paſſed away ; 5 
but no Cacambo was to be found. And Candidus 
was ſo immerſed in grief, that he did not recollect, 
that Paquetta and brother Giroflee never fo. much 
as once came to return hun thanks. 


_ 


wit 1 * * 
a - * - . 
"I 


a * 
: 4 * 


e 4 r. XXVI 


of Candidus and Martin”s Jupping with fix ftran- 
” gers, and who they were. _ 


NE Night as Candidus, followed by Martin, 
Vas going to ſeat bimſelf at table with ſome 
ſtrangers who lodged in the ſame inn, a man of a 
complexion as black as foot, came behind him, 
and taking him by the arm, ſays to him, “ Get 
yourſelf ready to go along. with us; don't fail t”. 
He turned; his head, and ſaw Cacambo. Nothing 
but the ſight of Canegondg could have, ſurpriſed. or 
| Pleaſed him more. He was juſt ready to un mad 
for joy. . his dear friend, « Cunegonda 

2 | | W * 4s 


Chap. 26. The OPTIMIS T. 925 


is here,” ſaid he, © without doubt; where is ſhe? 
Carry me to her, that 1 may die with Joy in her 
company!“ „ Cunegonda is not here,” ſaid Ca- 
cambo, © ſhe is at Conſtantinople.” “O heaven 
at Conſtantinople? Bur, if he was at China, 1 
would fly thither ; let us be gone.” “ We will go 
after ſupper,” replied Cacambo; © I can tell you 
no more; I am a. ſlave ; my maſter expects 
me, and 1 muſt go and wait at table; ſay not a 
. go to ſupper, and hold yourſelf - in readi · DR 
* * 
Candidus, diſtracted hetween joy and ek, 
charmed at having ſeen his truſty agent, aſtoniſhed 
at beholding him a flave, full of the idea of finding 
his miſtreſs again, his heart palpitating, ,and his un- 
derſtanding confuſed, ſet himſelf down at the table 
with Martin, who ou all theſe fcenes without: the 
leaſt emotion, together with fix ſtrangers that were 
come to ſpend the carnival at Venice. | 
Cacambo, who poured out wine for one of the ſix 
ſtrangers, drew near to his maſter, towards the end 
of the repaſt, and whiſpered him in the ear, © Sire, 
your Majeſty may ſet out when you think proper, 
the ſhip is ready.” On faying theſe, words, be 
went out. The'guelts ſorpriled, looked at each o- 
ther, without ſpeaking a word; when another fer- | 
vant approaching! his maſter, ſaid to him, ire, ; 
your Majeſty's chaiſe is at Padua, Fs yacht is ö 
ready,” The maſter gave a nod, and the domeſlie | 
retired. All the gueſts ſtared at one another again, - 
and their comes rpriſe was increaſed. A third 
ſervant approaching likewiſe the third ranger, ſaid 
to bim, (Sire, believe me, your Majeſty muſt 
not ſtay here: 2 N longer; I am going to get every 
thing ; ready ;” and immediately be pee RY 
and Martin began by this time a- 
no doubt but that this was a maſquerade of the 
carival. A fourth domeſtic laid. to the fourth 


a} a 
8 


* 
= . N 


1 _ © =O” ST "I" "OE =D 888 


» Þ R9YJY wy 


— 


92 CAN DID US; or, Chap. 26. 


maſter, . Your Majeſty may depart whenever you 
pleaſe; and went out as the others had done. 
The fifth ſervant expreſſed himſelf in terms to the 
ſame effect as the fourth: But the ſixth ſervant ſpoke 
in a different manner to the ſixth ſtranger, who ſat 
near Candidus : & Faith, Sir,” ſaid he, © no one 
will truſt your Majeſty any longer, nor myſelf net- 
ther; and we may both be ſent to jail this very 
night; I ſhall however take care of myſelf. Adieu.“ 
All the domeſties having diſappeared, the fix 
ſtrangers, with Candidus and Martin, remained in a 
profound ſilence. At laft Candidus broke it:“ Gen- 
tlemen,” faid he, © this is ſomething very droll; 
but why ſhould you be all of you Kings? For my 
part, I own to you, that neither I nor Martin are.” 
Cacambo's maſter then anſwered very gravely in 
Italian, ſaying, '« I aſſure you I am not in jeſt; J am 
Achmet III. I was Grand Sultan for ſeveral years; 
© Iahroned my brother; my nephew dethroned me; 
Vviſirs were beheaded: I finiſh my days in 
the old ſeraglio. My nephew, the Grand Sultan 
Mahmoud, permits me to take avoyage ſometimes 
for the ſake of my health, and I am eome to paſs 
the carnival at Venice.? | | 
A young man, who fat near Achmet, ſpoke next, 
and ſaid, © My name is Ivan; I was Emperor of 
all the Ruſſias, I was dethroned in my cradle, my 
father and mother were confined ; I was brought up 
in priſon. I have ſometimes the permiffion to tra- 
vel, accompanied with two perſons as guards; I am 
alſo come to paſs the carnival at Venice,” 
The third faid, © I am Charles Edward, King of 
England; my father has ceded his rights to the 
throne to me. I have fought to ſapport them; 
eight hundred of my adherents have had their hearts 
taken out alive, and their heads ſtruck off. F my- 
felf bave been in priſon : I am going to Rome, to 
pay a viſit to my father, who has been m_— 


chap 26 | The OP TIMIST. 93 
ned as well as myſelf and my grandfather ; and am 


come to Venice to celebrate the carnival.“ 

The fourth then faid, (I am King of Poland; 
the fortune of war has deprived me of my heredith. 5 
ry dominions ; my father experienced the fame re- 

. verſe; I reſign myſelf to Providence, like the Sultan 
Achmet, the Emperor Ivan, and Charles Edward, 
whom God long preſerve ; and I am come to pas 
the carnival at Venice.” | Y 
: The fifth ſaid, “I am likewiſe the King of Po- 

land; I loſt my kingdom twice; but Providence 

has given me another government, in which I have 

ö done more good, than all the Kings of the Sar- 
matians, put together, have been able to do on the 

banks of the Viſtula. I reſign myſelf likewiſe to 
Providence, and am Beth to pals the carnival at 

s Venice“ | 

It now was the auth dag turn to ſpeak. 


þ 
p 


, © Gentlemen,” ſaid he, I am not fo great a prince 
. as any of you : but for all that I have-been a King 
1 "as well as the beſt of you. I am Theodore; I was 
1 elected King of Corſica; I was once called Your 
p Majeſty, but at preſent am ſcarce allowed the title of 
Sir. I have cauſed money to be coined, but am 
, not maſter at preſent of a farthing. I have had two 
f ſecretaries of ſtate, but now have ſcarce à ſingle 
4 ſervant. I have ſeen myſelf on a throne, -and have 
4 for ſome time lain upon ſtraw in a common. jail in 
4 London. I have been vaſtly afraid of meeting 


with the ſame treatment here, though I am come, 
like your-Majeſties, to paſs the carnival at Venice.“ 
The five other kings heard this ſpeech with a 
noble compaſſion. Each of them gave King Theo- 
dore twenty ſequins to buy him ſome cloaths and 
ſhirts, and Candidus made him a preſent of a diamond 

worth two thouſand fequins more. Who,” ſaid 

= 'Gve kings, © can * private perſon de, who | 


(= 4 


\ 
n a 
7 


94 CANDIDUS; o, Chap. 2%. 


F is both able to give, and really has given an hun- 


dred times as much as either of us?” 

At the very inſtant they roſe from table, came 
into the ſame inn four Serene Highneſſes, who had 
likewiſe loſt their dominions by the fortune of war, 
and were come to paſs the carnival at Venice : but 
Candidus took no notice of thoſe new comers, his 


thoughts being taken up with nothing but going in 


ſearch of his dear Cunegonda at Conſtantinople. 


e K Den 
Candidus's voyage to Conſtantinople, 


HE faithful Cacambo had already prevailed 
: on the Turkiſh captain, that Was going to 
carry Sultan” Achmet back again to Conſtantinople, 
to receive Candidus and Martin on board. They 
both of them imbarked, after they had proſtrated 
themſelves before his miſerable Highneſs. - As Can- 
didus was on his way, he ſaid to Martin, There 


were ſix dethroned kings that we ſupped with; and, 


ſtill more, among theſe ſix kings there was 


one bat 1 gave alms to. Perhaps there may be a 


great many other ptinces more unfortunate ſtill. 
For my part, I have loſt only one hundred ſheep, 
and am going to fly into the arms of Cunegonda. 
My dear Martin, 1 muſt yet ſay, Pangloſs was in 
the right; all things are for the beſt?” I wiſh 


they were, ſaid Martin. “ But,” faid Candidus, 


< the adventure we met with at Venice is ſome- 
what romantic. Such a thing was never heard of, 
that ſix dethroned kings ſhould ſup together at a 
common inn.” This is not more extraordinary,” 
"replied Martin, “ than the moit of the things that 
have happened to us. It is a common thing for kings 


to be dethroned; and with teſpect to the honour 


„ 
8 * TW „* — . Mis. >. tc. una ann 17 7 a * ange 8 12 Erne 


r G ö nm A  O 


| < 
Chap. 27- The: © p TIMIS T. 95 


that we had of ſupping with them, it is a trifle that 
does not merit our attention,” 

Scarce had Candidus got on board, when be leap · 
ed on the neck of his old ſervant * friend Ca- 
cambo. Well,” ſaid he, “ what news of Cune- 
gonda? is ſhe ſtill a miracle of beauty? does ſhe 


love mie ſtill? how does ſhe do? No doubt but 


you have boughe a palace for her at -N 


nople ? 


«© My dear maſter,” replied Cacambo, Cune- 


gonda waſhes diſhes on the banks of the propontis, 


in the houſe of a prince who has very few to waſh: 

ſhe is a ſlave in the houſe of an ancient ſovereign, 
named Ragot/ky, to whom the Grand Turk allows 
three crowns a day to ſupport him in his aſylum 3 
but, what is worſe than all, ſhe has loſt her beau» 
ty, and is become ſhockingly ugly.“ Well, 
bandſome or ugly,” replied. Candidus, * I am a 
man of honour, and it is my duty to love her ſtill. 

But ho came ſhe to be reduced to fo abject a con- 
dition, with the five or ſix millions that you car- 
ried ber?” © And well,” faid Cacambo, “ was 
not I to give two millions to Signior Don Fernan- 
des d'Ibaraa, y Figueora, y Maſcarenes, y Lam- 
pourdos, y Souza, the governor of Buenos Ayres, 
for the permiſſion of taking Miſs Cunegonda back 
again? and did not a pirate bravely rob us of "all 
the reſt? Did not tbis pirate carry us to Cape 
Matapan, to Milo, to Nicaria, to Samos, to Dar- 
danelles, to Marmora, to Scutari ? Cunegonda 
and the old woman are ſervants to the prince I told 
you of; and I am a ſlave of the dethroned Sultan.“ 

« What 4 chain of ſhockingicalamities 1” ſaid Cans | 
didus. “But, after all, I have ſome diamonds; 1 

ſhall eaſily purchaſe Cunegonda $ liberty. It Is pi- 
ty'that ſhe is grown ſo ugly“ : 

Then turning himſelf to Martin,“ Who aa you 
rage ho ig moſt to be piticd, the Sultan 
Achmet, 


2 A 


"3. 


On 


* . 20 I? : wad 
—_— * * K — ww; * — ry - * 9 — 1 
2 9 — * — * — — — The 2 
A 1 i. ies, —— — Aa * * * 1 
- a 4 * * WD — 5 9 — 
A yes bay Oe LES : * — — — 
7 b at i. y 
O * A * - 
of | ; Pals F bs 


mis fortune to ki 


96 CAN DID US; or, Chap. 27. 


Achmet, the Emperor Ivan, * Charles Edward, 

or myſelf?? J cannot tell,” ſaid Martin, I 
muſt ſceinto your hearts to be able to tell.” Ah!“ 
ſaid Candidus, „if Pangloſs was here, he would 
know, and tell us“ „ 1 know not,” replied Mar- 


tin, © in what ſort of ſcales your Pangloſs would 


weigh the misfortunes of mankind, and appraiſe 
their ſorrows. All that I can venture to ſay is, 
that there are millions of men upon earth' a hun» 
dred times more to be pitied than King Charles 


Edward, the Emperor Ivan, or Sultan Achmet.“ 


That is poſlible,” ſaid Candidus. 
In a few days they reached the Black ſea. Can- 
didus began with ranſoming Cacambo at an extrava- 


gant price; and, without loſs of time, he got into a 


galley with his companions, to go to the banks of 
the Propontis, in ſearch: of eee notwith · 


ſtanding her loſs of beauty. 


Among the crew there were two ſlaves that row- 
ed very ill, to whoſe bare ſhoulders the Levant trader 
would now and-then apply a few ſtrokes with a 
bulls pizzle. Candidus, by a natural ſympathy, 
looked at them more attentively than at the reſt of 
the galley-ſlaves, and went up to them with an 


heart full of pity. Some features of their faces, 


though very much disfigured, ſeemed ta bear ſome 
reſemblance to thoſe of Pangloſs, and the unfortu- 
nate Jeſuit the Baron, the brother -of Miſs Cune- 
gonda. This faney affected him, and made him 
very dull. He looked at them again more atten - 
tively. © Really,” ſaid he to Cacambo, if I had 
not feen Mr Pan je banged, and had not had the 
the Baron myſelf, I ſhould; think 
it was they that are rowing in this galley,” 
At the names of the Baron and Pang of.” the 


two galley-ſlaves gave a loud: ſhriek, held faſt by 
the ſeat, and let their oars drop. The maſter of 
the Levanter ran up to . and dene e 


* 28 1841 


_ F — 


* 
OT. , , ORE . -w . r CCI 


r . e www 


Chap. 27. 


The OPTIMIS T. 


laſhes of the bull's pizzle upon them. Held! 
hold ! Signior,” cried Candidus, I will give + 


what money you pleaſe.” © Lord! it is Candidus * 
ſaid one of thegalley ſlaves; © Oh! it is Candidus!” 
faid the other. Do I dream?” ſaid Candidus ; 
« am I awake? am I in this galley? is that Maſter 
Baron whom 1 killed? is that Maſter Pangloſs 
whom I ſaw hanged?” 


c Yes, it is we! it is we!” replied they. 2 


« What ! is that the great philoſopher ?” ſaid Mar- 
tin. ©* Harkee, Maſter Levant Captain,” ſaid Can» 


didus, © what will you take for the ranſom of Ma- 
ſter Thunder-tenetronckh, one of the firſt Barons 
of the empire, together with Maſter Pangloſs, the 
moſt profound metaphyſician of Germany? 
« You Chriſtian dog,” ſaid the Levant captain, 
& ſince theſe two dogs of Chriſtian ſlaves are barons 


and metaphyſicians, which, without doubt, is a 


great degree of dignity in their own country, you 
ſhall give me fifty thouſand ſequins.” © You ſhall 


have them, Sir; carry me back again, like light- 


ning, to Conſtantinople, and you ſhall be paid di- 
retly, But ſtop, carry me to Miſs Cunegonda 
firſt. “ The Levant captain, on the firſt offer of 
Candidus, had turned the head of the veſſel towards 
the city, and made the ſlaves row faſter than a 
bird cleaves the air. ; 

Candidus embraced the Baron and Pangloſs a 
hundred times. How happened it, that I did not 
kill you, my dear Baron? and my dear Pangloſs, 
how came you to life again, after being hanged ? 
and how came you, both of you, to be galley. 
ſlaves in Turky ?“ © Is it true that y dear ſiſter 
is in this country ?” ſaid the Baron. Tes,“ re- 


plied Cacambo. „Then I ſee my dear Candidus 


once more,“ ſaid Pangloſs. 0 
Candidus preſented Martin and Cacambo to 
them; they embraced each Ge and ſpoke all at 
5 . the 
« 1 | Ne” 


* r 


ti 
| 
| 


. 

4 e 
* = * 
* 
„ OY 
A +4. 4. 
- — — —— 22 — — 
— _— - S o 


82829. I 4 


3 
— 


— C— 


12 
. © 3&6 L's 2 


96 CANDIDUS; , Chap. 27. 


Achmet, the Emperor Ivan, King Charles Edward, 
or myſelf?? „ cannot tell,” ſaid Martin, « 1 
muſt ſee into your hearts to be able to tell.“ Ah1” 
faid Candidus, “ if Pangloſs was here, he would 
know, and tell us © 1 know not,” replied Mar- 


tin, © in what ſort of ſcales your Pangloſs would 


weigh the misfortunes of mankind, and appraiſe 
their ſorrows. All that J can venture to ſay is, 
that there are millions of men upon earth a hun- 
dred times more to be pitied than King Charles 
Edward, the Emperor Ivan, or Sultan Achmet.“ 
That is poſlible,” ſaid Candidus. 


In a few days they reached the Black ſea. Can- & 


didus began with ranſoming Cacambo at an extrava- 
gant price; and, without loſs of time, he got into a 
galley with his companions, to go to the banks of 
the Propontis, in ſearch. of eee not with · 
— Randing her loſs of beauty. 

Among the crew there were two ſlaves that row- 
ed very ill, to whoſe bare ſhoulders the Levant trader 
would now and-then apply a few ſtrokes with a 
bulls pizzle. Candidus, by a natural ſympathy, 
looked at them more attentively than at the reſt of 
the galley-ſlaves, and went up to them with. an 
heart full of pity. Some features. of their faces, 
though very much disfigured, ſeemed to bear ſome 
reſemblance to thoſe of Pangloſs, and the unfortu- 
nate Jeſuit the Baron, the brother -of Miſs Cune- 
gonda. This fancy affected him, and made him 
very dull. He looked at them again more atten- 
tively. © Really,” ſaid he to Cacambo,'* if I had 


Hot ſeen Mr Pan en banged, and had not had the 


mis fortune to kill the Baron myſelf, 1 ſhovlg, think 

it was: they that are rowing in this galley ? 
At the names of the Baron and Pan of, the 

two galley-ſlaves gave a loud ſhriek, h 

- the ſeat, and let their oars drop. The * — of 


e eee ran 0; then: aud r W 


" — 


ao po —_ 


* 
gs ms , Hfrocs tet ae. A229 2% = *#a Me a. Goa. Ca _ 


A wy ww: wa, 6, wo wat res 


a+ © 


chap. 2. The OPTIMIST. op. 


laſhes of the. bulls pizzle upon them. Held! 
hold ! Signior,” cried Candidus, I will give o 
what money you pleaſe,” © Lord! it is Candidus” 
ſaid one of the galley ſlaves ;? © Oh! it is Candidus?” 
faid the other. © Do I dream?” ſaid Candidns 
« am I awake? am I in this galley? is that Maſter 
Baron whom I killed? is that Maſter Pangloſs 
whom I ſaw hanged?” 


c Yes, it is we! it is we!” replied they. 15 


« What ! is that the great philoſopher ?” ſaid Mar- 
tin. Harkee, Maſter Levant Captain,” ſaid Can» 
didus, * what will you take for the ranſom of Ma- 
ſter Thunder-ten=tronckh, one of the firſt Barons 
of the empire, together with Maſter Pangloſs, the 
moſt profound metaphyſician of Germany ? ” 
« You Chriſtian dog,” ſaid the Levant captain, 
6 ſince theſe two dogs of Chriſtian ſlaves are barons 
and metaphyſicians, which, without doubt, is a 
great degree of cignity in their own country, you 
ſhall give me fifty Mouſand ſequins.” „Lou ſhall 


have them, Sir; carry me back again, like light- 
ning, to Conſtantinople, and you ſhall be paid di- 


rely, But ſtop, carry me to Miſs Cunegonda 
firſt.” ? The Levant captain, on the firſt offer of 
Candidus, had turned the head of the veſſel towards 
the city, and made the ſlaves row faſter than a 
bird cleaves the air. ; 
Candidus embraced the Baron and Pangloſs a 
hundred times. How happened it, that I did not 
kill you, my dear Baron? and my dear Pangloſs, 
how came you to life again, after being hanged ? 
and how came yon, both of you, to be galley- 
ſlaves in Turky ?“ © Is it true that my gear ſiſter 
is in this country ?” ſaid the Baron. Tes,“ re- 
plied Cacambo. Then I ſee my dear Candidus 

once more,“ ſaid Pangloſs. * 5 
Candidus preſented Martin and Cacambo to 
them they ne each other, and ſpoke all at 
55 . | the 


A... 9 , 
if a f 
* , s i 
* n R 5 $ 
1 * a 
* 9 
IS N 
. "of | a Md x * = p 
321 . 1 
Pay” < 4 "4 ” 2 
| 1 © Rae a Nn 1 
9 E uw, 1 2 22 mm 4 e — 
— — — = 


«- 2 


—— ___ 7 


98 CANDID US; or, Chap. 28. 
- the ſame time. The galley flew like light- 
ming, and they were already in the port. A Jew 
was ſent for, to whom Candidus fold a diamond 
for fifty thouſand ſequins, which was worth a hun- 
dred thouſand; who, notwithſtanding, ſwore by 
Abraham, that he could not give any more, He 
immediately paid the ranſom of the Baron and 
Pangloſs. The latter threw himſelf at the feet of 
his deliverer, and bathed them with his tears ; as 
for the other, he thanked him with a nod, and 
promiſed to repay him the money the firſt oppor- 
tunity. © But is it poſſible that my fiſter is in 
Turky ?” ſaid he. Nothing is more poſlible,” 
replied Cacambo; for ſhe ſcours the diſhes in 
the houſe of a prince of Tranſylvania!” Two 
more Jews were inſtantly fetched, to whom Candi- 
dus fold ſome more diamonds ; and they ſet out a- 
gain all together in another galley, in order to deli - 
ver Cunegonda. a | 


CH. A F. n 


What happened te Candidus, Cunegonda, Pangheſs, 
Martin, &c. | | 


* to the Baron. I aſk pardon, my Reverend 
Father, for having given you à thruſt with a ſword 
through the body.” Don't let us ſay any more 
about it,” ſaid the Baron; © I waz a little too haſty, 
mot confeſs. But ſince you deſire to know by 
"What fatality I came to be a galley-flave, I will in- 
form you. After I was cured of my wound by a 
brother, who was apothecary to the college, I was 
attacked and carried off by a party of Spaniards, 


ce L your pardon onee more,” ſaid Candidus 


ubo confined me in priſon at Buenos-Ayres, at the 


very time my ſiſter was ſetting out from thence. I 
demanded leave to return to Pe to the Father- 


2 general. 


1 


8 : 4a. —T f en ee ox* oo . £oc a co Act. aa 


> oa XS QDs p V A W e A _ ac 


Freren nee Oo wo a. 


Chap-28. The OPTIMIST. wy 


general. I was nominated to go as almoner to 
Conſtantinople with the French ambaſſador, Ihad not 
been eight days engaged in this employment, when 
one evening I met with a young well-made icoglan. 
It was then very hot; the young man went to 
bathe himſelf, and I took this. opportunity to bathe 
myſelf too. I did not know that it was a capital 
crime for a Chriſtian to be found naked with a. 
young muſſulman. A cadi ordered me to receive 
a hundred ſtrokes of the baſtinado on the foles of 
my feet, and condemned me to the galleys. I do 
not think there ever was a greater act of injuſtice, 
But I ſhould be glad to know, how it comes about, 
that my fiſter is diſh-waſher in the kitchen of a 
Tranſylvanian prince, who is a refugee among the 
Turks.“ | 

But you, my dear Pangloſs, how came I ever 
to ſet eyes on you again?” «It is true indeed,” 
ſaid Pangloſs, that you faw me hanged ; I ought 
naturally to have been burnt ; but you may re- 
member, that it rained prodigiouſly when they were 
going to roaſt me: the ſtorm was fo violent, that 
they deſpaired of lighting the fire. I was therefore 
hanged, becauſe they could do no better. A ſurgeon 
bought my body, carried it home with bim, and 
diſſected me. He firſt made a crucial inciſion on 
me from the umbilicus to the clavicula. No one 
could have been more ſlovenly hanged than I was. 
The executioner of the holy inquiſition, Who was 
a ſubdeacon bcſides, burnt people indeed to a mi- 
racle, but was not uſed to hanging. The cord be- 
ing wet, did not ſlip properly, and the nooſe Was 
badly tied: in:hort, I ſtill drew my breath. The 
crucial iacifion made me give ſuch a dreadful ſhriek; 
that my ſurgeon fell down backwards, and fancy- 
ing be. Mas diſſecting the devil, he run away, ready 
to dib with the fright, and fell down a ſecond 


time un the ſtair-caſe, as he was making off. His 
83 I 2 4 wife 


100 | CANDIDUS; or, Chap. 28. 


wife run out of an adjacent cloſet, on hearing the 
noiſe, ſaw me extended on the table with my cru- 
cial inciſion, and being more frightened than her 
huſband, fled alſo, and tumbled over him. When 
they were come to themſelves a little, I heard the 
furgeon's wife ſay to him : My dear, how come you 
to be fo weak as to venture to diſſect an heretic ? 
Don't you know that the devil always takes pol- 
ſeſſion of the bodies of thoſe people? I will go 
immediately and fetch a prieſt to exorciſe him. I 
ſhuddered at this propoſal, and muſtered up what 
little ſtrength I had left to cry out, Oh, have pity 
upon me.! Atlength the Portugueſe barber took 
courage, ſewed up my ſkin, and his wife nurſed 
me ſo well, that I was upon my feet again in about 
fifteen days. The barber got me a place, to be 
footman to a knight of Malta, who was going to 
Venice; but my maſter not being able to pay me 
my wages, I engaged in the ſervice of a Venetian 
merchant, and went along with him to Conſtan- 
tinople.“ | 

One day the maggot took me to go into a 
moſque. There was no body there but an old 
iman.and a young devotee, . very. handſome, ſaying 
her prayers. Her breaſt was uncovered ; ſhe had 
in her boſom a beautiful noſegay of tulips, roſes, 
anemones, ranunculuſes, hyacinths, and auriculas ; 
ſhe let her noſegay fall; I took it up, and pre- 
ſented it to her with the moſt profound reverence. 
Hnwever, I was ſo long in giving it to her again 
that the iman fell in a paſſion, and ſeeing I was a 
Chriſtian, called out for help. They carried me 
before the cadi, who ordered me to receive a hun- 
dred baſtinadoes, and to be ſent to the galleys. I 
was chained to the very ſame galley and the fame 
bench with the Baron. There were on bott chis 
galley four young men from Marſeilles, five Nea- 
politan prieſts, and two monks of Corfu, h 


* 
f * 
. ** 4 
25 
= Ps. 4. 
” 


1 \ 


—_— 


* 


o told 


S == a wo .co 


-- af = 


— A. At Ms. Fr: 


— © 


LL 
oe 


8 © S8 FS 


ne 


Chap. 29. The OPTIMIS T. rot 


us, that the like adventures happened every day. 
The Baron pretended, that he had ſuffered more 
injuſtice than I; and J inſiſted, that it was far 
more innocent to put a noſegay into a woman's bo- 
ſom, than to be found ſtark naked with an icoglan. 
We were perpetually diſputing, and we received 
twenty laſhes every day with a bulPs pizzle, when 
the concatenation of events of this world brought” 
you to our galley, and you ranſomed us. 
e Well, my dear Pangloſs,” ſaid Candidus to 
him, © when you was hanged, diſſected, "ſeverely 
beaten, and tugging at the oar in the galley, did 


you always think, that things in this world were 


for the beſt?” „ am ſtill of my firſt opinion,” 
anſwered Pangloſs; “ for as J am a philofopher, it 
would be inconſiſtent with my character to con- 
tradict myſelf; eſpecially as Leibnitz could not be 
in the wrong; and his pre eſtabliſned harmony is 
certainly the fineſt ſyſtem in the world, as well as 
his plenum and ſubtile matter.“ 


CH A XXIX. 


How Candidus found Cunegonda and the old woma 
again, | 


Hye Candidus, the Baron, Pangloſs, Mar- 
tin, and Cacambo, were relating their ad- 
ventures to each other, and diſputing about the 
contingent and non-conticgent events of this world, 
and while they were arguing upon effects and cauſes, 
moral and phyſical evil, on liberty and neceſſity, 
and the comforts a perſon may experieneꝶ in the 
galleys in Turky, they arrived on the banks of the 
Propontis, at the houſe of the Prince of Tranſyl- 
vania. The firſt objects which preſented them- 
(elves were Cunegonda and the old woman, hang- 
ing out ſome tabf linen on the lines to dry. * 
| 14 L $3 : nee 


0 E 
. 
, 
: 


102 c AN DID 8; or, Chap. 29. 


The Baron grew pale at this ſight. Even Can- 
didus, the affectionate lover, upon ſeeing his fair 
Cunegonda prodigiouſly tanned, with her eye-lids 
reverſed, her neck withered, -her cheeks wrinkled, 
her arms red and full of ſcales, ſeized with horror, 
jumped near three yards backwards, but afterwards 
advanced to her out of good manners. She em- 
braced Candidus and her brother, who, each of 
them, embraced the old woman, and Candidus ran- 
ſomed them both. 

h There was a little farm in the neighbourhood, 
which the old woman adviſed Candidus to hire, till 
they could meet with better accommodations for 
their whole company. As Cunegonda did not know 
that ſhe was grown ugly, no body having told her 
of it ; ſhe put Candidus in mind of his promiſe, in 
ſo peremptory a manner, that the good man durſt 
not refuſe her. He then intimated to the Baron, 
that he intended to marry his ſiſter. I will never 
| ſuffer,” ſaid the Baron, “ ſuch meanneſs on her 
fide, nor ſuch inſolence on yours. With this in- 
famy I never will be reproached. The children of 
my ſiſter can never be inrolled in the chapters of 
Germany. No; my ſiſter ſhall never marry any 
but a Baron of the empire.” Cunegonda threw 
herſelf at his feet, and bathed them with her tears; 
but he remained inſenſible. You fooliſh puppy 
you,” ſaid Candidus to him, “ I have delivered you 
from the galleys; I have paid your ranſom ; I have 
alſo paid that of your ſiſter; ſhe was a ſcullion 
here, and is very ugly; I have the goodneſs to 
make her my wife, and you pretend ſtill to oppole 
it: I ſhould kill you again, if I ſhould conſuſt my 
paſſion,” Lou may indeed kill me again,” ſaid 
the Baron; “but you ſhall never marry my ſiſter, 
' While I have breath,” i) 


"CHAP. 


worſe humoured than Cunegonda herſelf, Cacam- 


Chap. 30. The OPTIMIS T. 103 


SE Wa BONG 
The concluſion. 


Andidus had no great deſire, at the bottom of 
his heart, to marry Cunegonda. But the ex- 
treme impertinence of the Baron determined him 
to conclude the match, and Cunegonda preſſed it 
ſo earneſtly, that he could not retract, He adviſed 
with Pangloſs, Martin, and the truſty Cacambo. 
Pangloſs drew up an excellent memoir, in which 
he proved, that the Baron had no right over his 
ſiſter, and that ſhe might, according to all the laws 
of the empire, eſpouſe Candidus with her left hand. 
Martin was for throwing the Baron into the ſea : 
Cacambo was of opinion, that it would be beſt to 
ſend him back again to the Levant captain, and 
make him work at the galleys; after which they 
might ſend him to Rome to the Father-general, by 
the firit ſhip. This advice was thought good; the 
old woman approved it; and nothing was ſaid to 
his ſiſter about it, The ſcheme was put in execu- 
tion for a little money; and ſo they had the plea- 
ſure of outwitting a Jeſuit, and puniſhing the pride 
of a German Baron. 

It is natural to imagine, that, after ſo many dif- 
aſters, Candidus married to his ſweetheart, and li- 
ving with the philoſopher Pangloſs, the philoſopher 
Martin, the diſcreet Cacambo, and the old woman, 
and eſpecially as he had brought ſo many diamonds 
from the country of the ancient Incas, maſt live 
the moſt agreeable life of any man upon earth. 
But he was duped fo often by the Jews, that he 
had nothing left but the ſmall farm; and his wife 
growing (till more ugly, turned peeviſh and inſup- 
portable. 'The old woman was very infirm, and 


0 * » * * 
* * « 3 . 
> IF Y © 
1. \ * 9 5 W 
„ 1 
— — a n ad —_ . 
- "KA * T . 
65% r 
DO - a 4x 2 
v IS 1 * 4 . 3 


14 CANDIDUS; or, Chap. 30. 


bo, who worked in the garden, and went to Con- 
ſtantinople to ſell its productions, was worn out 
with labour, and curſed his fate. Pangloſs was 
ready to deſpair, becauſe he did not ſhine at the 
head of ſome univerſity in Germany. As for Mar- 
tin, as he was firmly perſuaded that all was equally 
bad throughout, he therefore bore things with pa- 
tience. Candidus, Martin, and Pangloſs diſputed 
ſometimes about metaphyſics and ethics. They of- 
ten ſaw paſſing under the windows of the farm- 
houſe boats full of effendis, baſhaws, and cadis, 
who were going into baniſhment to Lemnos, Mi- 
tylene, and Erzerum. They obſerved, that other 
cadis, other baſhaws, and other effendis, ſucceeded 
in the poſts of thoſe who were exiled, and that 
they themſelves were baniſhed in their turns. They 
ſaw heads decently impaled, which were to be pre- 
ſented to the Sublime Porte. Theſe ſpectacles in- 
creaſed the number of their diſputations; and when 
they did not diſpute, they were fo prodigiouſly un- 
eaſy and unquiet in themſelves, that the old wo- 
man took the liberty to ſay to them, © I want to 
know which is the worſt, to be raviſhed an hun- 
dred times by negro pirates, to have a buttock cut 
off, to run the gauntlet among the Bulgarians, to 
be whipped and hanged at an auto-da-fe, to be dif- 
ſected, to row in the galleys ; in one word, to have 
ſuffered all the miſeries we have undergone, or to 
ſtay here, without doing any thing?“ „ That is 
l — not eaſily to be determined,” ſaid Can - 
idus. 

This diſcourſe gave rife to new reflections, and 
Martin concluded, upon the whole, that mankind 
are born to live either in the diſtractions of inquie- 
rude, or in the lethargy of diſguſt. Candidus did 
not agree to that opinion, but remained in a ſtate 
of ſuſpenſe. Panglofs confeſſed, that he had un- 
dergone terrible trials; but having once maintained, 

| that 


« 
F 
4 1 
41% 
* 
* 
4 —_— | 


Chap. 30. The OPTIMIST, 05 


that all things went wonderfully well, he till kept 
firm to his hypotheſis, though quite oppoſite to his 
real ſentiments. | 

What contributed to confirm Martin in his ſhock» 
ing principles, to make Candidus ſtagger more than 
ever, and to imbarraſs Pangloſs, was, that one day 
they ſaw Paquetta and Brother Giroflee, who were 
in the greateſt diſtreſs, at their farm. They ſoon 
ſquandered away their three thouſand piaſtres, had 
parted, were reconciled, quarrelled again, had been 
| confined in priſon, had made their eſcape, and Fa- 
ther Girofflee had at length turned Turk. Paquetta 


a continued her trade, where- ever ſhe went, but 
| made nothing by it.“ I could eaſily foreſee,” ſaid 
. Martin to Candidus, “ that yeur preſents would 
7 ſoon be ſquandered away, and would render them 
. more miſerable. You and Cacambo have ſwallowed 
: millions of piaſtres, and are not a bit happier than 
1 Brother Giroflee and Paquetta.” © Ha! ha!“ 
i ſaid Pangloſs to Paquetta, “has Providence then 
n brought you amongſt us again, my poor child ! Do 
5 you know that you have coſt me the tip of my 
- noſe, one eye, and one of my ears, as you may 
t ſee you have? What a world is this!” This 
0 new adventure ſet them a- philoſophiſing more than 
. ever.“ 5 
e There lived in the neighbourhood a very famous 
0 derviſe, who paſſed for the greateſt philoſopher in 
is Turky. They went to conſult him. Pangloſs was 
"Pi choſen ſpeaker, and faid to him,“ Maſter, we are 
come to deſire you would tell us, why fo ſtrange 
E an animal as man was created.“ | 
d « What's that to you ?” ſaid the derviſe; “ is 
e- it any buſineſs of thine?” „ But, my Reverend 
id Father,” ſaid Candidus, “there is a ſhocking ſight 
te of evil upon earth.” „ What ſignifies,” ſaid the 
ns derviſe, © © whether there be good or evil, When 
4, his Sublime Highneſs ſends a veſſel to Egypt, does 
at | "NS it 


— — : 
STS 


e g 


106 CANDIDUS; or, Chap. 30. 


it trouble him whether the mice on board are at 
their eaſe or not? „ What would you have one 
do then?“ ſaid Pangloſs. Hold your tongue,” 
ſaid the derviſe. I promiſed myſelf the pleaſure, 
ſaid Pangloſs, of reaſoning with you upon effects 
and cauſes, the beſt of poſſible worlds, the origin of 
evil, the nature of the ſou), and the pre-eſtabliſhed 
harmony.”— The derviſe, at theſe words, ſhut the 
door againſt them. | 
During this conference, news was brought that 
two vizirs and a mufti were ſtrangled at Conſtanti- 
nople, and a great many of their friends impaled, 
This cataſtrophe made a great noiſe for ſome hours. 
Pangloſs, Candidus, and Martin, in their return to 
the little farm, met a good-looking old man, taking 
theair, at his door, under an arbour of orange trees. 
Pangloſs, who had as much curioſity as philoſophy, 
alked him the name of the mufti, who, was lately 
ſtrangled. * I know nothing at all about it,” ſaid 
the good man; © and what's more, I. never knew 
the name of a ſingle mufti, or a ſingle vizir, in my 
life. 1 am an entire ftranger to the ſtory you men- 
tion; and preſume, that, generally ſpeaking, they 
who trouble their heads with ſtate-affairs, ſometimes 
die ſhocking deaths, not without deſerving it : but 
I never trouble my head about what is doing at 
Conſtantinople; J content myſelf with ſending my 
fruits thither, the produce of my garden, which 
I cultivate with my own hands!” Having faid 
theſe words, he introduced the ſtrangers into his 
houſe : his two daughters and two ſons ſerved them 
with ſeveral kinds of ſherbet, which they made 
themſelves, befides caymac, enriched. with the peels 
of candied citrons, oranges, lemons, ananas, 
piſtachio nuts, and Mocao coffee, unadulte- 
rated with the bad coffee of Batavia -and the ifles. 
After which, the two daughters of this good muſ- 


ſulman 


Chap. zo. The OPTIMIST, 107 
ſulman perfumed the beards of Candidus, Pangloſs, 
and Martin. 

« You muſt certainly,” ſaid Candidus to the 


Turk, “ have a very large and very opulent eſtate!” 
« I have only twenty acres,” ſaid the Turk; 


« which I, with my children, cultivate. Labour | 
keeps us free from three of the greateſt evils, tire | 


ſomeneſs, vice, and want.” 

As Candidus returned towards his farm, he made 
deep reflections on the diſcourſe of the Turk. Said 
he to Pangloſs and Martin, The condition of this 
good old man ſeems to me preferable to that of 

the fix Kings with whom we had the honour to 
ſup.” © The grandeurs of royalty,” ſaid Pangloſs, 
are very precarious, in the opinion of all phi- 
loſophers. For, in ſhort, Eglon, King of the Mo- 
abites, was aſſaſſinated by Ehud ; Abſalom was hung 
by the hair of his head, and pierced through with 
three darts; King Nadab, the ſon of Jeroboam, 
was killed by Baaſha ; King Elah by Zimri ; Aha - 
ziah by Jehu; Athaliah by Jehoiadah; the Kings 
Joachim, Jechonias, and Zedekias, were carried 
into captivity. You know the fates of Crœſus, A- 


ſtyages, Darius, Dionyſius of Syracuſe, Pyrrhus, 


Perſeus, Hannibal, Jugurtha, Arioviſtus, Cæſar, Pom- 
pey, Nero, Otho, Vitellius, Domitian, Richard II. 
Edward II. Henry VI. Richard III. Mary Stuart, 
and Charles I. of England, the three Henrys of 
France, and the Emperor Henry IV. You know—”? 
© I know very well,” ſaid Candidus, that we ought. 


to look after our garden. » « You are in the right,” 7 
, faid Pangloſs ; 


or when man was placed in the 
garden of Eden, he was d there, ut operaretur 
eum, to cultivate it; which proves that mankind 
are not created to be idle.” « Let us work,” ſaid 
Martin, without diſputing ; © it is ny way to 
render life ſupportable.” EE, 


All their Jet ſociety entered into thi: Bucks 


108 CANDIDUS, Ge. Chap. 30. 


deſign, according to their different abilities. Their 
little piece of ground produced a plentiful crop. 
Cunegonda indeed was very ugly, but ſhe turned 
out an excellent paſtry- cook. Paquetta worked at 
embroidery, and the old woman took care of the 
linen. There was no idle perſon in the company, 
not excepting even Brother Girofflee ; he made a 
very good carpenter, and became too a very ho- 
neſt man. 
Pangloſs would ſometimes ſay to Candidus : “ All 
events are linked together in this beſt of all poſſible 
A worlds. For if you had not been driven with great 
blows on the backſide out of a very fine caſtle, on 
account of your paſſion for Mrs Cunegonda ; if 
you had not been thrown into the inquiſition ; if 
you had not rambled through America on foot ; 
if you had not given the Baron a hearty blow with 
your {word ; if you had not loſt all the ſheep that 
you brought from that good country Eldorado; you 
would not have eat here preſerved citrons and piſta- 
chio nuts.” That is well ſaid,” ſaid Candidus ; 
t but let us cultivate our garden.” 


— — 9. 
"x 
— 


* — 


—— 


— 


2 


8 — — ate” ac 5 — 1 5 
K = * TT a = — 
— --_—_— P ant a 5 Rs 
* — —— ” 
a . — r RES 2 


— 


P:' Ri EF) e. 


T was thought that Dr RaLen *-had not 
intended to continue his OpTIMISM. 
It was tranſlated and publiſhed as a com- 
plete performance. But the Doctor, being 
encouraged by the petty quiddities of the 
German univerſities, has wrote a ſecond 
part, which we have tranſlated as ſoon as 
poſſible, to ſatisfy the impatience of the 
public, and eſpecially thoſe who are not 
fond of the witticiſms of Maſter Aliboron, 
who are acquainted with Abraham Chau- 
meix, and do not read the JouRNAL DE 
TRrEvoux. 


ro 


» Te 


_— — = OL k * AL 
: — — _—_——— . — ® 
.. EI ES 


o 
j * 
* 
L * 
n 

* n 9 * 
. 
— 1 3 2— 


* Though the French copy bears to have been writ- 
ten by Dr Ralph; yet it is univerſally known, that the 
celebrated M. de Voltaire is the undoubted author of 
this performance. 


AD VE R- 


ADVERTISEMENT. 


Hen we. meet with ſo modeſt a phi- 
loſopber as Dr Raren, we are apt 
to make compariſons amongſt writers. And 
here the Rev. author of- TRISTRAM SHAN= 
vv comes firſt in our way. He, to pleaſe 
his readers, brings in blank chapters, 
double entendres, and the winding up of 
clocks: he introduces alſo a famous ad- 
venturer from the celebrated Slachenber- 
gius. It is not ſo with our philoſopher: 
he makes uſe of no borrowed figures; net» 
ther does he introduce ſo much experimen- 
tal philoſophy, as in the firſt part. This 
ſequel is quite eaſy and natural; and we 
may beſtow on him that encomium which 
Candidus gives to his friend Pangloſs, 
« Certainly, M. VoLTarre, you are a 
very great philoſopher.” 


