CANDIDUS: 
OR, THE 


OPTIMIST. 
By Mr. Dr VOLTAIRE. | 
Tranſlated into Engliſh 


By W. RIDER, M. A. 
Late SCHOLAR of * College, Oxford. 


1 


2 


LONDON: 


rinted for J. Scorr, at the Black Swan, f in 
Pater - noſter- Row, and J. GR ET rox, in 
Old Bond-Street. Mc IIxX. 


[Price One Shilling and Six-Pence.] 


dt . 


| 


FAISEDTK. 


OR THE 
OPTIMIST. 
"CHAP. I. 


How Candidus was brought up in a 
noble Caſtle, and the Manner of his 
Expu Non from thence. 


###*X HERE dwelt in Veſtpbalia in the 
T : Caſtle of the Baron de Thunder - ten- 


tronck, a young Man, whom Nature 
M#S#X had bleſſed with the moſt drs 


Manners. His Aſpect was an index to his Soul. 
| B His 


X 
. 
„ 
* 


„ 

His Judgment was pretty good, and Simplicity 
great: which, I imagine was the Reafon of his 
being called Candidus. The old Servant ſuſpec- 
ted he was the Son of the Baron's Siſter, and an 
honeſt Gentleman in the Neighbourhood, whom 
the Lady refuſed to marry, becauſe he could 
not trace his Pedigree higher than Seventy- one 
Generations, having loſt the Tree of his Gene- 
alogy, by the Injury of Time. 

The Baron was one of the greateſt Lords in 
all Weſiphalia; for his Caſtle had both a Door 
and Windows to it: Nay, even his great Hall 
was hung with Tapeſtry. The Dogs, which 
kept his Yards, made up his Pack upon occa- 
ſion; his Hoſtlers were his Huntſmen, and the 
Vicar of the Village his grand Almoner. They 
all ſtiled him My Lord, and * at his 

ories. 

My Lady, the Baroneſs, who weighed about 
Three Hundred and Fifty Pounds, attracted no 
ſmall natice on that Account, and did the 
Honours of the Houſe with a Dignity, which ren- 
dered her ſtill more reſpectable. Her Daughter 
Cunigonda, was Seventeen, of a ſanguine Com- 
plexion, freſh, luſty and amorous, The Son of 
the Baron appeared in every reſpect worthy of 
his Father. His Preceptor, Pangle/s, was the 
- Oracle of the Houſe, and the little Candidus 
lſtened 


181 
liſtened to his Lectures with all the Simplicity, 
that was ſuitable to his Age and Character, . 
. Pangkeſs read Lectures in Metaphiſico-theologo- 


| coſmolo-nigology. He demonſtrated that there 


can be no Effet without a Cauſe, that in this 
beſt of poffible Worlds, the Baron's Caſtle was 
the fineſt, and my Lady the beſt of all poſſible 
Baroneſſes. 

, © It is demonſtrable, ſaidhe, that it can't 
© be otherwiſe: for as every Thing muſt be 
«© made for ſome End, every Thing muſt neceſ- 
&« farily be intended for the beſt End. As it is 
evident that our Noſes are formed to bear 
«« SpeCtacles, ſo we have Spectacles. Our Legs 
c are apparently made to be covered with 
6 2 and we have Stockings. Stones 

were. formed to be wrought, and to build 
& « Galle with ; and my Lord has a ñne Caſtle; 
the greateſt Load of the Manor, ought to be 
<< lodged the beſt. And as Swine are made to 
ebe eat, we live upon Pork all the Year 
&« round : Conſequently, A. o have aſſerted 
< that all Things are good, hàve been guilty of 
« avery great Folly ; z they ſhould have faid that 
every Thing is be/f. 

Candidus heard him with Attention, and aſ- 
ſented with great Simplicity; for he thought 
Miſs Cunegondg extremely handſome, though he 

| B 2 ne» 


| 
| 
| 


C41] 


never had the Courage to tell her ſo. He imagi- 
ned that next to having the Happineſs to be born 


Baron of Thunder-ten-tronck, was that of being 


Miſs Cunegonda, the third degree was that of 
ſeeing her every Day, and the fourth to hear 
Maſter Panglo/s, the greateſt Philoſopher of 
the Province, and conſequently of the whole 


World. | 
One Day as Cunigonda was taking a Walk 


near the Caſtle, in a little Wood, which was 


dignify'd with the Name of a Park, ſhe ſaw Dr. 


Panglsſs amongſt he Buſhes, giving a Lecture 


in experimental Philoſophy to her Mother's Cham- 


| ber-maid, a ſhoft, brown Girl, of a very 
teachable Diſpoſition. As Miſs Cunegonda had 
a very ſtrong Propenfity to learning, ſhe obſer- 
ved, without making the leaſt Noiſe, the reitera- 


ted Experiments, that were made before her 
Eyes; ſhe got a clear Inſight into the Doctor's 
Reaſonings, upon Effects and Cauſes; and re- 


turned in great Perturbation and Penſiveneſs, fil- 
led with a longing Deſire of being made more wiſe, 
thinking that that might ſeem a ſufficient Rea- 


ſon to Candidus, which was ſo to her—She met 


Candidus, in her Return to the Caſtle, and 
bluſhed : Candidus bluſhed likewiſe ; ſhe bid him 
Good-morrow in a faultering Voice, and Can- 


didus replied without knowing what he ſaid, 


The 


EF 


Hand of the young Lady, with a Vivacity, a Sen- 


Mouths met, their Eyes darted Fire, their | 


131 
The next Day, after Dinner, as they were 
going from Table, Cunigonda and Candidus met 
behind a Skreen. Cunigonda drop'd her Hand- 
kerchief, Candidus took it up; ſhe innocently took —— | 
hold of his Hand, the Youth innocently kiſſed the | 


ſibility and a Grace ſomewhat ſingular ; their 


Knees trembled, their Hands uſed great Free- 
doms. The Baron of Thunder - ten- tronck 
paſſed cloſe by the Skreen, and ſeeing this Cauſe 
and this Efe#, kicked Candidus out of the 
Caſtle, Cunigonda fell into Fits, and when ſhe re- 
covered, received many a Box on the Ear from 
my Lady the Baroneſs, and every Thing was 
in Diſorder in the moſt handſome, and moſt a- 
greeable of all Caſtles FR” | 


5 Dar U. 
fd became” of Candidus among the 
Bulgarians. 


Sarnen, thus driven out of his 
terreſtrial Paradiſe, walked ſometime without 
knowing where, in Tears, lifting up his Eyes 
to Heaven, and fometimes turning them to- 
wards the fineſt Caſtle, which contained the 
handſomeſt of all Baroneſſes; he laid himſelf 
down, without any Supper, between two Rucks, 
which ſerved him inſtead of 3 Bed, it ſnowing 
all the while prodigiouſly. Candidus, benumbed 
with the Cold, crept along the next Morning to 
a neighbouring Village, which is called Walberg- 
hoff-tarbk-dikdorff, without Money, and dying 
with Hunger and Fatigue; he ſtopped in the 
greateſt Diſtreſs at the Door of a Publick Houſe. 
Two Men, dreſſed in blue, took Notice of him: 
Comrade, ſays one of them, look, there's a 
well made young Fellow, of a proper Height ;” 
they went up to Candidus, and intreated him to 
dine with them very civilly. Gentlemen, ſays 


Can- 


** IA 


bh 0. * op 


8 171 


Candidus to them, with an engaging Modeſty, 


you do me too much Honour; for I have 
nothing to pay the Reckoning. O Sir (ſays one 
of the Blues) Men of your Figure and Merit 
never pay any thing; arn't you five Foot five 
% Inches high? Ves Gentlemen, I am,” 
replied he, making a low Bow, Well Sir; 
<« fit down ; we will not only pay your Reck - 
« oning, but we will take care, that ſuch a Man, 
< as you, ſhall never want Money; Mankind 
are made to ſuccour one another.” That's 
« true, ſaid Candidus; tis what Maſter Pang lo ſa 
t has often told me; and J am convinced that 
every thing is for the 5%. They then in- 
treated him to take a few Crowns, which he ac- 


. cepted of, and would have given them his 


Note, but they refuſed it, on which they ſet 


down to Table. Are not you very much in 


Love — „Ah! yes, replied he, I am deeply 
% in Love with Miſs Cuniganda „ That's 
4 not the Thing, ſaid one of theſe Gentlemen, 
we wanted to know whether you was not 
& deeply in Love with the King of the Bul- 
£4 garians ; Not at all, faid he, for I never 
« ſaw him. How? why he is the moſt 
« charming King, and you muſt drink his 
Health.“ „With all my Heart, Gentlemen, 
< faid he, and drank it.” © That's enough, 

. —_ & ſaid 


CK 1 
9 ſaid they to him, you are now the Bulwark, 
e Support, the Defender, the Hero of the 
ulgarians,' you have made your Fortune, 
« and your Fame is certain.” On this they 
immediately put him in Irons, and carried him 
to their Regiment. They made him move to 
the Left, to the Right, draw his Bayonet, re- 
cover his Bayonet, club his Firelock, draw, - 
march, and gave him a hundred Blows: with a 
Stick ; the next Day he performed his Exerciſe 
not quite ſo bad, and received but twenty Blows, 
the next Day after that he had but ten, and was 
looked upon as ſomewhat Nn by his 
Comrades. | 
Caudidus was fo Fupid, that be could not, 
as yet, well diſcover in what Reſpect he was an 
Hero; he took it into his Head one ſine Day, in 
the Spring, to take a Walk, going ſtraight for- 
wards, thinking that it was a Privilege of the 
human Species, as well as the Brute Creation, 
to make uſe of their Limbs if they pleaſe. He 
had, however, ſcarce gone two Leagues, when 
four other Heroes, ſix Feet high, ſeized hold 
of him, bound him, and clapped him into a 
Dungeon: here he was aſked very magiſterially 
which he liked beſt, to run the Gauntlet fix and 
thirty Times thro* the Regiment, or to receive 
 twelye Balls of Lead in his Brains at once: it 
| XK 4 Was 


18 þ 
was not in his Power to inſiſt that the Will is 
free, and that he choſe neither of them, for he 
was under a Neceſſity to make a Choice: and 
by virtue of the Gift of Providence, which is 
ſtiled Free Will, he choſe to run the Gauntlet 
ſix and thirty times. He run two Heats. The 
Regiment being compoſed of two thouſand Men; 
he received, of conſequence, four thouſand 
Wounds from their Bayonets, which laid bare 
all his Muſcles and Nerves from the Nape of his 
Neck down to his Rump. As they were pre- 
paring for his running the third Heat, Candidus, 
finding himſelf not able to go through it, begg d | 
it as a Favour of them to knock him: on the 
Head; he obtained his Requeſt: they blinded 
his Eyes, and made him kneel down: the King 
of the Bulgarians paſſing by, at that Inſtant, 
inquired into the Crime of the Malefactor, and 
as he was a Perſon of great Penetration, he ga- 
hered from what he heard of Candidus, that he 
vas a young Metaphyſician, entirely ignorant of 
he Things of this World, and he pardoned 
im with a Clemency which will be celebrated 
all Hiſtories and in all Ages. A ſkilful 
zurgeon cured Candidus in three Weeks with 
mollients, which he learnt out of Diaſcorides. 
e had juſt got a little Skin upon his Bones, 
d could ſtand, when the King of the Bulga- 
ans gave battle to the King of the Abares. 


el 


ooo οοννννUn 


C HAP. III. 


How Candidus got clear of the Bul- 
. garians, and the Conſequences of that 


Explut. 


Noe could be ſo ſine, ſo nice, ſo btilliant, 
fo well diſciplined as the two Armies. 
The Trumpets, Fifes, Hautbois, Drums, the 
Cannon, farmed ſuch a Concert, as could never 
de equalled in the infernal Regions. The 
Cannon ſwept away, at firſt, about fix thouſand 
Men on each fide, then the Muſketry ſent 
out of the bei of Worlds about nine or ten 

. thoufand Raſcals, . which infeſt its Surface. 
The | Bayonet was likewiſe. a ſufficient: Ple: 
-- for the Death of fame Thouſands. The whole 
might amount to pretty near thirty thouſand 
Souls. Candidut, who trembled all this while, 
like a Philoſopher, hid himſelf as well as he coul 
during this heroic Butchery. At laſt while eac 
of the Kings had cauſed Te Deum to be ſung it 
his Camp, he formed the Reſolution to go 
where | my” to reaſon upon the · R ect: ar : 
Ca j 


+ Sx -I- ere 


/ 


C @ 3 
Canſes. He paſſed over Heaps of the dead and 
dying, and got, at laſt, to a neighbouring Vile 
lage, which was laid in Aſhes. It was a Village 
of the Abarians, which the Bulgarians had burnt 
according to the Law of Nations. Here the 
Veterans ſhot through in ſeveral Places, beheld 
their Wives dying with their Throats cut, and | 
holding. their Infants to their blogdy Breaſts ; 
there the Virgins, with their Belle ripped up 
after having been ſubject to the preſſing NVeceſſ· 
ties of ſome of the Heroes, breathed out their 
laſt Sighs : and others half. burnt cried out far 
the finiſhing Hand of Death. The Ground was 
coyered with Brains, and fpread with Arms and 
Legs which were lopt off, 

Candidus fled, as faſt as he could, to * 
Village, which belonged to the Bulgarians, and 
had been treated in the ſame manner by the 
Abarian Heroes. Candidus, walking all this 
while, upon quivering Limbs, or through Ruins, 
got, at laſt, out of the Theatre of War, with a 
ſmall Quantity in his K.napſack, never forgetting 
Miſs Cunigonda. His Proviſions were ſpent by 
2+ Time he reached Helland ; but having heard 


"El that every one was rich there, and that it was a 
MY Chriſt 


Cauntry; he made no doubt but he 
hould meet with as good Treatment there as 


Mo be he ee Bran ati ber be ho 


I”) 
been expelled on Account of the Charms * Miss 
Td, 

He aſked Alms of a great many grave looking 
Perſons, who all reply'd, that if he continued 
that Trade they would catry him to a Houſe of 
Correction, where he would learn to get his 
Bread. 
le next applied himſelf to a Man, who had 

juſt been ſpeaking himſelf, a ſull Hour, on 
Charity, before a great Aſſembly. This Orator 
eyeing him aſkance, ſays to him, What Bu- 
ic ſineſs has brought you here? Are you in the 
& enlightened Cauſe ? There is no Effect with- 
4e out a Cauſe, reply'd Candidus, with great 
« Modeſty ; every thing is determined by Ne- 
« ceflity, and ordered for the beſt, It was 
ec predeſtinated that I ſhould be driven from 
«Miſs Cunigonda, that I ſhould run the Gaunt- 
& let, and laſtly that I ſhould beg my Bread, 
« till I can get 5 all theſe Things could not 
« poſſibly be otherwiſe. My Friend, faid 
c the Orator to him, do you believe that the 
4 Pope is Antichriſt.” © I never heard any 
<« thing about him, replied Candidus, but whe- 
< ther he is, or is not, I know this I am in 
ce want of Bread.” © You never deſerve 


tc to eat any, ſaid the other; go, you Rogue, 
* get you gone, you Wretch, don't come near 


C4 3 


lis * me again, for your Life. The Orator's Wife, 


having popp'd her Head out of the Window, 
ing and hearing of a Man that doubted whether the 


ied Pope was Antichriſt, immediately pour'd out 
of this Exclamation——— Oh Heaven's] to what 
his Heights is Religion carried by the Fair Sex] 
-A Perſon, who had never been baptized, a 
12d good Anabaptiſt, named James, faw the cruel 
on land ſhameful Manner with which they treated 
tor None of his Brethren, a two-footed Creature with- 
out Feathers, indued with a rational Soul; carried 
him home, cleaned him, gave him ſomething to 
eat and drink, made him a Preſent of two Florins, 
and offered to teach him how to work at his 
Trade of weaving Per/ian Stuffs, which are fa- 
was I bricated in Holland, Candidus almoſt proſtra- 
ting himſelf before him, cried out, Maſter Pan- 
roſs had Reaſon for teaching that every Thing 
was for the be/? in this World; for I am far, 
more affected by the Greatneſs of your Genero- 
lity, than by the Hard-heartedneſs of that Gen- 
the _ in the black Gown, and the Lady his 
ife, | 
ne- The next Day, as he was walking, he met 
in with a Beggar covered all over with Puſtules, 
rye Is Eyes dead, his Noſe eat off, his Mouth 
ue, drawn on one fide, his Teeth black, and ſpeaking, 
ear rough his Throat, tormented with a terrible 
me Cough, and ſpitting out one of his Teeth after e- 
very Fit of Coughing. CHa. 


i 
. 
ö 


12 


* 


5 v dead: * -$-4-$: NWA 


CHAP. IV. 

How Candidus met with bis old\Maſter 
in Philoſophy, Dr. Pangloſs, and 
what paſſed between them. 


CAN D I DU'S being more effected with Com- 

paſſion than Horror, gave this frightful 
Mendicant the two Florins which he had re- 
ceived from James, the honeſt Anabaptiſt. On 
which the Spectre look'd with Attention, ſhed 
Tears, and ſeized him round his Neck. Candi. 
dus leaping backwards in a Fright, Alas! ſaid 
| this poor Wretch to him, . Don't you remem- 
<< ber your dear Panglo/s ?”” What do T heart 
« Are you my Maſter, replied Candidus.? Lou 
e jn that dreadful Condition? What Misfortune 
« has befallen you? What brought you from 
« the fineſt of all Caſlles? What is become of 
« Miſs Cunigonda; the moſt beautiful of all the 
cc fair Sex, the Maſter-piece of Nature? 1 
« am not able to anſwer you at preſent, ſaid 
« Panghlſs.” On which Candidus conducted 


him 


l 

bim to che Stable of the Anabaptiſt, where he 
got him omething to eat; and when Pangleſs 
was refreſhed a little, 4+ Well now, ſays he 
« to him, what is become of Canigonda ?” << She 
« js dead, replied the other. Candidus fell in a 
Fit, as he pronounced theſe Words; and his 
Friend reſtored him to his-Senſes, by means of a 
little bad Vinegar, which happened to be upon 
the Table. Candidus opening bis Eyes, “ Ah! 
% Cuniganda is dead, ſays he ſighing? Is this 
then the % of Worlds? But, —— Diſtem- 
um- © per did ſhe die of? Was it not becauſe ſhe 
tful “ ſaw me kick'd out of the fine Caſtle, of my 
re- Lord, her Father? No, ſaid Pangleſs, ſhe 
On “ was ripped up by the Bulgarian Soldiers, after 
hed © having ſuffered the greateſt Indignities her Sex 
ai · could poſſibly endure : They knocked the Ba- 
ſaid © ron an the Head far attempting to defend her; 
em- © my Lady, the Baroneſs, was cut in Pieces; 
ar? © my poor Pupil treated in the ſame Manner, 
ou © as her Siſter ; and as for the Caſtle, they have 
une © not left one Stone upon another, nor a Barn, 
om nor a Sheep, nor a Duck, nor a Tree; but 
of © we have received ample Revenge, for the Abares 
the ſl have done the ſame in a neighbouring Barony 
« IF * which belonged to a Bulgarian Nobleman. 

ſaid Arthis News Canaluus fainited'a ſecond Time; 
Red but coming to himſelf again, and having faid all 
him | | that 


[ 16 J 

that he ought to ſay, he inquired into the Cauſe 
and Effect, and the final Reaſon of Panglſs's 
appearing in ſuch a pitiful Condition. Ah! 
c ſaĩd the other, it is Love; Love, the Comfor- 
tc ter of the Human Race, the Preſerver of the 
<« Univerſe, the very Soul of ſenſible Beings, « 
cc tender Love! Indeed, ſaid Candidus, I have 
experienced Love myſelf, the Sovereign 
of Hearts, the Soul of our Souls; but If. 
never got more than one Kiſs and twenty 
Kicks on my Breech by it. How could this . 
charming Cauſe then have been able to produce «; 
fuch an horrible Effect on you? F 
 Pangloſs replied to the following Effect: « 
« My dear Candidus, you knew Paguetta, the « 
ce pretty Maid of our noble Baroneſs; I have iff c 
te taſted the Pleaſures of Paradiſe within her | 
« Arms, which has occaſioned theſe infernal || c 
* Tortures, with which you ſee me conſumed ; || « 
&« the was infected herſelf, and died of the N« 
« Diſtemper. Pacquetta had received it as a . 
© Preſent from a wiſe Cordelier, who had it Ne 
te thro the right Channel, for he had it given 

ic him by an old Counteſs, that received it from a 
« a Captain of Horſe, who was obliged for it, I. 
* to a Marchioneſs, who received it from a 
& Page, that contracted it from a Jeſuit, who 


«© received it, in his Novitiate, immediately 
& from 


4. 


E. 1F } 


6 from one of the Companions of Chrifopher 
% Columbus; as for my Part I am not likely 


& to give it to any Body, for it has almoſt killed 
«© me.” 

« O Pangleſs, cried Candidus, this is a very 
e ſtrange Genealogy indeed: Was not the 
„Devil himſelf the original Source of it?“ 
e By no Means, replied this great Man; it was 
& requiſite in the 5% of Worlds, it was a neceſ- 
e ſary Ingredient ; for, if Columbus had not con- 
& trated this Diſtemper, in one of the Iſlands 
© of America, which infects the very Source 


« of Generation, ſometimes is an Obſtacle to 


“ Generation itſelf, and counteraQts every De- 
« fign of Providence in our Creation; we ſhould 

not have had either Chocolate or Cciclllncel « 
ee beſides it is a Point deſerves our Canide 
« ation, that this Diſtemper and Cantroverſy 
« are found no where in the Continent, but a- 
% mongft qurſelves. The Turks, the Indians, 
« the Chineſe, the Inhabjtants of Siam 
« Faponeſe, have as yet no Knowledge 
„But there is a /# ufficient Reaſo 
« ſhould experience it in their Tu: 
« hence, In the interim it be confeſſed, 
it has made a prodigious Tr@reſs amongſt 
© us, and eſpecially among the vaſt Armies of 
Mercenaries, that are deſcended from great 
| ; 8.2. «6 Houſes, 


— * Tus ©, — 2 — — —— 


6 8 ] 

46 « Houſes which decide the Fate of States; it is 
a known Fact, that if thirty thouſand Men 
* on one Side, meet with an equal Number on 
ce the other, in the Field of Battle, there are at 
& leaſt twenty thouſand on each Side that have 

got this Diſtemper. 
That is indeed ſomewhat urin ſays 
46 Candiags, but you muſt be cured. But how 
can I? ſaid Pangles, I have not a ſingle Penny, 


my Friend, and all the World over one can- 


not be blaoded, or get a Lotion without paying 
for ĩt one's ſelf, or ſome other Perſons doing that 
friendly Office for one. 

The laſt Hint, furniſhed Candidus with an 
Expedient. He went and threw himſelf at the 
Feet of James his charitable Anabaptiſt, giving 
ſuch an affecting Deſcription of his Friena's 
Condition, that the good Man ſent for Doctor 
Pangla/s immediately, and had him cured at his 


own Expence. Pangliſs recovered with the Loſs. 


of hut one of his Eyes and an Ear; and as he 
wrote 2 good Hand, and underſtood Accompts, 
the Anabaptiſt made him his Book - keeper. At 
the Expiration of two Months, being obliged to 
go to Lisbon to ſettle ſome Affairs, — carried our 
two Philoſophers along with him. Pangloſ. 
preached to him the De&rine of the beſt: But 
James . of a contrary * „ Man- 


cc kind 


ths: - me A 1 20 att, 1 35 


(1 19 J. 
ce kind ſays he, muſt have corrupted their Na- 
* ture, for they are not born Wolves, but have 
« become Wolves; ; God never pave them 
c twenty four Pounders, nor Bayonets, but yet 


they have made Bayonets, and Cannon, to 


« deſtroy one another, themſelves, I might 
indeed place your Bankrupts to the ſame Ac- 
« count, and Law too, which ſeizes on their Ef- 
ei fefts in order to cheat the Creditors. All 
** this was abſolutely neceſſary; replied our one- 
& eyed Doctor, the Misfortunes of | Individuals 
tend to the good of the whole; ſo that the 
more the Misfortunes of Indiyiduals are increa- 
s ſed, the greater is the agregate Sum of good.” 
Whilſt he was argning, the Sky grew dark, the 

Winds blew from every one of the four Corners 

of the World, and the Veſſel was beaten by a ter- 
rible Tempeſt in Sight of, the . * 

Luna. 


n 8 
ED TEE 
de Af. v. 


4 4 Tempeh, a Shipwreck, an Eartb- 


. quake, and what became of Doctor 


Pangloſs, Candidus, and en the 
Wanna 16.16 


ONE Part of the Paſſengers Er quite weak, 
and half dead with thoſe inconceivable Ter- 


tures, which the rowling of a Veſſel occaſions in 
the nervous and animal Syſtem; had not Strength 
enough to be alarmed at their preſent Danger. 


The other Part made terrible Lamentations, and 
betook themſelves to their Prayers. As for the 


Sails they were torn to Pieces, the Maſts 
carried away by the Board, and the Veſſel very 
leaky. Every one was at Liberty to work or 


not, no one regarded any thing, nor was there 


any Order kept on B The Anabaptiſt in- 
deed, lent a Hand to work the Ship: As he 
ſtood upon the Deck, one of the Sailors, being 
in a Paſſion gave him a Blow, which extended 


him upon the Floor; but the reaction of the 


Blow 


WY 


[21 1] 
Blow was ſo violent, that he fell out of the Ship 
himſelf, Head-fore-moſt. He hung and ſtuck 
by a part of the broken Maſt. ' The good 


James, ran immediately to his Affiſtance, mids 


helped him in again, but over-reaching himſelf, 
fell into the Sea in ſight: of the Sailor, Who 
Jet him periſh without giving himſelf the leaſt 
Concern about him. Candidus came towards 
the Place, where he fell in, and ſaw his Bene * 
factor riſe once, and diſappear for ever. He 
was going to throw himſelf into the Sea after 
him, had not the Philoſopher Pangloſs hindered 


him, by demonſtrating that the Road of Lisbon 


had been formed on purpoſe for the Anabaptiſt 
to be drowned there. While he was proving 
this a priori, the Veſſel went down to the Bot- 
tom, and every Soul periſhed, excepting Pan- 
gloſs, Candidus, and the Brute of a Sailor, that 
had been inſtrumental to the drowning of the 
Anabaptiſt; the Villain ſwam, like a Fiſh, to 
Shore, whether Pangloſs and Candidus were driven 
upon a Plank. 

When they had recovered themſelves a little, 


| they walked towards Lisben; they had a little 


Money left, with which they hoped they ſhould 
be able to eſcape from Hunger, as well as from 
the Storm. But ſcarce had they ſet Feet in the 
Ci, 1 the Death of their Benefactor, 
C 3 than 


| L 122 7] 
than they. felt the Ground ſhake under theif 
Feet; and ſaw the Sca break in Surges into the 
Port, and daſh in Pieces the Ships that were 
Riding there at Anchor. Large Sheets of 
Flames and Cinders covered the Streets and 
publick Places, the Buildings tumbled down, the 
Houſes were overturned from their very Foun- 
dations, and the Foundations themſelves diſap- 
peared ; thirty thouſand Inhabitants, of all Ages, 
and Sexes, were cruſhed under the Ruins. As 


for the Sailor he whiſtled, and ſwore, that now 


was the Time to make himſelf. << What can 


be the final Canſe of this Phœnomenon, ſaid 


* Pangleſs?” This is the laſt Day, cried 
Candidus. 

The Sailor ran me amidſt the WN 
hazarded his Life in ſearch of Treaſure, found 
it, ſeiged on it, got drunk, and having ſlept 
himſelf ſober, purchaſed the Favours of the firſt 
Proftitute he met with; upon the Ruins of the 
Houſes which had fallen down, and in the midſt 
of dead Bodies, and Perſons juſt expiring, Pan- 
$/o/s-kept pulling him all the while by the Sleeve: 
Friend, ſaid he, this is not right, you oppoſe 
«the. Reaſon of I hings; you ſhould have 
0 more, Regard. to the preſent Conjuncture. 

Blood, and Wounds! replied the other; I am 
* ene and Was born at Batavia, I have 


4780 . 8 — e tram- 


_ refreſhed themſelves a little. At laſt they took 


t 28 7 
< trampled -upon the Croſs four Times in the 
« four Voyages I made to Japan; you may go 
* and ſeek for your Man who acts agreeable 
to the Reaſon of Things, ſomewhere elſe. 
 Some-Splinters of Wood having wounded 
Candidus, he was flung down in the Street and 
covered over with Ruins. Ah, ſaid he to Pan» 
« oloſs, get me alittle Wine and Oil, for I am 
< almoſt dead.” © This Earthquake is not a 
<« ſtrange Thing, replied Pangloſs; the City of 
« [ima experienced the ſame ſhocks in America 
« Jaſt Year; like Cauſes have like E ffefts;, there 
« js certainly-a Train of Sulphur under Ground, 
« which reaches from Lima to Liſbon,” No- 
ce thing is more probable, ſaid Candidus, but, for- 
« God's ſake, a little Wine and Oil.“ What 
& do you mean by probable, replied the Philoſo- 
4 pher, I'll maintain it that it is demonſtrable,” 
Candidus now loſt all Senſe, and  Panglofs 
fetched him a little Water from a F ountain 
Juſt by. 
The next Day meeting with ſomething to to eat, 
as they were ſcrambling among the Ruins, they 


Part with others in adminiſtring Relief to ſuch of 
the Inhabitants, as had eſcaped from Death. 
Some of theſe, that had been aſſiſted by them, 
= them as good an Entertainment, as could be 

C4 ex- 


IN 1 
it expected, amidſt ſuch a Diſtaſter: it muſt indeed 
I be confeſſed that the Treat was dull, as the 
Gueſts watered their Bread with their Tears; 
but Pangliſi comforted them, by aſſuring them 
that Things could not be otherwiſe, © For, ſays he, 
& providing a Univerſe muſt exiſt, that Univerſe 
© muſt neceſſarily be the 5%. Now in the be/# 


— — — 
— 7 — — — = 


e good, every Thing is 5%: Comfort yourſelves, 
ce take Heart, and let's Drink. 

A little Man in Black, who belonged to the 
Inquiſition, fitting next to him, took up the 
Point with great Politeneſs, And ſaid, it is e- 
tc yident that the Gentleman, does not believe 
&« original Sin, for if every Thing is the 5%, 
& there could neither have been any Fall, nor 
© Puniſhment.” 

„ humbly beg your Excellency's Pardon, 
ce replied Pangloſt, with greater Politeneſs ſtill, 
& for the Fall and the Curſe entered II 


© into the be/? of all poſſible Syſtems, 
c The Gentleman then, does not believe in 


free Agency, ſaid the Inquiſitor.” 
& Your Excellence will excuſe me, ſaid Pan- 


cc with abſolute Neceſlity ; for it was neceſſary 
& that we ſhould be Free, for when the Will is 
&-neceflitated———Pangloſs was in the middle 

— | of 


e Syſtem every Thing ls right, every Thing is 


ec gloſs; for, Liberty, or Free- agency is conſiſtent 


—ͤ— — —— — Boos — Ae. en 


23 
bf his Sentence, when the Inquiſitor made a 
Sign with his Head to his Attendant to help him 
to a Glaſs of Port, or Opporto. 


CALLEXAELEAL IL LEA AR 


CHAP, VI. 


A great Auto-da-Fe, or Act of Faith 
to flop the Earthquake, and how 
Candidus was whipp'd. 


FTER the Earthquake, which had deſtroy'd 
three fourths of Lisbon, the Sages, of the 
Country could not find out a better Expedient 
to prevent the total Deſtruction of the People, 
han to give them a great Auto-da-Fe, It was 
reſolved, by the Univerſity of Coimbra, that the 
fight of a few Perſons burnt by a ſlow Fire with 
great Pomp, was an infallible Arcanum to pre- 
vent an Earthquake, 
In conſequence of this Reſolution, they had 
apprehended a B:/cayan, who was found guilty 
of having married his Step-mother, together with 
ro Portugu*ze, Wao took out the Bacon as they 
ere eating a Pullet. 9. 5 


After 


k 26 J 


Aſter Dinner was over Doctor Pangloſs and 
his Diſciple Candidus, were ſecured with Cords, 
one of them for having ſpoke ſomewhat freely, 
and the other for having heard him with an Air 
of Approbation: they were each of them carried 
into ſeparate Rooms, that were extremely cool, 
and never incommoded by the Heat of the Sun: 
eight Days afterwards, ihey were both clothe! 


with the Habit of San-benito, and had their 


Heads adorned with Paper Mitres. The Mitre 
and Sqan-benito of Candidus were painted with 
Flames, with their Points downwards; and 
Devils without Tails- or Claws, but the Devils 
on Panglefſ*s had both, and the Flames pointed 
upwards. 

They marched in Proceſſion, in theſe Habits, 
and heard a very pathetick Diſcourſe, which was 
followed by a Voluntary on a ſqueaking Organ, 


Candidus was whipt, in Time, to the Tunes of 


the Anthem: the Biſcayan and the two Men, 
that would not eat Bacon, were burnt; and 
Pangle/s, though there was no Precedent, was 
hanged. But at the ſame Time there wa 
another terrible Shock of the Earthquake. 

* Candidus, quite out of Breath, ſtupihed, 
aſtoniſhed, all over Blood, and trembling in 
) every Joint, ſaid to himſelf: If this be the 


| 66 "Fg of all poſſible — what muſt the, 


Ce O- 


4 


C.ia7*s) 
“others be, then? Even ſuppoſing I had eſca- 
“ caped whipping now, I have endured it al- 
« ready amongſt the Bulgarians; but. ah! my 
dear Parg/o/s, thou greateſt of Philofophers, 
« was it my Fate to fee you hang'd, without 
„knowing the Reaſon!-O my dear Anabaptiſt, 
* thou beſt of Men, was it thy Fate to be 
„ drowned in this Port! O Miſs Cunigonda, 


8 chou Jewel of thy Sex, was it decreed that. 


you ſhould be ripped up.” 

He was returning, ſcarce able to ſtand, after 
having been at Sermon, whipt, abſolved and 
bleſſed, when an old Woman accoſted him, 
and ſaid ** My Son, take Courage, and follow” - 


me. 
ene 
CHAP.. VI. 


How the old Woman took care of Can- 
didus, and how he found his Sweet= 
beart Miſs Cunigonda again. 


CAndidus, indeed, could not take heart, but 
yet he followed the old Woman into an old 
decayed Houſe, She gave him a Pot of Ointment 
| | t@ 


1 


28 1 


+ to rub himſelf with, left him fomething to eat 


and drink, after ſhewing him a little Bed, near 
which was a complete Suit of Cloaths. „ Eat, 
drink, go to fleep, ſaid ſhe to him, and may 
„ our Lady of Atocha, and our Lord St. An- 


« thony of Padua, and St. James of Compoſtella 
protect you. I ſhall come again To-morrow.” 


Candidus, aſtoniſhed at all he ſaw, at all he had 
ſuffered, and ſtill more ſo, at the Charity of the 
old Woman, offered to kiſs her Hand. No 
you muſt not kiſs. my Hand, ſaid ſhe : I ſhall 
« be ſure to come again To-morrow. Rub 
« yourſelf with the Ointment, eat, and compoſe 
« yourſelf.” 

Candidus, notwithſtanding the Complication 
of his Sufferings, eat and went to ſleep. The 
next Morning the old Woman brought him his 
Breakfaſt, examined his Back, and rubb'd it 
with the Ointment herſelf; afterwards ſhe 
brought him his Dinner; and came again 
towards Evening to bring him his Supper. 

For a Day or two afterwards, ſhe paid him 
the ſame Compliments, ©* Pray, Who may 
« you be? would Candidus always ſay to her. 
« Who has inſpired you with ſo much Kind- 
© neſs? What Return can I make you?“ But 
the old Woman never made him any Anſwer. 
Qne Evening ſhe, returned, without bringing 

him 


[ 29 J 


him any Supper; and fays to him, Come 
« along with me, and make no Words.” On 


im a little Way into the Country ; where they 
ame to a Houſe that ſtood by itſelf, ſurrounded 
ith Moats and Gardens. The old Woman 
nocked at a little Door, which was directly 
pened ; and then conducted Candidus by a 
private Stair-Caſe into a gilt Cloſet, and leaving 
im upon a brocaded Couch, ſhut the Door, and 
ent her way. Candidus thought he was in a 
Dream, and looked upon all the precedent Part 
f it as a frightful, as he did on the preſent Mo- 
nent, as an agreeable one, 

The old Woman appeared again ſoon ; ſhe 

upported with ſome Difficulty a Lady, that 

rembled all the while, and was of a majeſtic 

ort, ſhining all over with Jewels, and covered 
ith a Veil. Take away the Veil, ſaid the 

old Woman to Candidus on which, the 

outh drew near, and lifted the Veil with his 

embling Hand. But, Heavens ! how great 

as his Surprize ! when he imagined that he 

ww Cunigonda. He ſaw her indeed, for it was 

teherſelf. His Strength fail'd, he was unable to 

jeak, and he fell at her Feet. Cunigonda, at 

e ſame time, fell on the Couch. As for the 


0 Woman ſhe almoſt drowned them with aro- 
matic 


his ſhe took him by the Arm, and walked with 


1 
As 


e 
. r J 


— 


— — 6 


_— = Rand 


” GSC 


— ͤ— 
o 


L 30 J 

matie Waters; they foon recovered themſelves, 
and” ſpake to one another : at firſt their Words 
were imperfet, they play'd at croſs Queſtion 
with each other, ſighed, lamented and wept. The 
old Woman having adviſed them to make leſs 
Noiſe, left them by themſelves. 
„What! is it you! ſaid Candidus to her: 
« Are you till alive ! Do I find you again in 
Portugal] and was not you raviſhed then! 
« Was not you ripped up, as the Philoſopher 
« Panglsſs aſſured me? It is true, ſaid the fairſhis 
«« Cunigonda; for People do not always dic 
* under thoſe two Misfortunes, Were your 
« Father and Mother killed then? *Tis but too 
« true, that they were,” ſaid Cunigonda, ſhed- 
ding Tears. And your Brother too?“ “ Yes 
« my Brother was killed too.” Ho came 
« you into Portugal; and how could you find 
« out that I was there, and by what ſtrange Ac- 
& cidentdid you order me to be brought hither.” “ 
« will ſatisfy your Curioſity in every Particu · ]“ 
«« lar, replied the Lady; but you mult. pre-. 
«© viouſly, give me an Account of every thing]. 
« that has happened to you, ſince the innocent 
« Kiſs you gave me, and was kick d out of 5 
« Doors for it.“ ” 

Candidus obeyed her with the moſt profound 1 
Reſpect, and though he was ſomewhat ſtupified, I * 
though 


elves, 
Vords 
ſtions 
The 
e leſs 


her: 
in in 
hen ? 
>pher 
e fair 
s die 
your 
t too 
ſhed- 
Yes 
Came 
find 
Ac- 
er,” 
ticu- 
pre- 
hing 
cent 
t of 


bund 
hed, 
ugh 


[08+ 3 | 

hough his Voice was feeble and faultering, 
hough his Back gave him ſome ſmall Pain, he 
dave her the moſt ſimple Account of all his 
Sufferings from the Time of their Separation. 

Cunigonda lifted up her Eyes towards Heaven; 
and ſhed a Torrent of Tears for the Death of 
he good Anabaptiſt, and Pangloſs ; afterwards, 
ſhe ſpoke to Candidus in the following Manner, 

ho did not loſe a Syllable of what ſhe ſaid, 
but gazed on her as if he would devour her with 


his Eyes. 


2222 , N LOSS 


C HAP. VIII. 
The Hiſtory of Miſs Cunigonda. 


6c 1 Was in Bed, in a very ſound Sleep; when 
« it pleaſed Providence to ſend the Bulgari- 
« ans to our fine Caſtle at Thunder-ten-trunck > 
« who cut my Father and Brother's Throats, 
and cut my Mother into Pieces. A great 
« Bulgarian, ſix Feet high, ſeeing I had loſt 
« my Senſes at this terrible Spectacle, attempted 
« to raviſh me: this brought me to myſelf, I 
* recovered my Senſes, I cried, I ſhrieked, 1 

ec bit 


w 


4 bit him, ſeratched him and would if poſſibl 
& have torn out the Eyes of this monſtrou 


S 


% Bulgarian, not knowing that what had hap. 
« pened at my Father's was nothing extraor- 
% dinary. The Brute gave me a Stab in the 
« left Side with a Knife, the Marks of which 
&« are to be ſeen to this Day. Ah! I wiſh! 
& could ſee him, ſaid the ſimple Candidu, 

That you ſhall, ſaid Cunigonda, but let us pro- 
ceed, « Aye, proceed, ſaid Candidus.“ 

She then reſumed the Thread of her Hiſtory 
in this Manner: „A Bulgarian Captain came 
& in, and ſaw me all over Blood; as for the 
% Soldier he did not deſiſt: The Captain was 
ein a Paſſion at the little Reſpect which this 
© Brute ſhew'd him, and kill'd him upon me. 
« He then had my Wound dreſs'd, and carried 
e me to his Quarters as his Priſoner, [ 
1% waſhed the few Shirts he was Maſter of, I was 
« his Cook, he took a Liking to me it muſt be 
6 confeſs'd : and I can't deny but he was well 
“ made notwithſtanding, he had not the whiteſt 
6 of Skins. His Underſtanding was but fo, ſo; 
« he knew very little of Philoſophy : and one 
$* might eaſily ſee he was none of Doctor Pan- 
& glo/s's Scholars. At the End of three Months 
& having loſt all his Money, and growing quite 
6 tired of me, he fold me to a Jew, _ 

gn 


121 

« Don Iſaebar, who traded to Holland and 
« Portugal, and was of a very amotous Diſpo- 
« fition. This Jew laid cloſe Siege to my 
« Perſon, but was never able to carry it: I 
& have reſiſted him better than I did the Bulga- 
« rian Soldier. For though a Perſon of Repu- 
tc tation may be raviſhed once, yet in my Opinion 
“ her reſiſting Virtue grows the ſtronger for it. 
«© The Jew brought me to this Houſe where I 
« now am, in order to render me more com- . 
e pliable. Till now I always thought that no 
« Caſtle in the World was fo fine as that of 
« Thunder-ten-trunck, but I now find myſelf 
« miſtaken. . | 
The grand Inquiſitor ſaw me one Day at 
« Maſs, he ogled me pretty much, and got 
e ſomebody to tell me that he had ſome Secrets 
to communicate to me. I was conducted to 
& his Palace, where I informed him of my Birth: 
e on which he repreſented how much it was 
% below me to belong to an Iſraelite. Propoſals 
were made from him to Don 1ſachar to yield 
« me up to him. But Don /ſachar, who is the 
King's Banker, would not come into his 
% Meaſures. + On this Account the Inquiſitor 
* threatened him with an Auto da Fi. At laſt 
* my Jew, being in a Fright, concluded the 
« Bargain, by which the Houſe and myſelf was 
* to belong to each of them in common. The 
D «« Jew ; 


<< quakes,.and to intimidate Don 1//achar at the 


{ 94 1 


c Jew was to have Monday, Friday and his 


Sabbath; and the Inquiſitor the other Days 
c of the Week. This Contract has ſubſiſted 
&« for ſix Months. Indeed it has been ſometimes 
“ interrupted with Quatrels, for it has often 


„ been diſputed whether Saturday Night or 
Sunday belonged to the ancient, or the new 


« Diſpenſation. For my Part, Ihave kept them 
<« both at Bay hitherto, and for this Reaſon they 
cc are both in Love with me. i! 

6 In brief, to avert the Plague of the Earth- 


c {ame Time, his Lordſhip the Inquiſitor was 
«© pleaſed to celebrate an Aute da Fi. He did 
© me the Honour to invite me to it. I was in 
4c very good Seat; where the Ladies were ſerved 
cc with Refrefhments between the Maſs and the 


Execution. I was really ſeized with Horror 


<« at ſeeing the two Jews and the Biſcayan, 
« who married his Mother, burnt; but how 
<« great was my Surprize, my Aſtoniſhment, 
my Anguiſh, when I ſaw in a San-berito and 
0c Mire, a Perſon that ſomewhat reſembled 
<« Paxgleſs. I rubbed my Eyes, I looked upon 
« him very attentively, and ſaw him hanged: 
6 T fell into a Swoon ; and ſcarce had I come 
c to myſelf when I faw you ſtrippꝰd ſtark naked: 
cc this was the Height of Horror, Confternation, 
„ Grief and Deſpair. I muſt tell you inge- 


* 


<< nuouſly, that your Skin is ſtill whiter, and o 
«<< a better Complexion than that of my Bu. 
< garian Captain. This Sight increaſed all the 

<« Senſations, which oppreſſed and rent my wel 

| 6 


Lads 1 


« Soul with Tenderneſs and Horror, I had 
much ado, to prevent myſelf from crying out, 


„ Stop the Savages! but my Voice was too 


« weak, and my Cries would have proved in- 


© ſignificant. hen your whipping Bout was 


« nearly finiſh'd, What could have brought, 
« faid I, the charming Candidus, and the wiſe 
« Pangloſs to Liſbon; the former to receive a 
& hundred Strokes from the Laſh, the latter to 
« be hanged by Order of the grand Inquiſitor, 
«* who wanted me to take him as my Inamo- 
„ rato. Pangliſs certainly deceived me Ys 


« when he taught me that every thing is for the 
« beft,” 


* amazed, ſometimes beſides my, and ſome- 


«© times ready to faint with Weakneſs, my 
Head run upon nothing elſe but the Maſſacre 


„of my Father and Mother and Brother, the 


& Infolence of the Bulgarian Soldier, the Stab 
6 he gave me, my Slavery, and being Cook to 


„ the Bulgarian Officer, on the Rafcal Don 


& achar, the abominable Inquiſitor, the Exe- 
% cution of Doctor Pangls/s, the grand Mi- 
% ſerere on the Organ, to the Tune of which 


"Tow * was whipp'd; and eſpecially on the Kiss 
T 


gave you behind the Skreen, the Day I 
« faw you laſt. I bleſſed the Lord for his 
% Goodneſs in having reſtored you to me after 
« ſo many Misfortunes. I defired my Duena 
eto take great Care of you, and to bring you 
* hither, as. ſoon as poſſible, She executed her 
“ Commiſſion, with great Addreſs; I have 

| D 2 enjoy d 


( 36 ] 
* enjoy'd the inexpreſſible Pleaſure of ſeeing you, 
« hearing you, and ſpeaking to you. You muſt 
<< be quite famiſhed by this Time; for my Part 
J am very hungry; and fo let us fit down 


<« to Supper.” 

On this, they both fat down to Table, and 
after Supper {ated themſelves on the fine 
Couch, we mentioned before. "They were in 
this Situation when Signior Don [ſachar, one 
of the Partners in the Houſe, came thither. It 
being his Sabbath, he was to come to enjoy his 


Right, and to declare his Paſſion. 
eee esse, 


„ HAF. IX. 
What happened to Cunigonda, Candidus, 
the grand Inquſitor, and the Jew. 


THI 8, ſaid //achar, was one of the moſt cho- 
leric Hebrews that was ever ſeen ſince the 
Babylonian Captivity. What ! ſaid he, ou Ga- 
lilean Bitch is it not enough to take in Mr. In- 
quiſitor, but muſt this Raſcal be my Partner too ? 
As he pronounced theſe Words he drew out a 
long Poniard, which he always carried with him, 


and not ſuſpecting that his Antagoniſt was armed 


as well as himſelf, fell upon Candidus: but our 
We/iphalian had by way of Precaution received a 
good Toledo from the old Woman together with 

is Suit of Cloaths. He drew his Sword, and 


though of a very peaceable Diſpoſition, _ the 
23- 


, | 
* 


— — 


SS I D020. 


eee 


. PW CY war ww T'w I TV 


E091 


Iſraelite dead, upon the Spot, at the Feet of 
Cunigonda. | 

Holy Virgin] cried ſhe, What will become 
& of us] a Man murder'd in my Houſe ! if the 
&« Crregidore ſhould come, we ſhall all be 
& be ruin'd.* © If Pangloſi had not been hanged, 
ec ſaid Candidus, he would have given us excel - 
&« lent Advice on this Emergency; for he was a 
& great Philoſopher. For want of him let us 
& conſult the old Woman.” 

She was a Woman of great Experience, and 
was going to give them her Advice, when an- 
other ſecret Door opened. It was now about 
one in the Morning ; and conſequently Sunday 
was begun; a Day which belonged to the In- 
quiſitor, On his Entrance he ſaw Candidus, 
whom he bad whipp'd, with his Sword in his 
Hand, a dead Body on the Floor, Cunigonda in 


a Fright, and the old Woman giving ber 


Advice. | 
The following is a Deſcription of the State of 
Candidus's Soul at this Inſtant, and the Manner 


in which he reaſon'd. If this holy Man, ſaid he 


“ to himſelf, ſhould call in Aſſiſtance, he will, 
e infallibly have me burnt ; he may ſerve Cuni- 
e gonda ſo likewiſe, he has already had me 
« whipp'd without Mercy; he is my Rival; 
«I am obliged to diſpatch him; there is no 
% Remedy for it. This Reaſoning of his was 
N ery natural, and very precipitate. And 
without giving the Inquiſitor Time to recover 
from his Surprize, he run him through the 


Body, and laid him cloſe by the Side fo his- 


Brother in Iniquity the Iſraelite. | 
D 3 ce So, 


—— —́à— 


L IF :1. 


4 80, this is the ſecond, ſays Cunigonda ; we 
ce can expect no Pardon; we are excommuni- 


c cated, and our Sentence is as good as paſt ! 
© Who could ever have thought this of you, who 
& are naturally of ſo peaceable a Diſpoſition, 
c that in two Minutes time you ſhould kill the 


cc Jew Don 1ſachar, and my Lord the Inqui- 


< fitor.” „“ My deareſt Lady, replied Candidus, 


<« when one is in Love, jealous and whipp'd by 
4 an Inquiſition, one is not Maſter of one's ſelf.” 


The old Woman then ſpoke in her Turn, 
and faid : Here are three Andaluſian Horſes in 
< the Stable, with their Bridles and Saddles ; 
« let the brave Candidus get them ready : my 
« Miſtreſs has ſome Moidores and Jewels: let 
« us take Horſe immediately; though for my 
cc Part I cannot fit but on one Side of my A 
c and let us go to Cadiz : we could not choofe 
& a better Time, and it is by much the pleaſanteſt 
cc to travel in the Cool of the Night. 

© Candidus, without heſitating, took her Advice, 


and immediately ſaddled the three Horſes. Cu- 


nigonda, the old Woman and himfelf, went 
thirty Miles without ſtopping. While they were 
on their Journey the Holy Hermandad came to 
the Houſe, they buried his Inquiſitorſhip in a 
magnificent Church, but as for poor ¶achar 
they deny d him Chriſtian burial. 

Candidus, Cuni gonda, and the old Woman, 
were now got to the little Town of Avicenna, 
about the middle of the Mountains of Sierra 
Arena; and had the following Converfation at 


C HAP. 


* ” 


RS ASS G2 2 2 


HE 


— _— 2 az LY 1 # k A be * ki. 4 - 


„„ ĩ dro. Ss 


„ 


—— a.” 
© | 


4 39 } 
„ 


The Diftreſs of Candidus, Cunegonda, 
and the old Woman, at Cadiz, and 


| thety going on board Ship. 


Y Lon D., who can have robbꝰ d me o my a 
6 


Piſtoles and my Jewels? ſaid: Cuniganda, 
„ with Tears: in her Eyes; what ſhall we live 
& upon na-? Where ſhall I meet with Inqui- 
e ſitors and Jews to give me more? Ah!] 
„ fays' the old Woman, I ſtrongly ſuſpect the 
4 Cordelier, who laid at the ſame Inn with us 
« Yeſterday at Badajav. God forbid. I ſhould 
e accuſe any one falſely; but he entered twice 
e into-our Chamber, and went away ſometime 
4 before us.“ Al! ſays Candidus, the good 
« Pangloſt has often argued that the Goods 


« of. the Earth, are common to all Men, and 


&« that every one has. an equal Right to them. 
According to theſe Principles, the Cordelier 
4 ought to have left us enough to carry us to 
© our Journey's end. Vou have then nothing 


left, my dear Cunigunda? Not a Souce,, ſaid, ſhe. 


What Courſe muſt we take, ſaid Candidus & 
Lat us ſell one of the Horſes, ſaid the old 
* Woman, as for my part I can ride behind 
«© my Lady, though I cannot fit a Horſe well by 
* myſelf; and we ſhall ſoon get to Cadix. 
W — the ſame Inn was a Benedictin Prior, who 
ught” the Horſe cheap. Candidus, 
Cunigonda and the eld Woman paſſed through 


24 TCucena, 


4—?—ÿE³ H EONS 


„ and without doubt all Things 


. 
Lucena, Chillas and Lebrixia, and at laſt got to 
Cadix. 8 


They were there employed in fitting out a 
Fleet, and raiſing Men to bring the reverend 


Fathers the Fe/uits of Paraguay to reaſon, who 
were accuſed of ſeducing one of their Herdes, or 


| Settlements, near the City of St. Sacrament, to 


revolt from their Obedience to the Kings of 
Spain and Portugal. | 

| Candidus, immediately upon his Arrival, pre- 
ſented himfelf before the Commandant, and 
having before ſerved amongſt the Bulgarians, 
went through their Exerciſe before the Officer of 
this little Army, with ſo much Grace, Dexterity, 


Spirit, and Addreſs, that they gave him t 


Command of a Company of Infantry. 
Being thus made a Captain, he embarked in 


Company with Miſs Cunigonda, the old Woman, 
two Footmen, and the two Andaluſian Horſes, 


which were the Property of his Lordſhip, the 
grand Inquiſitor of Portugal. 44 
During the Voyage they held many an Argu- 
ment on the Hypotheſis of poor Panghlſs, <* We 
<« are going to another World, ſaid Candidus, 
are, there, for 
c the bet. For, it muſt be confeſſed, that one 
6 met be ſhock'd both with reſpe& to Phyſics, 
4 or Ethics, in ours.” No one is more your 
Friend than myſelf, - ſaid Cunigonda, but my 
Mind is terrified with what Lhave ſeen and ex- 
perienced. All Things will go well, replied 
„ Candidus; the Seas of this new World are pre- 
« ferable to thoſe of Europe; it is * 
| 0 


Px, SS TC SY © VT 


, 


141 J 


10 the Winds are more conſtant. Tis be- 
« wand all doubt, that the new World is the 


lle of all poſſible Syſtems. I wiſh to God it 


« may, ſaid Cunigonda, but I have been fo terri- 


e bly unfortunate in mine, that my Heart is al- 
« moſt ſhut againft Hope. Here's Complain- 
ings indeed, ſaid the old Woman; alas, you ne- 
ver experienced ſuch Misfortunes, as I have. 


; Cunigonda could ſcarce forbear Laughing, and 


thought it was very comical in the old Woman, 


to pretend that the was more unhappy . than 


herſelf. 


« Alas! my good Dame, though you ſhould 
„have been. raviſhed twice by two different 
« Bulgarians, though you ſhould have received. 
« two Wounds in your Belly, though you had 


« had two Caſtles demoliſhed, though you had 
« had two Fathers and two Mothers maſlacred, 
« and though you had ſeen two Lovers whipp'd 
at the Auto-da-F?, I can't ſee how you could 
« have the Advantage of me; I don't mention 
my being born a Baroneſs of threeſcore and 
twelve Deſcents, and my being a Cook-maid. 
„%% My Lady, reply'd the old Woman, you don't 
„know any thing of my Family; was I 
„to ſhew you my Pedigree, you would 


« Judgment.” This Reply having raiſed an 
inſatiable Curioſity in che Minds of Cunigonda 
and Candiaus, the old Woman went on in the 
following Manner. N 


CHAP. 


not talk as you do, but would ſuſpend your 


— q 


— — 


PIE IS 
— 


— 2 — — n — . 
— — — ) 2 % — - 


* . ͤ _— 
WW % 
— 2 Po I mum IR PIpoa 


* 
22 —TEIX. * DOVE. 
* 


IF 4:1 


c H AP. XL, | 
In which the old Woman begins ber 
Hex. 


Mere ye Lids were not always lecred, nor my 

yes thus bordered witk Scarlet, my Noſe 
W ror touched my Chin, nor Havel been 
always a Servant. I am the Daughter of Pope 
Urban the Fenth, and the Princeſs Pale/trina. | 
was brought up, till I was Fourteen, in a Palace, 
to which all the Caſtles of your German Barons 
would not have ſerved for a Stable; and one of 

Robes coſt more than all the Dreſſes in e. 
phalia; J encreaſed in Beauty, in Charms, in Wit, 
in the midſt of Pleaſures, of Homages and Hopes. 
F now began to captivate every one that faw me. 
My Neck was fo formed — Heaven's what a 
Neck, as. white, as ſmooth, and as well turn'd 
as that of the "Venus of Midicis; and what 
Eyes what Eyclids! what fine Hack Eyxebrows ! 
what Flames darted from my Eyes! which, as 
Poets in waiting told me, effacedithe olictering of 
the Stars! The Maids who: dreſſed and un: 
drefled me fell into Raptures, when they viewed 
me before and behind, and there was not a Man 
m the Country that would not have been glad to 
have been in their Places. 

I was betrothed to a Prince, who was Sove- 
reign of Maſſa Carrara. A Prince indeed 
he was as handſome as myſelf, made up of no- 
thing but Charms and Sweetneſs, of delicate . 

ONS 


[ 43 1 | | 
ations and burning with Love. I loved him, 
dolatry and Madneſs. Preparations were made 


magnificent, as can ſcarce be conceived : No- 
hing but Feſtivals and Caroufals, nothing but 


m 

of, donnets on me, of which there was ſcarce one 
een Worth any Notice. I was within fight of the 
bpe appy Moment, when an old Marchionefs, that 

„ I Dad been one of my Prince's Miſtreſſes, invited 
ce, Num to drink Chocolate at her Houſe ; where he 
ons Nied in two Hours time in ſtrong Convulfions. 


But this you muſt look on as a meer Trifle. 
y Mother who grew quite deſperate, and 


Fit, Nnuch more ſenfibly touch'd than I was, reſolved to 
pes, etreat for fome Time from fo melancholy a 
me. Nene. She had a very fine Seat near Gazrte.- 
t a Ne went on board a Galley that was gilt all 


ver as fine as the Altar of St. Peter's at Nome. 
but alas, we met with a Salee Rover who boarded 
8 and took us. Our Soldiers defended them- 
elves, as the Pope's Soldiers ſhould do, they all 
fell down upon their Knees, after flinging their 
ums away, and demanded Abſolution in articu- 
+ Moriis of the Corfair. 

They immediatefy ſtripped them as naked as 
0 many Baboons; my Mother, our Maids of 
onour, and I myſelf fharing the fame Fate. 


entry undreſs People. But what ſurpriſed me 
me more than all the reſt was, that they ſhould 
put their Fingers into a certain Place, where we 


s Folks generally do in their firſt Love, even to 
or our Nuptials ; which were ſo pompous and 


Dperas were to be heard of; all Italy rung with 


Tis ſcarce credible with what Expedition theſe - 


„„ — — 
P _ 


OT SVA..z = 7 Ix 
83 — 


N 


Dr 4 


* of — 
— een ME Le ena, 


1 —_ Li 


| "1: 
Women ſeldom put any Thing but a ——, 
This Ceremony ſeemed very unaccountable to 
me; ſor ſuch we generally eſteem V Thing 


that is not the Growth of our own Country, 
However, I ſoon learnt, that it was to ſearch 
whether we had not concealed ſome of our Jewel: 
there; and that it was a Cuſtom, eſtabliſhed from 
Time immemorial by the civil Gentry that live 
upon the Sea. I know that the religious K nights 
of Malta never fail to put it in practice, when 
| they take any Men and Women from 'Turkey, 
It is one of their Laws which has never been 
violated. _ | | 

I need not tell what a diſagreeable thing it ui 
to a young Princeſs to be carried as a Slave, with 
her Mother, to Aer occo; your own Senſe will 
inform you of all that we might expect on beard 
the veſſel of the Corſair. My Mother was ſtil 
very handſome ; our Maids af Honour, nay our 
very waiting-maids, had more Charms than any 
one could boaſt of throughout Africa. As fot 
myſelf, I was nothing but Attraction; I was all 
Beauty, and all Charms; and, what was ſtil 
more, I was a Main, However, I was not 
ONE long. This Flower, which was reſerved 
for the charming Prince of Maſſa Carrara, was 
tore from me by the Captain of the Corſair. He 
was a moft frightful Negro, but yet thought he 
did me a great Honour. Indeed her Highneſs 


the Princeſs of Pal:/trina, muſt have been very 
ſtrong to have been able to reſiſt the Violence d 
that was ſhewn us till our Arrival at Adorocce. MW th 
But we will paſs over that; ſor it is ſo com- {Wh 

* I; mon, WC 


= NT TY I | 
> toffimon, that it is ſcarce worth while to mention 
nine he. | 


try. Morocco was overflowed with Blood when we 


ame there: The fifty Sons of the Emperor 
ley Ijmael had each of them his Party, which 
xcaſioned about fifty Civil Wars at leaſt ; ſuch 
Blacks againſt Blacks, Blacks againſt Tawny- 
oors, Tawny-Moors againſt Tawny-Moors, 
hen nd Mulattoes againſt Mulattoes. In a Word, 
key. Where was nothing but Bloodſhed all over the 
Deen Wimpire. *? : | 
On our landing, a Number of Blacks, of a 
it 8 Warty oppoſite- to that of the Corſair, made an 
vith Wittempt to rob him of his Booty. Next to the 
will loney and the Jewels, 2” may be ſure we were 
dard We only Things of wy 
ſtill Wre-witneſs of ſuch a Battle as was never fought 
our WW Europe. The Blood of the People of the 
any Worth is very cold: They do not carry their 
| for Fury to that Height which is common in Africa. 
all ue would be apt to think, that nothing but 


(tl Milk ran in the Veins of the Europeans; and 
not Wire and Brimſtone in thoſe of the Inhabitants of 
ved Wount Atlas, and the adjacent Countries. They 
was 


ght like the Lions, Tigery and Serpents of 


He We Country, to determine who ſhould be our 
t he Walters. A Moor ſeized my Mother by the 
nels Webt-arm, while our Captain's Lieutenant held 
ery Ir by the Left; a Mooriſh Soldier then took 
nce Wil of her by one Leg, and the Pirates held her 


ct. the other. Almoſt all the Women were thus 

m- bold of, by four Soldiers. As for my Part, 

10n, WF Captain ſtood before me, ſo that they could 
| not 


alue. I was, here, an 


. - - — yy 
- ©. — 


* — 


« Err 
. K ˙ We. a be. 


— 
— — —— — === 


046-1] 
not ſee me: He had his Scymitar in his Han 
and killed every one that attacked him. 


brief, I ſaw all our Italian Women, togethe 


witch my Mother, torn in Pieces, hacked a 


by the Brutes which fought for then 


My fellow Priſoners, together with thoſe v 


. taken us, Soldiers, Sailors, Blacks, White 
Mulattoes, aye and my Captain too, were kill 


on the Spot: As for myſelf, I lay expiring upt 
a Heap of dead Bodies. Theſe horrid Devaft 


tions and Murdere, extended for near three hu 


dred Leagues, as every one knows; and | 
-theſe very brutiſh Wretches did not fail, me 


_ conftantly, to perform their five ſtated Times 


Prayer every Day, as ordained by Aabomet. 
I 1 diſengaged myſelf, with t  Difficu] 
from the Weight of the dead Bodies, which we 
Heaped upon me, and made a Shift to crawl 't 
T got under a large Onoge: Tree, which gr 
on he Banks of a River juſt bye, _— - 
down, oppreſſed with Fear, Fat atigue, H 
Deſpair and Want. My Senſes were — 1 i 
volved in a Slumber, which reſembled a Fit ne 
than Sleep. As I was in this State of Weakn 
and Infenſibility, neither dead nor alive, I pt 
ceived fomething heavy upon my Body ; : 
opening my Eyes, 1 ſaw a white Man, of ave 
— Appearance, ſighing, and utteting the f 
Words. © che ate defſere jet 
wh | 


; Sp {I | p: C H 


5 eos OY” o 


„ 
r 


In wwhich the old Woman concludes ber * 


ASTONISHEꝰ and in Raptures to hear 
41 my own Country Language, and not leſs 
ſurprized at the Expreſſions of the Man, I re- 
plied that there might be far greater Misfortunes 
than thoſe he complained of. I then gave him 
a Sketch of the Misfortunes I had underwent, 
and fell into a Fit again. He carried mie to a 
"Houſe juſt bye, ordered me to be put to Bed, 
and to have omething to eat; waited on me 
himſelf, did all he could to comfort me, ſaid a 
great many fine things to me, and aſſured me 
that he had never ſeen any one ſo handſome in 
his Life ; and that he never regretted the Loſs of 
what no one could reſtore him, ſo much, before. 
* I was born at Naples, ſays he, where it is the 
% Cuſtom to caftrate three thouſand Children 
« every Year, ſome of which die under the Ope- 
t ration; as for the others, they acquire a fner 
Voice than any Woman's, and ſome of them 
even reach Soveteignty in ſeveral States. I 
* underwent this Operation with no ſmall Pain, 
& ahd afterwards became a Singer in the Chapel 
te of her Highne(s the Princeſs of Palgſtrina. Of 
* myMother, cried J. Of your Mother!” cried 
he again, ſhedding Tears at the ſame Time. 
. What f are yo'1 that young Princeſs, whom I 
had the Care of till ſhe was fix Years old, and 
% whe 


W 


- 
" &* 
- 


bo promiſed at that Age to.be as handſome 
Las you now are?“ Tis, indeed, I myſelf, ſaid 


I; and my Mother lies about a Stone's Throw 


| off, cut and hacked to Pieces, under a Heap d 


dead Bodies. | 
I then related, to him, all that had befallen 


| me: He, likewiſe, related all his Adventures to 


me; and told me, he was ſent to the King of 
Morecco, by a Chriſtian Power, to conclude 2 


Treaty with him, by which he [the Chriſtian] 
was to furniſh him with a Fleet, Artillery, and 


Ammunition; and to enable him, 2 to de- 


ſtroy the Commerce of all other Chriſtian Powers. 


J have now diſcharged my Commiſſion, ſaid the 
boneſt Eunuch to me, am going on board to re- 


turn to Italy, and will carry you with me. Ma 


chi ſciagura d ęſſere ſenſa coglioni.“ | 
I thanked him with the Tears of Gratitude ; 


but inſtead of carrying me into Italy, as he faid 


de would, he conducted me to Algiers, where he 


fold me to the Dey of that Province. Juſt after 
I was fold, the Peſtilence, which had made the 
Tour of Africa, Aſia, and Europe, broke out at 


Higiers with great Fury, Lou have ſeen an 


Earthquake, I know, Madam; but have you 
_ < ever had the Plague?” No, never, replied the 
"Baroneſs, | 


If you had had it, replied the old Woman, you 


would confeſs that it beats an Earthquake by far. 


It is very common in Africa ; I was ſeized with 
it, Only fancy what.mult be the Situation of 2 
Pope's Daughter, about fifteen ; who, in three 


 \Mowbs Time, bad underwent Poverty and Sla- 


ven, 


F TEST 5ESCES >O” 


N 


Ar 


8s 


= 
2 


{ 49 ] 
very, had been raviſſed almoſt every Day, had ſeen 
het Mother cut into four Quarters, had experienced 


in Agiers: But I did not die neither; though my. 
Eunuch, and the Dey, and almoſt all the Seraglio 
at Altiers went- to pot. 

When the firſt Ravages of this dreadfal Colamicy, 


andria; from Alerandria L was ſold a- 
gain 3 Smyrna; and from Smyrna at Conſlantinoplt. 


thx Defence of el, which was beſieged by the 


ried all his Serag] io along with him; und put us in 
a fmall as 1 on the Pale 

Guard' of two black Eunuchs and twenty Soldiers, 
At firſt we killed vaſt Numbers of the, Ruſſians, but 


pt to Fire and Sword, without Regard to Age or 
_ Ar little Fort was all that ſtood out, which 
the Enemy was reſolved to reduce by Famine. The 
=y Janiſſaries had taken an Oath that they 

never ſurrender. But were at laſt re- 
duced to ſuch Extremities 


both Famine and War, and was dying of the Plague 


were over, they ſold the Slaves that belonged to the 

A Merchant bought me, and carried me to 
Tunis. There he ſold me to another Merchant, who 
= me 7 at Tripoli ; from Tripoli I was fold 


At laſt I became the Property of an Aga of the Ja- 
niſſaries; who was ſoon after commanded to go to 


ns 
he Aga, being a Man of great Gallantry, cars 
alus Mantis, under the 


they returned the Favour with Intereſt, Aſopb was | 


9 * 
: . 
wm - 2 — a . , - 3 ls * — 
77 2 — 2 
— —— .. —_—_— — nn. r — — — — — 2 = 


— 
— — 
— 


{ Aal 


1 
king us at once. Cut off only ona of the Buſtoc li 
of theſe Ladies, fays he, ind you'll have Meat 
enough; by this Means you may cut and come again; 
if you ſhould want Meat afterwards, you knoy 
where to have it, and can have as mach as you had 
| before : If you do this, Heaven certainly will ble 
you for being ſo charitable, and will certainly ſend 
you Succour. As he had a good Tongue of his 
own, he eaſily prevailed on them. They perform- 
ed this horrible Operation upon us; and the Iman 
applied the ſame Salve they dreſs the Children with 
"EY porno A pr eue to 


: 
_ 
t 
7 
fi 
b 
th 
N 
01 
ri 
wW 


} | ils 

They had Aue finiſhed the enemies, 
which we had furniſhed them with, when the Ru/+ 
| came”in-flat-bottom'd Boats, and leſt not a 
Angle Man Man of all the Janizaries.: They gave them» 
ſelves no Concern about our Condition: But as. nv 
Country is without French Surgeons, one of them, 
who was a Perſon of great Skill, in his Profeſkion, 
took us under his Care, and cured cus: I ſhall nevet 
forget it, to r e dying Day. When my Wounds 
were pretty well healed, he made Propoſals to me. 
To be ſhort, he bid us all comfart ourſelves; and 
aſſured us, that it was a Misfortune which had hap- 


e, Sieges, and was-one of che 
*. n WEL D 3 1 Fos 189d 


in His Garden, ney) 

every Day: But his . Lat — 
Wheel, about two Years aſterwynnde together with: 
thirty more: Beyardi, for Neaſom of State 1 I mad 


the beſt of a dad Market; aud packs.up l 


wh 
Vi 
A 
Pu 
Nt 
4 
vol 
the 
ef 
cha 
dea 
the 
wit 
ney 
had 
Cut 
met 
deal 
Ma 


7 
E. 


T 4-3) 

hs paſſed through Ruſſia, and became a Servant-Maid 
eat 3 at Riga for ſome 5 nd; a6 4 
an; that at 0 &, Fi . Leip , Hees 

ow If Lojiler, 3 1 have thus 
bad Ned in a State of Miſery and Reproach, having 
les but one Half of my Backſide; often recollecting 
end I that I was a Popes Daughter. I have had a great 
his Mind to make away with myſelf, an hundred times 
m- over; Met, Jam fond of Life aſten all. This 
aan ridiculous Weakneſa, may poſſibly be one of che 
rich worſt Principles interwoven, in our Conſtitution 


to ¶ For ean any thing be more ſtupid, than to be de- 


© firous of carrying a Burthen, which one has con- 
nt, A Mind to fling down on the Grgund ? To 
% Wl deat Exiſtence, and at the ſame Time to preſervo 
t 2 Nn a Word, to give — lewd, 
mo which will prey on us till it has devoured our very 
e 01500 1:0 eee eee eee 
m, ¶ un che Countries I paſſed through, and in the 
ou, I Publick-Houſes'T was Servant in, I met with a vali 
vet Number of Perſons, who looked upon their Being 
nds Il Curſe; but ! never knew more than eight that 
ne. voluntarily put an End to their Miſery + They were 
and: IN three Negroes, four Engliſhmen, and a German Pro- 


ap* fa, named Nobel. My laft Place was Don Iſa- 
the drs, who placed me near the Perſon of you, my 
fear Lady: I have attached myſelf to you, from 

ent. and have been more affected 


1 32 7 
"Hin ren oer one of ths Paſſengers to ohſigt W 
e his Hiſtory; and if you find one that — 2 * 


*Bappy of 'the Species, ru: . Leave t fling 


0 
dern tired of Life, or thought himſelf the moſt un- $ 
| 1 


Cu and the; wers oblipetl to frat: chat the 


{i enn ee Hr * 1 01 oh 
os LOO INTER I * Oil aw © ales Fi 5 
Süss GH, A P. oa ls 4 

En, Gant us was obj; 1 % Yo quit the fair 
bigs . Cunigon ide ane: + old Woman. 


911 DOT iii vis 


"HE tir Ganigende, att hearing the Adyen- 
wig tures f the old Woman, paid Ber- all the 
„ Complümenem due to a Perſon of her Rank and Me- 
ne She approved of her Propoſal, aud engaged 
All che Paſſengers to relate their Adventures, one 
aſter another: The Reſult of which was, that both 


0 Woman was 222 her Conjectures. 
6 Tis x ſad Pity, iduss Jing the wit Pan- 


= gloſs was hangs, _—— Pregedents at the Auts- N R 


s of. the Globe; and 1 bebey 
en 


| | gon, Candi ais, and the old Woman waited on 


- the-Goverbor:Dar Firn G ſoar a, N Figir 
„ Maſtaranes La r dosy. J Soune, Tos 
4 potiefied a 4 ſuitable to a 


| fe; otherwiſe we ſhould have heard ſome . ** 

& tharmi from him), concerning moral 
4%, and phytical Evil, which covers the whole Face 10 

& L ſhould de bold {fa 


WG. to make ſome humble Ob- | 12 


ne they bey were engaged in e, thei *. 
ventures, the Veſſel continued: its Courſe.” hey _ 


went on Shore at Buenas=Ayres. * "When, Cum- -hi 


bad por ſet, Eyes, on. The fink Thing that he 


2 8 not tell him that ſhe was s Wife, berauſe, 


| "neither : and though this Equivocation might have | 
17 of ſome Seryſce to him, r Soul was too 


0 's 5 at gur, Nup * 4 
unn 
S, y Lan rdos . Souſa, "ning p iaf- 
e's, # force 1555 Smi 8 and ordered _— 
tain andidus fee to the Review of 


as left tete a tite, with Miſs Cunigenda. He then 
wo declared his Paffion, roteſted that he would 
cher the ext Day in the Face of the Altar, or 


or any 
„ bother 18 85 275 ſhould beſt uit a Perſon of her 
4 
bh "Ta on this Propoſal, and to conſuft with the 
0 


4 63 J 

/ "that had fo many Titles. He ſpoke to 1 
Men with a noble Contempt, carrying his 2 
'Hj Eb, railing his Voice intolerably, ſpeaki 

is one of ſo much Authority, AKecling a 1 
ſo much Grayity, that every one rhat had any 
thing to do with him could > chi bear with him. 

He was immoderately fond of the fair Sex; aud 
Cunigonda ſeetried to him the prettieſt Woman he 


did, was, tp1 alk whether ſhe was not the Cap- 
tain's Pte The Manner iti which he propoſed 
Queſtion, armed Candidus prodigi iouſly. He 


in, Reality, "the Was not: he durſt 850 tell him 
be ſhe 25 his Siſter, becauſe ſhe was not that 


1 fined to violate the Truth, Mis Cunigonda, 


t ſzid he, "intends me the Honour'of making me 
Per Huſband, aud we moulck rake it as 4 Favour 
4 f your Excellency would condeſcend to be pre- 


Den F. ard andis 5 — 8 y Maſca- 


Company. ''Cardidus obey d, and the "Governor | 


harms. onda defired a Quarter of an Hour 


an, him his Anf\ 
Wo ne Ol Woman Nene reg 


4 "A 17 
| Ps LH! 
— 2 bf a re Th, 


no in your, Family, and are i 1? 
<« braſs Farthing: i your own, 1 ble vic 
8 married io .one of the N 5 Ab l. 


BY my py ag has on | 2 White 
2 * eyer let, 105 Ry « Ui ; bur Intereſt 
* 40 ſuch 15. ir | 429 
« Fidelity 5 705 ion 1 10 'ettiptations' * 


„ Wpen y v e Bulgarians, 
<« and a i ans wiſts EO ns "by 


o oman Was eng br 


ie (Gov s 
—_ Sk dz 7c) a, ha 


—— that Prudence, which Sad, 
e Fan m a Perſon of 225 197 and Ei 
ke making 


4 IR belt U. Wes and = 


ort, which 
— *Bur rcd eim wav pen hall N. 
The bid Woman be Fb We Bg Ne Nail on the 


| "when, 1720 it w or delier, that 
25 we Meera e eee 
; 01 WE e fle in 
0 wit Candles Te. r ee 01 10 
a a Jens ee cy 0 cen td be 
| Mars, 36 . the c r. = me 
Cor de e c ſhe TH ft ate Place of 
cut e de 6d: the erjons lie them” 
- Iran 3 701 wh J he ö ons. The 
1 e ug Ws bins ins 
* 


1 
e Wa e 


Buenes- 


* "Pp 


ras, It. immediately reported all over 
Pure 7 it e was LE on Shore in 
Pan G ſome alas that had murdered the grand 
Inquiſitor... The old” Woman ſaw at once — 


Courte was to taten. « It's 9 
A ou to make yo : Eſcape, faid ſhe ae, * 
ut neyer aun Ply bed have nothing to fear: © 
111'd the Gentleman: 


= it was no. ue I. 
« befides, the Gefen 155 Live with you, and 
« want 9585 ny, ONE Pur hurt an Hair 6f your Head 
J | ny on't bu ee D 
8 PE «i Make 


then ran immediately to Candid 

7 70 185 118 5 aid Ihe, or yo 

b e , 9U 1155 e ee — 
* M. COU bart Wi ud eeing 1 2 ( 

e SK Place Leh: run” to 


Satety ?. s it Eg hon 
# om Gly 
„un 11 K P. NV. "i 
a I 4 


Hi Camd idus umd Cacambo were receit 
"WY. -, the elwts ts. of Paraguay. 
8 wi A broug une 


59 


LS - 5 ny 


* Thom print A Mot 


and had been” a” 1 
| al 
4 4 | \ Bec 
92 5 8 | bi, 


__ 


1 86 
4 gone, Meg run off, without RM beking db. 
, as could nat help ſhedding a Flood of fears, | 
<.Q ;my dear Cumigarda, * he, muſt Þleave | 
. —— in the very Inſtant, when the Goyernot is 
going to ſee us married. Ab! Cunigonda what 
will became of you at this been She'll-do-: 
548 well as ſhe can, I wurrant you, ſaid Caram-· 
* 5; Wamesn are never long at a Loſs; Provi - [ 
*M Hence, Wdl-take Care oficher: and ſo let us 
4 © Joamper off as faſt-ags;welcan.'?,:\ Where will 
„u Sarry ma to faid-Gandides,: » (Whither ſhall 
Line What un wedoa without Cunrganda 2” | 
LY - Gi Byrd t. amis of Ga ofieite. ! aid Cacau niba- 
cc ** noten going to fight againſt my eſuits? 
d Fuppplecthenumnitcad: of fg aan em we na 
Pr hems Loan the 9 N 
Bibew you the Road to their Kingdom: phy | 
2 = charmed to have a Captain that iknows:the: 
„ Bulgarion Berreiſe; you may make your For- 
tune there though a Perſon cant make Things 
& do in one Blace, he may in another. And no- 
ching can give one a greater ann to os 
* out of the common Road. id 
$$ Hlave.yau.then. 1 2 ſaid: Gam Nini 
ye, that I have, ſaid . Was 
ier in the * College of Afſurptian, and I knowithe 
| Goverpment. of the Zathers, as: gl 20 J do any of 
I = ee 
extraor /. dis. at proſent 
aAbeüthbtee hundred Leagues in Cirtymfcrence, aud . 
8 vided into 85 * noo be Fathert are 
| oprigkars- of Every: ng3and:: therefore the 
2 Mur nothing s Which is a Muſter- piece of 
| Paley agg xiv: "For-wy Pan think cheſe are . 
die, incoriceivalile ö | 
2 1 "Rn 0 


[$7.23 - 


jo! V Fathers, | who make War, ene Kings of 
am ahd Horrigal in theſe Parts, and are their * 
fe fake)" Europe here they kill all the Spa- 
dc they can lay Hands on, and at Madrid tenck 
en che Way to Heaven: this is ſomething very © 
och but of the co Road; and very ſurpriſing. 
_ 0 Oe A ou. will certainiy bela very great 

Will'the Fathers be when-theß 


n 
— 
—— 


B. 82 


+ S 


= —_— ﬀ 


s the Bulg ariugs Exerciſe. {X26 FO N 
on a they: Hud weschel the eit Pals, . 


r 


ould be glad to fpeato with cheir dbmmading 
Berl? Ts was imtnediately reperted to the 
r beg. A uaran Officef ram irhmediately * 
e Notice of it lo Hs Commander. OWA 
Lets and Gase were immediately difarmtd; 
and their two Ananlouſſan Horſes wert ſeized” Tue 
os Strangers were then conducted between two ** 


Por their Commander: he had his three- corner d 
on his Head}hif Gown: tucked ups his Sword ts 
dy his Side, and a Handſpike in his Hand. On his 
Fring a Signal, four and twenty Soldiers ſurrounded 
Nur new vers; a Serj pays, at the lace Time, 
cquaimting them chat they muſt wait) that thele”” 
ommander ooulcb not ſpeak with chem, becauſe 


rere tes ro 
— — > —_ — — - — 


— 
— 


hat no Spanzrardfiguld open his Meuth, unleſs im 
bis Preſence wntilhe had been in their Territorien 
' leaſt chree/Hours. «gn NVC 194 iich ent eib ei 
* boy mhertivehe Reverend Provincial Kid 
mb. des to the Parade iter Maſs, r- 
plied Weser andlſyoucanhot ki his Spurt iu 
ge an three Rows." gut mn, * 


R rr rene. 
— 2 | ©” 


Hog | 


now a a 1 278 offers them dus Service, who 4 


Janbo informed the vanted Guard that a Captain” 


len of Soldiers/'tt the Place which'was: appointed 


he Reverend -Fatherotheir Provineial had ordered. 


[75%] } 
u, my Maſter, the Captain, who is half ſtarved a 1 
well as mylelf, is no Spaniard; no, he isa German; 
and 't ue eat our Breakfaſt, rhile u watt 
for his Revetente? l iii nod eg. 
The Serjeahbiivent that Trifldbtqto give an / Ab 
count of WH had paſſed toenbe, Cotnmanitt 
e Thank God, lays. 15 Neuerehec; if he ia a 
German l enk with himizibaitng him into wig 
Arbour HCardidus: was: then introduced [wnto; an 
Avbdirideroratyd with/a very handibine Balkdliaih 
2 und gold Marble, radbfatniſhetl with Ani 
fed witsParoqutts Other Riede Apes 
colon Brecfaſtruiks ſervedcup in gold Cupsgoail 
_ while:theÞobr Plaraguayans, Were: gatiiig their m 
ibo doden Bowls! im thelopen (Air, expoſed to tte 
ſultry Heat of the Sun, odr K Reverbud Father the 
Commundes entered 88 1660s 
Hevn hivety handſome qq urg Fellowy with & 
ful?! Fo ater ee 
bros wede arbhed, his Ene hub of Fire, His: EL 
ret, s Lipeliks Vermillion: His Air was ſome· 
vchat fie reed but uf a F iercemeſb which differed bach 
from that f 2 Spaniard and à Jeſuit. They nor 
returned Candiaus and Cacanibe a 8 
had been raken from them, together with; 
Aidathufith Horſes; Which 2 toble the ki 
berty to feed near the Arboum d keeping: his) Lye 
upon them; for Fear of a Shrpfiney ig [dy o) 
Candida immediately kiſſed tha Hem of oths 
Commanders Gurment; after hich cheychbth, 4 
his order, tat downits Table, Von ate a Gn 
« then,” ſaid liche Jeſuit to him in that Language 
„es, revetend Father; ſaid Cundidus. Hime 0788 
nowitingtheſs/Woride, : they Jonked:-on- eath ti 
ml = Fenn Surprize, RA they Worts A 
a 


| PIES — 22 2 — 11 


ble 


| ü 
[159% ] ) 
u toactbiint! for e And, what Pait:bf Gerad. 
an; ¶ my do you-belong tb 22! ſaid the-Jeſiuity; To. 
t Waker lower Part of Heſtphalia, faid Condight 2 
las born in the Caſtle of Thunder=ten-trunch.'!;1 
Heavens! Is it'poffible!)): 1 
let. What a Miracle is ais hn 2 Candiuus. Is it 
f ſaid the C Tisimpoſſible!“ 
i andidus. 'Onithipthey both. gel backwards z ; 
; al 1 8 e 7 7 embraced caανj,E:er, and: 
| 416, „% What g is: it you, fy ceverend Fa- 
ek. vou de Bicther. ithe ſhop Canirends +. 
-W you; that was flain-by the! hr ˙ , you; 
uid WF Baron's Sdn 1 are f © Jet at: Been 
a: an is a ſt Worid indeed ah eg, 
the Pangldfs | how.g d wquld you have / ben (if your! 
ac nöt been hang'd Dh ot To 3689H e 
The Commandant ordered the Negro · Slawesg and 
& Payoguayans, that poured out their, {in ” 
= rock-Gh ryſtal to retire. He thanked Gn 
tꝰ Mnatiut, 8 times; folded Candidus 
ai Arms; their Faces being all the while batheyl: 
Pears, 4 You will be more aſtoniſhed, more 
wſeced; more out of your Wits,” ſaid: Candidasy"! 
when 1-tell you that Miſs 3 n 
Wiofgou'the was ri up, is as Well as 1g 
anl. fl — ut by, at ne Houſe of 
r rer; "nk Tha coming: d 
ht againſt youi?{1 eee Word they ſpoke inv 
| flo Convertationy heaped: Surprize upon Su- 
be. f — ongues, liſc 
Win their Ears fand ſpiatk led in thelr Ryes. Avid 
were Ger mums, they ede a fog Meab(atcordr 2? 
kg Caſtom) waiting forithe-xevetend Father, te» 
wnciz;> when che C ander\/thas adqreſſib a 


„rr 
ble vide CHAP 


. 


ew. I forrna vet; L 6 f Ws ban ev 21 
#81197 pd O H A P.. XV. DITworon 5 
bo Candidns killed tr Brother of bf 
55 n dar Cuhige da. 29.51 - 

ual 7 ol ny loſe ſight of that horrible D 
60 wherein kfaw my Father and Mother, Kills 
+, and wy iSiſter xaviſhed; When the Buggri 

Mere gone, my ſweet Hiſter was no, Where ta! 
6, found 5: And Ir together with my fa 1 
„ Mother ]ũũ ˙⅛I Maids, and, three little Lads. th 
Mee Were; a6 ing were flung! into a; Cart in ord 

obe buried in a Chapel Which, ee toth 
„d Jeſui:e, gabont two, Jieagues d. 
eee. Jeluis printed us 125 is Hh | 
*Wate, Which being very mud „ and. lo” 
93 * Drops falling into Fa. the ather. coil 
7 -4,gercgive m Eysballs, oye; on, which hf | 
„hn Hand upon. my Side, and felt my 
Las taken care of, and in about three 
time, ng one e en thought any Thi 
had giled- e You-know very de | 
8 Gandidus,, L was very handſome, but 1 
mare ſo; gon which, Account the — | 
„Father Didrius, Superior, af the Houle, ca 
* ceived; à very great Affection f s e ji | 
the Habit of a; Novice, pod ſopaeyme, A 

15 dme de, Rams. The Superics, was then, loo 

. ing out for a, Pecruls of. yqung; Jeſuits, fr 

„ Gema. For the Ruler of Paraguay take 

<<, few Spaniſh Jeſuits as they can; but choc 
„Foreigner, becauſe, they think. they, can 

% xannize.oyer them as they pleaſe, I was. 

fore madę choice of LAY the reverend. Father, 5 
eb, s We Perſon tog $0,xark Jin ® 

Hite 1 7 ſet Saul in Company with a 2 + Wa 


n 
& dur, and a Tirolzfien, . On my Arrival I was. 
« honoured with a Sub- deaconty and a Lieutenan- 
6 15 eee Jam a Goibosl and a Prieft. 

a 


give the King of Spam's Army a warm 


kent you hither de affflt us. But is it true that 
« my dear Siſter, Cuni gendo, is in dür Neighbour- 
% hood, at the Govstfor of Buenos- Ayrus's Houſe ? 
0 Candi ls ſwore chat di Was as true us the Goſpel. 
On this their Teath guſhed oùt a 'freſh77'0 1, *- 


Wits, Wbom he call'd his Brother; and ib P 


(61 * Yin triumph, and recover i ter Cunigon- 
* „ There i is nothing I could wich for more, 


ou fad Cundidus; for 1: Expitied to be married to 

ber, 15 Toronto, and T have ſome Hopes I 
5 „The Inſolence of the Fellow ! 
6d th the Baton”; would you have the Impu- 
« ee to marty my Siſter, when the can reckon 
* 15 no leſs than threeſcore' and twelve Deſeents ?” 
Candidus being ſtruck all'sf a Heap at this, made 
nin, the following Reply: My Reverend Father, 

u aff" the Deſcents in the World, Von't fignify a 


% under a great — Obli tions to me; and is 
al willitis, to Maſter Panglofe' always 
told e alt ll Men are equal. 1 am Hure I fall 
habe her“ We'll ſee whether you ſhaltor no, 
eu Villath l ſaid che Jeſuit- Baron of Thunder- 
inet, and it the ſame Time gave him a Wipe 
_ wien ae fat pard'of lo Swords! Le 
drew his ART g VE few am . ts the 
DIR Von 


K [171 fangt MSEC 29) : 


* 2 


Reception, I can affüte you that they will be ex- 
4 communicated. aid beaten. Providencę has 


The Baron conld"hbt2 refrain embracing Cantli- | 
Ah, pethaps,” Tays*he, we two! may "(Enter the | 


©Farthitig ;" I have delivered your Siſter from tbe 
* Hands" of A Jews and an nqui ifitory The ies 


4 £#% 


— — 


N 
| 


get ad We can ze Tald itz 


dee Se el a bern chic ow3- 9d ef 


| L 62 
Hit ; in Bit6h's" Bb bite Alawingei 
En, and Jooking it 20 it Re 
"out; O. God | I have leg 
Friend, r ' Brother-itl-Law." I am 0 0 Hf j 
_ Hatured in the World; ye have Kill Mi 
Men, _ Biſt of the three; 2 Wete two of them 
Priefts. nE, 19v1 d bobivib ea aonw wo 
Cucambu, ne Rout Seat x the Door of WP 
Nee WM eard the Nciſe, rtr in Wi 
« Have Hoffffflg few to U birts Fel uf Hiyes 4% 
aſter ton Hm 5 And if 


19 801 


110 0 


<0 tht gel tere pelt be pandent Arbobr; g 
* ibis ar caſt ür AfmS n Sr Hands. 
eb l iR deen e eber b 


ee, iet Manu to tack 6 — it 
fot at Expedietit, Bir took n al 
the Bron l Ie: Put ic upon Aale, che to , 
the dead Man's Cap, and mate im "rho nr 
Hot piper als M . —. off 

= 4WAy, Mäſter, ſays he; ever 
- Nady WAR yon 8890 Jede that is Boing 
ee. xp dna WS MAN 262% HE 'Frotitiery, beftjr 
«they! Me Ms idr n 0 bs | 

He fed pie FExightnin}s;' beföre aHEſe 8 

quite out Of "his Nahe 2 | 
«Makes Way make Way fer the x eee 


Zul q * 2s t5 e 
15 26% bre WR "HA - 1887 2 2 N 
areas RS ne 


- and e, Gy, "ras Monkeys, "ind th; 

1. 3D SH 7 af. NON FLEET 
Sabah f 17 Orgitlong, gain „ eee 
. — bud Man- had 8 


fore an Soul in the Company 
” 


> We 
* 


* 


L -63 | 

s oyilable; of che. Neath: of 3 Tue 
95 rovidgnt Lacan 29 taken care $0 1k, his Wal- 
ie with, Bread, Chocolate, Hams, and, ſome Mea- 
455 4. Wine. They puſhed with: their Horſes 
a ſtrange Comes! where they could not diſ- 
er any Path r Road. „t laſt & pleaſant Mea 
Jow which was divided by : a 1 fo preſented itſelf to 
dei Eyes. Our n d + po 
lgrſes a-grazing. And made 2 Pro 

p Maſter to eat à Bit, 55 92 "the. fame, 


8 

e cd Example... Do yon think; lai Ge 
EY 812 82 fealk Ham, when (þ, have, killed 
e Berens Son, and find. myſelf under;a,Neceffity 
19 fee. Cungarya, again; 38 long: 88. J Rye. 
ki — it x0 (prolong, my Da in Milerys 
0. muſt; drag, them far from her, a Frey i 


h emorſe and Delpair 5 e what will che Journal: 
i Yrevoux, ſay of me ec baob ods 
er this Speech he refuled, ta; cat a Morſek; 
©, aca now; ſet ; when our two. Wanderers: 
bei very great Surprize heard a faint Cry, which 
med to come from ſome Women. It war not 
| oy to 8d KA whether it was ed * 
| _ or Mirth ; they roſe, xanediately with all 
jety and Apprehenſion to which eople are 
jt en, range; Place. The, Noiſe. was - 
nade by irls that ran ſtark —— the: 


(ar o. pu 

* =D he b KE. 
Fabel ur the Sight 3 . 
t among 5 ns,\ and was ſo 2 

| " 1 Id Ve Nut 10 .a Buſh 

— touching a Leaves. * HE took up his 


ie Fance, which was” double oF ies) 


Wong yosgme 503 al bo yas 91079 


N 


I. „ 
killed the to Monkeys, « God be praiſed, 
dear” Gacambe,, ſaid he, I have delivered the tu 
poor Girls from this great Danger; however, if 
have been guilty of a Sin in Killing the Inquiſitor 
F have now made ample Aniends for it by ſaving thy 
Lives of the two Gitls. They may chance to prov 
a couple of Ladies of Rank; and who knows bull 
this Adventure may do us ſome Service in thigh 
Country.“ N re ; 

He was going, on at this Rate, thinking that h 
had done a great Feat; but how great was his Sur 
Prize, when, inſtead of rejoycing, he ſaw the tu 
Gals bracing, the Monkeys with all the Marg 

_ "of: the moſt; tender Affection: they bathed the 

Bodies with Tears, and filled the Air with Shri 
that teſtißed the deepeſt Diſtreſs, I could never bai 
expected to have ſeen ſo much as this, ſaid he 1": 
Cacambo, who replied, you have done a fine Pied 
f Work indeed, Sir, you have killed the Ladii 

two Sweethearts. Their Sweethearts ! Is it pol 
"ible !, you ate in Jeſt ſure, Cacambo : who th 
Duce could believe you to be in - Earneſt? M. 
dear Sir, replied Cacambe,' ou are always for mak 
ing Mountains of M/ le-hills ; why ſhould you think 
it incredible that there are ſome Countries where 

Monkeys enjoy the Favours of the Ladies; why 
they are got by human Creatures, in the ſame Man 

ner, as 1 was t by 4 Spaniard. | 6c Aye, repliec 
|  Gandidus, now 1 recollect, Maſter. Panglo/s h; 
told me that there may be many a Inſtance of thi 

EK ind, and that theſe Mixtures gave Birth to tha 

EAgpians, Faun and Sityrs z that a great many 
the Antients had ſeen them, with their own Eyes 
- but I always looked. upon it as a mere Romanc 
Fou ought, at preſent to ſee your * 4 
nr acamvig 


% 


* 


FIT . | 4 * | 63 3 5 
n . own that the Doctor was in the tight. 
igd you may ſee what Influence the Preſudice-of E. 


, 
2 thi 
„ if 


6 on bas u pon the Underſtanding. All Team . 
War 7 of 5h that thele Ladies Will play us ſome un- 


prov 
8 but 
| thi 


43] wiſe Reflections induced Cordfidus to quit thy 
Meadow, and take to a Wood: Where he and Cacambo 
hpped together; and after heartily; curſing the Porta- 
% Inquiſitor, the Governor of Buenos-Ayres,, and the 
Bron, they Tell'afleep.7 -:f; » 


at h 
On their awak ii g/ they ſound that they could not fiir, 


3 Sur 


thei 
iel 
hay 
he . 
Piece 


adie 


tur; the Orcy/loxs, e of the Coun 7 whom 
lame bro Lats had bad, aß med of their Fro — had 
( und them, in rh trtime, with Eords, e-ofthe 


1 k of a Tee were ſurronnded*by"a Body'of 

r.cullons fark A el Ne with Arrows; Clubs, and 
0 ts. made of F tit? eme 6f who bene ma 
eat Calldrof boil 3 others preparing Spits, ant all of , 
lem crying Gut: Hef efuit, bes a: Feluity well 
ke him pay Sawoe for it, we'll'pick Bis Bones for 
„him; leeres the / Jeſuit, let's eat the Jeſuit.” “. 
«You may remember I told you, my dear Maſter, 
ed Cacambo in a-llamentable Tone, that thoſe two 
laſſes would play us ſome unlucky K 
Caudlidus perceiving the Cauldron and the 8˙ its, cried, 
Wot: 0 Lord! we are certainly going to be ro 

5.07 boiled: Ah, would Maſter Panghfs now lay, on ſee- 
ing Nature without Diſguiſe, that, Whatever in, i roger ? 
may be ſo: but muſt confeſs it is a Tad Thing to have 
oft Miss Cuni onda, und to be ſpitted by the Oreillons.” 

” Carambo w Wis never at a loſs for an Invention: 
Never deſphif, ſaid he to the diſconſolate Candidus; I 
1 the jargon of theſe People a little, and am go- 

to ſpeak to chem.“ Don't fail, faidCandidus, o te. 
preſent io chem the Inbumanity of drefling Men for | 

7 ſer forth what an unchrifttan Prathice it is.“ * 
laid NET LnSs, lays. 8 acambo,” you fancy that” Joa 
l featt on a Jefon to Day; a V e * 


for my part I was dorn among you ; the Gentleman, yo 


47 * 
1 ute, r 1 "there die RO more ju TY fe 


ſerve oncs Enemies ſo. In Effect, the of Nature 
teaches us th kill our Neighbour, and it is a Printig: 
which is put in Practice all over the Globe. If d 
not make Iſa of the Right of eating him, tis da 
we have Plenty of Victuals without it; but as 
have not that Advantage, it muſt certainly be better f 
you to eat your Enemies, than fling away the * of ya 
ictories as à Feaſt to Crows apd, Ravens. But Ge 
tlemen, I a you would not be for eating jo 


Friends. to ſpit a Jeſuit; þ 
believe RRP you 225 222 e It is th 
Enemy of your Enemies that you fre going to roaſt. / 


— ® G - i % 
> 2 — 1 = —U— — . — — 


a. - — 
— * 
4 9 


E . 1 Maſter, and ſo far from being u Jeſui 
ow: killed a Jeſuit : and he is only: drel 
ſed in in li lte which is the Cauſe of your Miſtake 
ing der t0.confirm my Aſſertion, let one of you ta 
own off, carry. it to the firſt, gi of the Goyernma 
5 OY Fathers ; » and, inform himſelf whether my, Maf 
has not killed aJeſuit Officer. „I is an Affair that won 
take up mich Time ; and vod may always haye it 
our Possen West bs, if ot . — e Int A L. ye. But 
_ Eſhouldhavetoliged® tlie I and aching but th 
Truth, you re too dell ade, with the Principle 
ral Bone. e Fee not to ſhew 4us | ou 
avour,” M7 148 : 
„The Oreitlm were 1 fully nana of the Reaſb 
a Aa of his P that they deputed two. of $05 
Chiefs to, Afi way Nu acky 95 47 Yruth of wi 
he had told AL Th The two; epunes acquitted die 
ſelves of their Charge like Men of Ss , and return 
ſoon with a fadourab © W Tas n The eillon chend 
bound their Priſoners, ſlewod them thouſand Civiiti 
aftered them Women; gave them! ſemething to refft 
| N r the Con 


Ade Jae Re He Ine Je * 9 


; 3 =9- 


— —⁵˙— — ĩ ⁰ö!. DEAE AE NI > - ——— — 


x5 £65]: 
' Cantidus could not help admiring the dubject of 
hi Deliverance, What a People | ſaid bo 
Men! What Manners! If 1 had not had the good 
Luck to whip Miſs Cunigonda's Brother through 
the Lungs, I ſhould inevitably havr been eaten up. 
But, after all, the Dictates of pure Nature are 
— beſt, ſince this People, inſtead of eating 
„ ſbewed me a-thouſand' Civilities; "as" ſoon as 
they knew that J Was gt a gut. 


1008 boo IO qqu} 25 


e e. 
4, $9 0 HA p. XVII. T 1107-10 * 3 


2 ng 


des and bir , "af 
| * Zee * A 


you ſee now, ſays Catambi to Candidus, ahh 
they were got to the Frontiers bf the Oreillons, 
4 That. this Part 57 the World, is not one Pin 
better than the other : Take Fools Advice 
© for once, and let us return to Eurape, as faſt as 
© eyer-we can ?* © Howiis that poflible? ſays Can 
, n And pray which Part df it would you have 
us go to? Shall I go into my own'Country ? the 

. — rh and Abarians kill all they meet with 
there; if I return to Portugal, I am ſure I ſhall 
de burnt alive; if we ſtay in this Country we 
run the Hazard of being roaſted every Moment: 
And again, how can I think of 8 1 that Part 
t of the Globe, where Miſs Canigenda lives? 
Why then, let's take our Courſe 5 Cayenne, 
lays Cacambo, we ſhall meet with ſome Frenchmm 
* there, for you know they are to be met with all 


over the Globe will e vs ſome 
* 6 


[66] 

n Frovidgoge gm. have Fin, upon 
us. 40001; > Dos eich gi won 19% 

It was no ealy Matter forthem, to go to Cayenne; 

10 they did not know whereabouts it lay z. beſides 

. — Rivers, Precipices, Banditti, and Sa- 
vages, were Difficulties they; were ſure; to encouns 
ter with in their Journeys! heir Horſes died with 
Fatigue, their Proviſians were ſoon conſumed: 
Aſter having lived a hole Month on the wild 
Fruits, they found themſelues on the Banks of a 
ſmall River hieh was bordered by Coca Trees, 
which at once preſerved, pe, Lives, and kept up 
their Hopes. 190070 JIOM TO b: 
„ Cucambo, e i ſick of theſe Adven- 
tures, and who was on all Occaſions, as good a 
Counſellor; as; the old Woman, ſaid to Candi dus 
Good Sir, you ſee we are quite ſpent; we have 
F walked:enough already, and here's an 8mpty 
Canoe upon the Shore, let's Ell it with Cocas, 

+; then get on board, ole it drive with; the 
| #1 Stream 2 A River always carries: one to ſome 
inhabited Place, If we; don't; meet with what 
oP we likes wr are ſure to meet with ſomething 
new.“ Why what you ſay is very right, geg 
let's go, ſaid Candidus, and recommend ourielyes 
$40 the, Care of Providence, „ med 36 bak 
„They floated ſome Leagues between, the two 
Enter 5 were enamelled:.. with, F lowers in 
ſome Places, in others barren, in ſome Par 
level, and i in others very ſteep. „The River grew 
broader as, they proceeded, ag. at laſt, loſt itlelf 
n.a ſpacious. Hogizon, ,thatiwas bounded by ſows 
 $rightful, Recks, which reached a8. i Cone 
Clouds. Hur -o ads 
F356 1 


SSS Sa S sss Sg = => < 


— 
>” 
P—_ 


EOF SSN 


45 


Wy 


A | 
fiſt themſclves to the Stream. © The River being 
very narrow in this Place, drove them along with 
Oh Rapidity and Nite as filled them with 
merutmoſt Horror. In about four and twenty 
Hou?#*they got Sigke of „ . again, big 
their? Canoe 25 ali in | apdinſt che 
Breakers. They" Were obliged to.crawl from one 
Nock to another for Wivhole League; "after which 
hey got Sight of * ſpaeldus Plain terminated with 
inacceſſible ogg The Country dus eulti- 
rated both for Plegſure and Profit Which! latter 
was always mixed Witt the agreeahlen The Rodde 
mere coyered, or more properly ſp were 


Werned with Ie Figute und Mate- 
tis were wy ſhes ey were fulhof Men und 
Women of an Laerskei er and drawn} 


with great Swiftne dy large red e Jinan, 
itfafled the fleeteſt Hotſes' of Am an 
& Mequines in their Coutſee 9005 
e Tkis certainly; fad Cnν⁰I is rel 
thts JPe/ephae.” Hfe and Cacambe'got on Shore 
bent the "firſt Village they eame tb The very 
Children of the Village were dreſſed in Gold Pro- 
tides,” playing at Battledore and Snuttle- cock, at 
the Does er of the Town: Out two · Stra 
ſtared at them, like ſtuck Pigs. The — 
Wete made of large ruund Pieces, f 4inedminon 
Notes! ich wee red; and green, And 
— m . e Hands itchod 
be ering ſ of; 
they were amel fret rj, Move they were either 
Cold, Emeralds or Rubies; the Tea of "which 
would have bern ng ſtrrall Ornament to che The 
e ir „ Calumbo, 
1017 F. 2 6 theſe 


[ 68 ] 
c theſe muſt be the Children of the King of the 
c Country, diverting themſelyes, at Battledare and 
c Shuttle-cock.” 
The Mafter of the Village 53 5 at lat Hilla 
to call them to School: Thats, the ; Freczpgr, to 
© the Royal Family! cries, Congidus, bee 
_ I he title Brats immediately gave over playing, 
d left their Battiedores agd; other Play: things. be; 
155 them. Candi dus picked them up, run to the 
hoolmaſter and, preſented them. to ble with a 
reat deal of Humility, 4 1 6 g Hic, DY Si Ns, 
3h thejr Royal. Hiphne ES 6 their ( old 
and Jewels ſe The Maſter of of 998 8 Wage ſmiled, 
and flung Tu” upon the Pete having 
BY, at Candidus with ſome U egree of S pri 
walked off, 
ve "Our Travers: you may depend upon it did not 
fal | imigediately 1 to pick up the Gold, Rubicsy and 
Emeralds. here are we. 92 50 to now? ater 
« Candidus. The Princes 01 the Blood mu} cer- 
8 "tainly be Well educated here, ce they. a 
5 8 t0 make ſo batt of ld and Jeweh. 
as 25 much urprized. as Condidus,. 
e en made up 1 Ne firſt 1 in 
the © 57 * which was da f e one of © 
ropia n Palaces, There was à ve 1 of, Feak 


_at thy Door, and ſtill a FH 
at 1 4 5 Ta ick, nd thr e 1 


1 nook * Felis Sme Sme ar Qualz from the 


782 ande crept ip vol Aer his Far to the 

Igor, . 0G. Tie ih 798 the e Peruvian Lan: 

whic| Was hi ot er-tongue z for, every 

ons Knows. that Oy Wa berg BT. ig A 
vive © HOY © 9154 5 r 7 


Village 


1 
a 


4 
LESS 


=" HDPSASO © nom co» 


hu 


” 


p # "of 10 
* 
0 ' Y 252 # ; * 
1 * — , 5 > " = C5 ELIFE - C 
LANG TA Y FF «At 94 _ | 11 ob» fo 
: < ” 
Ns tO Bia! do, $291S 5 | | F 
Va pe 


Vnläge where they make Uſe of no other Lan- 

e Pl! be your Interpreter, Maſter, Mater, 
985 'Cacambe, in the: greateſt Raptures, this is 
un kam? in ich you, in with you.” 


| [Immediately A Wy ple "of Lads . twp of. the 
Maids that ben 14 the Houle, dreſſed in 


Cloaths of Gold by ang "with. their Hair tied 
Yack' with RibbaHg ide, tied th them to ſet down to 
Tible with theit Tie They yed up four 


38095 arniſhied With Parr uets, A J. Dim of 
Bb that” weighty 5 hand e ; 
turd Apes roaſted 77 'of a an excel ent Tate, three 
wündkeck Conbries, ohe Plate, and "x hundred 
Fütümmig Birds“ in atiother ;" together With ex- 
quifite Ragouts, and the malt delicious Tatts, all 
won Plates of Rabl Cr yital, After which the Lads 
ad Maids ſerved them EE a preat Variety of Li- 
Wore made from the” Sug. gar canes... 5 
45 e "Gueſts conſifted * for ah, moſt Part, of 
Tradeſmen and Cart ief's, extreme y polite; ; who 
ied ſome Queſtidns Gf. Carambd, ch ſhewed 
the greateſt Diſcretion and CircumſpeAtion ; and 
fictived as ſatisfactory "Anſwers, © 
0 ftertainment”. wag ove,” Cacambe 
8 Candidus, Þ, Aiſchat their 
lap by pl tt ” down a cou ple of t the large 
75 5 Gold, w ich they had ikea up: But 
te Lundlord 4H iRatally up6n feeing this, burſt 
1 rodigious, Fit of „ Ry and could 
fl i git 'e 1 fog iv e ecovering them-. 
1 lt . e ſiys the Landlord, 
ip EN % Wa 8 that you.” are "Strangers 5 
00 Fee üb Mines (6 us, för we 
not much 0 to them here; you will. ex- 
F 3 cuſe 


A 


s cuſe us * 


7 Stones of our 


8 reckoning. Lis 


e 40 


2 Te jnerreed it 


en 255 his Ei 


* Tis be, fad ad 


3 known forhe 
to our any 


W 44 


* bim 


© tnank G. 


10 « 
. 


. * 


maintained 


0. 


— 


58 other, which is un- 
"of 


? - © > 


£1 ang Fea 
4 ae, 


eee neee. 
Ft A P. VE „„ 


me that IT. 


W 2 
ö W +. 4 


s > - - 
* 


Aa _ could ns 16hger kee 
ri 
with 1 


105 


ut 


1.70% 
hing, when, you offered us. the 


A ware in diſcharge of” 118 
plain, you have got none 

Money in your Pockets ; but there's no Occaſigh 
for it, in order to Ae here, All che Innz, 
N TI. are eſtabliſhed | i the Conveniency of 


pA 
* Mong os 
© but a poor 


il be dars 5e be 


ven. 
ge:; 


1 


** 


Tis ; pr 


ng 


but 5 de "the 
ch y Pa rt 


ter. 


ff 1th 


Pp SN 
> 775 2 of Fetir ied 


sohn 190 rfzod 074 dvs gw 750 


2 


e Mander You 


155 As. me 


Our 


by fi Government. 
here, becauſe this is 
ut, any where elſe You 


| cc ch, to Con. 
Aſtoniſhment 
acambo, at the 
Country can 


a ne e 


Phat. 


— 


e wt onbut ta wm 


arth, and ſo different 
bly that Country, where 
[a is neceſſary that there 


5 for all Doctor 


ng Notice many 
LE very * at . 60 


— «- 
— 


Gn * Eldoradp. 


lin his Cu- 
"AC quaitited 


hol 


. 
ys the 15010 to 
r to theſe I dg, 
50 M ave” e 66 6 Ve 
Wh Galt, Had 


Fol ag 


Le: 
LY at 


Ci 


1571) 
the oe Bock che Wielt and the moſt communica- 

0 10 1 in the Kingdom.“ And faying this, 
Our thout any more ado, che ſhewed Cacambo the 
| do Man's Houſe. Candidut now acted but the 
15s 80 nd Ne in the Play, and followed his 
ö of Servant. They EfttefeH into 4 oor Cottage for 
ent. the Door was obs hut Silver, afid the 2 * 
8 Þ nothing but Gold, 5 iſhed with omuch Taſte, 
u that 105 ricbeſt of Europe, could not come 
you üg tö them. TEA eB C e only 
03 covered Nick 9 Ig Emeralds, but Te Gem: 
ner in which the r the ne- 
W their Sim W 4 22x i 
The old Gen n received our d bg 
With great 'Politeneſs, atid placsck them upon a 
i ſtuffed with the F 7020 r* 'the Colibris, 


and order'd them to be ſerved with "ſomething to 
an ik in Veſſels of Diamond; after Which he ſa- 
here che; their Curiffit in the following Manner. 
Qtor am now iti hundred and f venty-ſecond 
71 * Lear, and I Have heard” my Father, Who was 
9 room to his Majeſty, We cen the ſurprizing 
= — of Peru, of which he was an Eye- 
90 ee The Kingdom we are in at preſent, is 
5 e antient Cut of the IN As, who left it 
© very indiſcretely in order to conquer one Part 
of the World; inſtead of which, the ey. themſelves 
„% Were all deſtrôyed by the Spanid rab 
The Prince, who deſcended from the. ſame Fa- 
„ mily, and who. remained in his native Country, 
| ras ſomewhat 1 more ee and. made a Law, 
1095 y the unanimous Conſent | of f the whole Nation, 
;the bye, ** eſt of AWS, oe, in being, 
that's 7 0 of 0 Tnhabiarte 80 


om, an i: 7 to this, 


py por little K 
we have — both our Innocence 
N and 


( 72] 
our Happineſs. The Spaniards have had ſome 
: confuled Idea of this Country, and have called it 


EI Dorado: And an Engliſhman, named Sir Mal. 


© ter Raleigh, has likewiſe been on our Coaſts 
© above a hundred Years ago; but as we are ſur- 
© rounded by inacceſſible Rocks and Precipices, 
© we have always been hitherto. Strangers to the 
© bloody Rapacity of the European Nations, who 
© are inſpired. with, an inconceivable Rage for the 
C "+ Damg and Dirt of our Streets, and would not 
c ftick to cut all our Throats tomake themſelve 
« Maſter of them.” ; 

Their Conference was 88 and bel 
upon the Form of their Government, their Man- 
ners, their Women, their public Shews, and their 
Arts, At laſt, Candidus, who had always a great 
Fondneſs for Metaphyſics, bid Cacambe aſk, if there 
was any Religion in that Country. 

At this Queſtion, the old Gentleman looked a 
little red with Anger. Hoi is it poſſible, ſaid he, 
that you ſhould queſtion, it ? Do you look upon us 
£ az ſuch a Pack 2 grateful Wraches? Cacambo 
then modeſtly aſked Kim, What- the Religion of 
© Eldorado was? This made the old Gentleman 
bluſh © Is there more Religions than. one! 
6 ſaid Fo z. we profeſs, as I and every body elſe 
© here are of Opinion, the Religion of the whole 
World; we worſhip the Deity from Evening to 
Morning. Do you worſhip but one God? ſaid 


Cacombe, who acted as Interpreter to Candidus- 


« You may be ſure we do, ſinos it js-evident there 
© can neither be two, nor three, nor four. | 


© confeſs, that, People of your Country propoſe 


9 "I odd Queſtions.* Candidus perſiſſed a 


1:33 T; 


/ 


= _ a «a «Uo — a > 2a 
aA. Ho tnm Qs =. 


„ ve 


Tas 22 2 8 © 


MR | 
ne || the good old Man a thouſand more; be wanted to 
+ it © know how they prayed-in Eldorado. We never 
al: pray to God, ſaid the good and reverend Sage 
ſts we have nothing to aſk of him; he has fo fully 
ur- *fatisfied all our Wants, we have nothing to do 
es; I A but to offer up our Thankſgivings without ceaſ- 
the “ ing to him, who has ſo greatly bleſſed us.“ 
ho Candidus had a'yaſt Curioſity to fee Tome of their 
the Prieſts, bid Cacambo aſk hinſ, whefe they were to 
not WW be found. This madè the old Gentleman ſmile. 
ves Friends, | ſays he, we are all of us Prieſts; the 
King and the Heads of every Fatnily ſing their 
ied “ ſolemn Thank ſgivings every Morning, accompa- 
in- nid by five or fix thouſand Muſiciaus, What!“ 
cir WW © fays Cacambo, have you no Monks td preach,” ta 
eat . diſpute, to tyrannize, to ſet People together by thi 


7 

8 

ere Ears, and get thoſe burnt who are not of the ſame 

- WW Sentiments as themſelves? We muſt be very 

qa great Fools if we had, faid the old Gentleman; we 

he, Ne all of us of the ſame Opinion here, and we 

us don't urderſtand What you mean by your Monks.“ 

1% © Candidus was in an Extaſy during all this Dif- 

of courſe, and ſaid to himſelf, There's a great Dif- 

nan ference between this Place and Mfphalia, and 

e the Baron Caftle': If our Friend Pangloſs bad 

elſe I ſeen Eldorado; he would never have maintained 

ole . that nothing upon Earth could ſurpaſs the Caſtle | 

; to of Thunder-ter=trdiith; every Body ought to travel,” 

aid I After this long/Converſation” was finiſhed, the. 
„Nod old Man ordered 'fix Sheep to be harneſſed- 

aud put to the Coach, and Tent a Dozen of his . 

eruants with our twe Travellers do donquct them , 
oe Courr . Excuſe me, ſays he to them, if my , 

Age will not per ie me to have the Horiodr to 
M1? attend 


* 
* 


their Ladies intfoduced them“ 


| * great Officer; to embra 107 me, and; kils bim 


— 


„0 


4 | 
attend ycu. The King will teezive y uin a Man. 9 
« ner that you" will not ond Fault with, and“ — #4 
< will, I doubt not, make 1 105 the 7 
«© toms of the Country, if you maul d a e Wh E 
© any thing that you, drfapj de + wh 
Cuandidi and ne tinte tis Coach l. the J 
i Sheep fled Bke Li ightn Lo in Tefs than' four 5 
Hours they reached 25 . 70 oo which was Ill 7" 
— 2 of the Me 1 50 ne Gate MW 
Was two hundrell and twe and one Ml © 
Hundred Brbad; N ok the Ma- x 
weribtsi4t 0040 00 m ah 7 15 one may Caſi] 
gueſt, chat it tut abe prodigi gioufly ſurpaife q 50 | 
Stoties' and the Sand when We ban Gold and iN 3} 
Wd? 2&W bis 2001171 VASE ber! yoo? qc 
We gen ab Ojeb bt, un their Arrival, 'were iN 18 
received" by twenty Maids of Hogbur, of 41 exqul. WI P7 
fe Beauty; who ConduCted — * the Baths, and fy 
preſented therm With Robes fade br the Down of IN 5 
the Colibris; after which the great ' Officers and n 
108 his Majeſty's . 
a two ROMS Uf Muſicians, eo 
of a thoufa nd in each, * to the Cuf- 
ef the Country,” 
When they were come to tlie F64 t of che Throne, 
Carembi aſked one of the great Cets, in Ila 
Manner they were to'behave whe tek went to pay 
their Reſpekts to his Majeſty, Whe er. they were 
to fall down HH their Knees, or My Bethe: whe- 
ther they were to put thety tfajds upon their Ueads 
er upon thelf Backſtd6s, "whether "they; were to lick 
op e Dult of the Room,” ee Word, 5 
the Ceremoty was: ülfem is, faid the 


4 patw Sides.“ Candids and A According- 
Iyelaſpæd his Majeſty round the Neck who received 
] then 


g- 
ved 
em” 


175 
Aa, in, the molt, palite Manner imaginable, and 
[a y, invited them to ſup, with, him, 

ms the ] N 15 ſhewed them the City, the 
difiges that reac $i: as high ag the Clouds, 
2 de with a thouſand Co 

þ mg Fountains 77 Water, beſides others 
1 eh t Liquors that, are extracted 

10 e Sugar Canes, 4 7 layed inceſſantly in 
the Squares, whic Were paved 3 Kind of pre- 


cious e ns hat di Iu 1 ke, — of 
28 0 innamo BY qui ab&ng them to 
= 4 one of their, C Go ſtice, and their 
Pane: hot TY they. told him they had non none, 
and that no one W 7 ever tried there, He then em 
qdired if they had any Priſons, and was told 


tad not. What afforded. + the. greateſt Sur- 


prize. and Pleaſure, was their Schools for the Sci- 
ct: in whic 'he aw; a Gallery of two thouſand 
Wy ul oftruments for making Hapeſianns 
in 140 0p * 12 905 1 
After having g ne, over about a thouſand e 
hy . in the fternoon, they were re- conducted 
the Palace. Candi dus ſeated himſelf at Table 
uh his Majeſty,” his Man Cacambo, and a great 
many Ladies: Never was a better Entertainment 
ſeen; his Maje Y Was a very ſenfible clever Man; 
cambo in preted the King's Repartees to 
Ca ndidus, — 65 they Were tranſlated, they 
e 0 III. A Thing which gave Carr 
JE a 19 8 leaſure! 
They ſpe 05 whole Month in this holpitable 
anner : | . Candidus, was always 
ine e Cacambg, mul {ay it, again and again, 
1 t the Calle J was born in, was nothing like 
Gina w Wölfe * Ae. trays Mic 


7 
boi O 10% or bauos v Heis Tei bst Cuni- 


mod; f 


8-3. 
.* Cunigonda is not here, and I don't queſtion but 
© you have left a Sweetheart behind you inEurope, 
© If we ſtay where we are, we ſhall be looked upon 
© only like other Folks, when, if we return'to'our 
© own World only with twelve Sheep loadedwith 
© the common Stones of Eldorado, we ſhall be 
© richer than all the Kings put together; we ſhal! 
© have no, Need to be afraid of the Inquiſitors, and 
'« we may eaſily recover Miſs Cunigonda,? - 
Cacambo reliſhed this, Pzopoſal;prodigiouſly;; ſo 
fond are we of running about, of being thought 
SOMEBODY OF.COND1ITION among; one's Coun- 
trymen, and of making Orations on what. one has 
ſeen on one's Travels, that theſe two really happy 
Men, could they have thought ſo, were reſolved 
not to be ſo long, and accordingly began to take 
their Leave of his Majeſty _ "1 
Vou are guilty of very a)great Weaknefs, ſaid 


© 'bis Majefty to them, I am not ignorant that my: 


© Country, is. a. deſpicable Place 3 but providing 
© it be but paſſable,” you had bettet ſtay in it; 1 


muſt indeed confeſs that I have no Right to de- 


_ tain People of another Nation; tis a Degree of 


© Tyranny inconſiſtent with our Cuſtoms and Laus 


all Menhhere are free: You may go when you 
« pleaſe ; but you ought, firſt to be informed that 


6 you cannot leave us without ſome Diſfficulty. It is 
c impoſhble to go againſt the Current up the rapid 
£ River, which runs under the Rocks ; your Paſ-" 
* faze hither was a Kind ofza Miracle. Ibe 
Mountains which ſurround my Kingdom are 2 
© thouſand Foot high, and as ſteep: as 'a Wall; 


© they are at leaſt ten Leagues 9ver; and their De- 


c ſcent is nothing but Precipices. However; ſince 


« you ſeem determined to leave us, I'll give Or- 
N 6 ders 


Las] 


© ders immediately to the Conſtructors of my Ma- 

o chinesg to conttive one to tranſport you, with the 

greateſt Eaſe. When they have conveyed you to 

bethe other Side of the Mountains, no one muſt 
{attend you; becauſe' my Subjects have made a 

„Vo never to paſs "beyond them, and they are 
doo wiſe to break it. There is nothing elſe you 
"can aſk of me, Which ſhall not be granted. We 
taſk your Majeſty; ſaid" Cacambo, very eagerly, 
* only a few Sheep loaded with Provifions, together 
with ſome of the common Stones and Dirt of 
of your Country. nee eee 

At this ſtrange Deſire, the King halgbel very. 
heartily. z1* I cannot, ſaid be, account for the 
cFondneſs which you Eurcpcan have for our vel 
ow Duſt; but you are welcome to take as lied 
of it as you pleaſe, and much good may it d 

1 

the gave immediate Orders to his Engineers to. 
conſtruct a Machine to hoift up and tranſport theſe. 
two extraordinary Perſons out of his Kingdom. 
About three thouſand able Mechanicks ſet to- 
work; and in a Fortnight's Time, the Machine 
was erunpleated, which coſt no more than . 
Miliions Sterling of their Currency. - 

Canuidus and Catambo were both placed in the 
Machine; together with two large red Sheep bridled” . 
and ſaddled for chem to ride on, when they were 


dt ear of the Mountains; a hundred Sheep of. 


Burden loaded with Proviſions, thirty charged with 
the gteateſt Curioſities of ce Country. by Way of 
Freſent, and fifty doaded with gold, precious 
Stones, and Diamands. The King took his Leave 
of ou two n Wits Ae Wente Marks of. , 


YAleRion;- 1 


; * Pg bh. 8 2 * bs. - Py 2. : — br 
On WT t 37 = 45 """I6 


4h 


ST” * 


78˙-0＋ 


[ 
"ft waw"eottelbly 4 very ifs" Bight to lee em 


depart, and the — in which 1 Fonds th 
Sheep were ſlung over the Moiyitain "The Phit 
loſophers took their Leave of lik” after Hav 
got them ſafe over; and Cafdſdut now thi ug 
of nothing elſe but of going to prefent his 


to Miſs Cum goa. We bare now got Hep 
to pay for che Ranſom Hung bnlla, if the G- 


vernor will but part With her, ſays he, let's 
mareh towards Cayenne, chete take Shipping, and 
then we'lf 166K Gut for ſome ious. Kingdom | to 
c make Purchaſe n 


SZonobiv 701 10 En en! nl * bnsH 1A 


411) £9 G75! 


, fiO 1ibno. 


1 


didus s feraptd” Acquaintan.. 4 "Wer! Martin. 
| T H E Gc& Day's Journey our Travellers paſſel 


very agre8ahly, being elated with the Idea bf 


finding themſelves Maſters oſ more Treaſure, than 
Aha, Europe, on Africa could equal. Candidus wis 
in ſuch high; Spirits, that he cut out the Name of 
Cuni gonda upon almoſt every Tree that he came 
to, The ſecond Day two of their Sheep funk in 
Bog, and wexe loſt, with all chat ey, cartied: two 
others died of Fatigue a few Days after ; feven or 
eight died at once for Want in a Poſart, and ſome 
few Days after, ſome others fell down a Precipice. 
To be ort after a March of one hundred Days, 
their whole ock amounted to na more than two 
Sheets eig bed 7 eld 01 bi 
Candiduis then, to Gaeatnbos; [$1 F vary * 
5 ſec * periſhable the Rights of this World a 
* 


© there 


ha H A n e 18 
| 2 Apel hom at Sürinam, e Cain 


S . 


—— 


——_—_ 
2 
1 


[79] 
« there is nothing durable, nothing to be depended 
« on but Virtue, and the Happineſs of once more 
e Cunigonda. I grant it, ſaid Cacamboz/ 
« but, we have ſtill two Sheep left, beſides more 
Treaſure than, ever the King of Spain was, 
Maſter of; and I ſee a Town a good Way off; 
that I take to be Surinam; it. belongs to the 
« Dutch, Farewell Sorrow, and welcome Joy!? 
„As they drew nigh to the City, they;{aw.a Ne- 
ee lying on the Ground, almoſt naked, that is 


10 W bee e of Drawers en af blue 
ach; the poor Fellow had loft his Left Leg and 


s Right Hand. In the 3 of Providence, 

44 7” you do vac in this terrible os 

lam waiting for. my Maſter Mynbeer Vander- 
„ 1447, the great Merchant, replied. the,Negroe.4 

And was it Mynbeer Vanderdendur that uſed you 

Win this Manner: aid Candidus.*  « Yes, Sir, 
ſed WF ald the Negro] tisctule Ouſtom of the Country, | 
of They give us A Pair of Linnen Drawers, the only 
an Gatments they afford us, twice a Var: If we 
xis WO hould chance to have one of our Fingers caught 
f in the Mill, ase are working in the Sugar- 
me houſes, they cut off our Hand; if we offer to 
na run away they cut eff one of our Legs; and L. 
o he had the / Aisfortune to be found guilty of- 
or both theſe Charges Such are the Conditions oi 
me which: you ener Europe! Hremember ik 
ice. well as if it was hut Yelterday,' When my Mo 
ays, I Her. ſold me ſor cem Crowns of Patagon on the 
Coaſt of Gnimaʒiſheiſaid to me, My dear Boy, 
you are bound to bleſs our Benefactors, always” 


you be vety dutiful to them, they'1l-muke v, Days 
. happy Vu have chH⁴ Hohen the A Sve s 
here (01502 2 | c 


my 


j 


— 
— — — ˙ — Oo 
— — — — — — — - 


| Vol 11 end Haan os e ie, Nat] 


1.85 7 


ny Lorks © the. wand Will Ad Mean c 
25 in 1 Way of i Ie A. 5g? both o 45 
© your Father and Mother.” Alas! 1 tort! kno © 4 
© whether T have made their Fortnnes, bu Fan 1 
* ſure they have not made mine. Tbe Woo *.t 
« Monkeys 5 And Patrots Are A thouſand Tin = 
© bettet of "than we. * Huteb MiffionarieY for 
ho converted nie, told "tie-every Sunday thi alc 
4 we all ate = of os yg th" Blacks and Whit CY 

© 1 can't; ih Gf Pele myſelf x f 


ory Pie 2 Lak the Tuch, we are! 
8 Coll 8 a Ss, ee 13 1 own that! 


25 550 Tock bg. bing for to uſe their Rela 
os it hi I e Fe fray. 
1 Ali! "Panyloſs, cried claus, 5% nen 


7 Gat of fyth an r Piece of Villain 
Sis 0 is be Caſe, I ſhalf certainly renounce Fo 
2 Opticiſm'! What do 17 by Opticiſm 
Ee Why, * ſaid Coils i it is the nt 1 
6 ſitive that Poke thing good, t 0” one finds it evil 
E then J | 38 upon” the Wegrö, and ſhedding 
ears, in that Condi tio enter ihto Surinam 
The firſt Thing the tis te, was, to enquir 
whether there 5 any Veltit; e Li the Harbour, tha 
mig ht be hired e res. The Perſon the 
lieg themſclyes to was Ho other than a Spa 
Snaga 1 who Lee 1925 1708 "upon, he 
nourable: efins.. 7 ta meet them 3 
an Inn, ndidus and t "Cacainbo wen 
hl for hi 


a here, taking afcat Care of the tf 


nds us, ein one who 0 uld n never fare; wel 
de e n. 1 461d the $þ ani 


Pureh 
Caliph q © of 


1 3 


O ge 


* 


hed 187 1 
« I ball take, Care ow I carry. to Buenos» 
« T6 if. that's the. 25 * e we 
ould all of us: be ſera upon it. The 
149 uni gonda is his ear ur's pt ck Miſ- 


. ſtruck Candigus 3 all of a Heap z be wept 
for . ſome. Time but at 75 R Cacambo 
aide, II tell You, my dear 1 ſays he, 
het! would haye 1 o VEE each of us 
Cabout five. or u N. Mons of qe in our 
| Pockets, as you ace A.much cleycrer Fellow than 


Tam; L wow! DFI 89 4 9059 iſs Gu. 


(nt WAY; om Buenas- Ayres, IVETNOT 
Waal make 42571 eee WL to yaus 
1 him one Million of them; ;. af Ph ſuc- 
Fed, een give him two. As. "you, 0 not mur- 

Yer the Inquiſi itor, they Can; t ay hold. on you; 

5 Fo the mean time, Pp 2 ot r Veſſel, and 

and wait for you at 2 70. 5 & lafe Place, 

Fi 1 need nok 15 afraid there of of. . 

3 7778 or Inqu uiſithr 4 was 

Ways fond of A e Cri 5 Will f of 
thi "Propoſal; He was 8 un 9 

E a 12a. 


fo leave ſo good a Mae T who ule 
| ar 9 ; but the Plea ſure of, being ſervice= 


| le to him ſoon got the better of his Sorrow. 


9 


| 5 took. Leave of each other with Tears n 


(angi, [as recommendir ng to him at the ſame Time 
95 to forget thang | 


| N ad. 


Cacamb il, | 
1 andidus A. at Jurte im ſome Time, waiting 


well ber a Veſſel to Far him and the two Sh 


which remained, to, 40. ' He hired” Servants, 


135 11. e — for a long Jour 


e 1 e [oy 55 che M 4 wor 


is d old Woman. The ſame 


j 
A 
11 

) 
(1 
bf 
il 
| 
| 


| 


[ 82J) 


of a large Veſſel, offered his Service, What ſhalt 


Lgive you ſaid he to our Dutchman, for carrying 


me, my Family, Goods, and theſe two Sheep, 


you ſee here, directly to Venice. The. Matter, gf 
the Veſſel aſking ten thouſand Piaſtres, Candidus 
made no Words. 


4 Ohgob,faid che ctafty /anderdendur to himſelß 


© after he had leſt him, if this: Stranger can give 
« ſix / thouſand, Piaſtres, without, making any 
«. Words;: he-muſt; be plaguy xich.“ A few, Mi 
nutes aftor he comes back again to Candidus, and 
tells bim thut he could not go for Jeſs than twenty 
Tboufand! Well you r 4 them then, ſaid 
Gandiduc. 13959 e8 tool 28 18A 27 1 1 
n# Ah; brahsl- ſays the Captain with a\low Moice, 
© this Man:makes.\no \mare of twenty [thouſand 
ci Piaſtres than he did of ten] He then teturned 
4 ſecond Lime, and ſaid that he could not -carry 
him to Vanice, for leſs than thirty thouſand Piaſtis 
c You thall haue thouſand then, replied 
6 Candidus. 8 308111 in 90005 
„Ob, Oh! Heid the Dutch 1 alen again, to him: 
ſelf, and-at/the-ſame Time ſeeing the two Sheep, 
This Man makes nothing of 3000 Piaſtres, n0 
doubt but the two Sheep are loa ed with immenſe 
6 Treafures ; let's ſtand out no longer; let us how- 
© ever finger-the zoooo Piaſtres ſirſt. and then 
¶andld h diſpoſed: of two ſmall Diamonds, the 
leaſt off which brought him more han the Captain 
had: aſłed bim: And advanced him the Money. 
The two Sbeep Were put on board the Veſſel. 
Candiaug ſallowed in a ſmall Wherry, intending 
to join the; Veſſel n the Road as for the Capiaſo 
he mate Hay while: the Sun ſhone, unfurl'd hig 


Sails unmoored, and met with a freſh Gale. 
7 a Candidus, 


Ant. 


»4 
u! 


831 
IN Candidis, diſtracted and but of his Wits, ſoon loſt 
g Sicht of him. Ah, eried he, this is a Trick 
P, i Forthy of the old World.“ He returned on Shore 
of affected with moſt diſtracting Sorrow ; for he had, 
4 certainly; loſt more than would ſet up a Score of 
F 2910 
f, Me ran immediately to the Dutch Judge; and 
ves he was not quite Maſter of himſelf, knocked 
ny w loud at the Door ; he went in, told his Caſe, 
and pleaded a little louder than became him. The 
nd Judge began with making him pay teh thouſand 
piaſtres for the Noiſe he had made. After which, 
he heard him very patiently, and promiſed to ex- 
amine into the Affair as ſoon as ever the Trader) 
ſhould/return, at the ſame Time demanding. ten 
thouſand Piaſtres as a Fee, for the Haring. 
his Proceeding made Candidus ſtark mad; he 
had indeed experienced? Misfortunes a | thouſand 
Times more affecting, but the Coolneſs of the 
judge; and the knaviſh'T rick of the Maſter of the 
Veel, who had robbed him, made a very deep 
m  Impreflion''on his Spirits, and plunged him into a 
ep, ptofohnd Melancholy!“ The Depravity of Man- 
no kind: preſented itſelf to his Mind in all its De- 
ole formity;; and he dwelt upon nothing but the moſt 
vr diſmal Ideas. At laſt, a French Veſſel being ready 
— soo fait for Bourdeaux,' às he had no Sherp loaded 
the ¶ with Diamonds to carry with him, he paid the com- 
ain ¶ mon Price as a Cabin Paſſenger, and ordered the 
ey. Cryer to give Notide all over the City, that he 
[cl ¶ would pay for the Paſſage and Diet of any honeſt 
ing Man that would go the Voyage with him, and he 
au would give him 2000 Piaſtres beſides; on condition 
dis I tist he would make it appear that he was the moſt 
ale. Ik) lone 21140 8 2 rr t 2100 :rdiflaticfhed 


us, au Wu“ 2 


CO ant -.- AAA A AO — OI IT I I - 


n 
841 


8 18 | | 
Latif 550 105 his lee toy D 


Inn, ah ve. 10 a, per, on Coche Fe ls 
| 905 0 96 ake 7 an Wa that h ons 41 
relate 1 185 e romiling bhi n 


hr Per ſeemed to 685 the ene 0 
F 
ied with his Lot, and to give a ſmall Preſent to the 
Reſt} as a Gratific&ion for\their Trouble. 
be * ee Wee es next 
ornin 8 Candidus was employed in hea ing 
their Ache res, he 1 K Kelp cee 0 
what the 155 Wow an Had to in their \ yage 2 
towards ee Hei, and“ h Bargain ſe had for - 
made I in, Cale he met with 4 ſiggle Petſon in the e 
Ship Py that'd id not eſteeim elf e Hef den 
thou ght 2 5 Tag, - fy Incident 1 hat was tt 


re an 0 zd he, Would be Hd an 
0 put to it to Ge this Sy 2 wy with he Was 750 
© but here. Indeed if 1 82 ug is Ergee fore 
© the Belt, it mul be 0 85 dür no whore 

© elſe. on Eürtn. To be tha,” he determinid ; 
Favour * of . Jour Ty . "wh Had wrote" te 
Yea, f or 'the ook(elters' ! Wt Aan. For WY 


Ro 45 ouls no e difag reea * 
Fog toymehrgh | 


Face of t ka | 
Mad Sek A 25 Reſp 0 > ba 360d 
r 575 27 tg Feed by TH 105 det 7 


by "Ki 15800 ls Who get 
Date — 


— 


1 „ n we ber ; had loft an Em- 

9 | Welt. wn c 1 he bad to CB on on, And 

WAS, 19 90 by. 'he Prieſts at Surinam, berauſe 

ook him fo for a; TS 

1 5 1 5 indeed be confeſſed! that ſome of the other 

5 were 105 leaſt as unha pp be; but by 

Za with 1 Prefere decile au 77 though 4 

A; Sol 17 9 he S faplp ro ori > $ i 

FA at bo Yor 4 ge A 9555 "AY hi St petitors | 
t 


that Condit Wi o 1 1 5 5 
m 
it Ig 


111 We bus e ONVINCe 1 
by giving them a ji red Plaſtres 4 piece 


391 Ol 1159 18113 


1 


1 0% 11919 11 Hzml es 9vig ot bas 24.1] zid dw bott 


1: CHA P40; KM) S 26) FtoA 
"What: begins Is Candids end Martin vn d. 


f (NUR old Scholes a Was named Ai wen 
Of 19 1 


ene board i K 
for Bourdeaus,. ih Gerd Wt hot th 6D | en 290 
Hperienced a engt Gly. d kee 


| had 
nd L n 7 th Wiy 10 
— 1015 2 1 & 15 wo Dot = found Ii 


Uiches-that the 
ea of 
pg pon 


—— —— _ 
_— — — 
2 = WW — — — 


. A ei oe. 
2 — 2. 2 


- JE * 
— 28 — 9 — 


— 
— 


1 5 


out £322) 


— 
— — 


EEE, 4 57 


— 
— 


— — 
"= x 
— 


— 


| Ty 86] 

ad he had left! in his Pockets, and when he taked 5 
about Cunigonda, opera after” 3 good Natal, fi 
., he inclined to anghſ? s Hypotheſis. 
But you, Mr. Martin, 5 he to the 'Setlblir, 7 
what is your Opinion? What are yout Senti- 
ments concerning moral and d ical Evil?” * Sir, WO .- 
. © replied Martin, the Parſons have accuſed me of 
being a Socinian ; but the Truth of the Affair , 
I am a Manic han.“ are in Jeſt ſure, ad 
IP, J at is not." 0 J. Manichean in the 1 
„ Worl; * am one tho Sy » aid ; artin'; T can't f 
KC cleverl 7 Account for i it, "Bitte vet Lam not able to 1 
6 think otherwiſe, "The Devil's in you then, fad 5 
1 Candidus. He concerns himfelf fo much in the 
Nr Affairs of this World, fail Martin, that he may Ml 14 
4 {bl y be i in me, . as Well as any where elſe; But . 
by 115 uſt profeſs, that when T caft my Eyes upon "9 
43 this Gibe, or Kather o on this Globule ; can't hi 

© © help thinking e 145 has abandoned it to k 
c © ſome malignant Io except Ela IM N 
* rad. 17 554 met W th a City that did not with N {# 
© the Deftrudion « of its Neighbour, nor one Family I A 

2 "+ that would not exterminate ano ther Family. Al 
* over the World the Poor curſe the Rich, 50 the F 
1 350 he Rich treat them Ike T9” many Sticp ＋ 
.* whoſe Wool and Fleſh is fbld t6 the bett Bidder, 4 
OA athouſal 7 mr fortnied into Regiments, iſ 1 
running about from one 110 of Europe do ano- 8 


* ther, raQtice 1 der Apine According to th 
* c . Diſcipline or their Brea uſe it is the moſt © 41 
be p honoural le 19 7 5 701 in the World; and in thoke 00 
ities, iel to ehjo Pede, and where 0 
10 175 170 we 7 ey 4 — his conſumed th 
if W , Car 85 and Diſquietudes, * . 


2 


4 * It $ certain, {aid Cendidui, there's ſome 
15 thing diabolical in jt.” As he was 5 ſo, be 


| Hier in ſorting | red, ſwimming, 


1 ND oF 
| lus; felt more Joy at th e ecovery, of 
tt . . i Keb 


L871 


City meets with Troubles when it is beſieged; 


* But alas ! our ſecret Torments are more Au- 


105 * portable than our public Miſeries. To be 


way I have ſeen and experienced ſo much, that 
am a confirmed ;Manichean.” © 


12 There's ſome, (300d, for all that, replied Can- 
of *didus, That may be too, ſaid Martin, but I 
„ ſhould be ban bee N find it,” Juſt at 
this Inſtant; while, they were thus difputing, the 
Phe Reger ek Oodoon,' The NYE ta 
| 77 Moment; e ch Perſon my Uſe of his Te- 
leſcopę: By this Me 


eans they e 177 two” Veſſels 
N56 each other, about three Miles from them. 

ind bro bt the ombatants fo. near the 
My We that they could ſee the . 


5 iu To be ſhort,. one of the Veſſels 
25 a Broadſide between Wind and Water Which 
1 ee Candidus and Martin diſcovered about A 


red Men upon the Tackle of the Ship which | 


5 ſinking, lifting their Hands towards eaven, 
and making the. moſt diſmal Lamentations J and in 
KP Inſtant 5 were all (wallowe 19 0 t Sea. | 


Well, ſaid, Martin, lee how nkind t treat one 


s Ship, 
N Sea the long Le ſee what 


it proved to bh 955 of his red 
ad Trou le at the Loſs, of A 


; 1 ny 5 9 87 Beach 8 Eldar ago. 


e 4 ar 1 * „ 


e Freng on AY that th 1555 05 


N4 is aQuich TO - 5506 ER; 2 Ha hc 


K © 


[88] 1 

+ Villin had. ſcraped together, were: burſedrin 
e SEA along with him, and there was onlyla ſingle 
Sheep faved. .. bd IM 7% 
- You ſee, ta Candi dus to Martin, that Wiek 


© edneſs ſometimes meets with its Deſerts 3 that 
© Raſcal, the Dutch Commander has met with the 


Fate he merited. That's true, ſaid Martin, 


but was it juſt that the. Faſſenge on board, 
6 1 periſſ er en him? God indeed: 
Maid but the Devi drawned 


6 1 Re Nun 
In the 2 Time * 


12 88 ol e 1.273 106 


with Martin, . hey diſputecd Fortnight without 
Intermiſſion, and at the Fortaigbts End were of 


the lame * 0 they brgan-with, But it muſt 


be owned that by this Conference they communi- 
cated their Ideas mY h others and comforted each 
other, 77 * gareſſing his Sheep, 
« fince I 9958 
; Hopes of f recoyering Cunigande.”? 


1 58 
g T „ H'A 18 NI. ll 


e3J (197 97H 
(134 | 


tts »Qeaft and Diſpute; dw 99198 30! 


* 
* 


© Mry Martin f. faid a Eons , 1 0 i Artie 
5 


£ I have y 

* ſone, the "Ih nts, 
5 meer Fools: | 
. of 
—_ ind 


510m ? 


5 15 gay 
th e ine e 


$honiard.and \Plenchates 
eontinued 5. Go cle, and Candidus bis Debates 


Md, you, aid! be, J hive one | 
senses 


, A draw A] the French | 
Tarx, enk gere, Sh 9 65 6 Caf of. 


ran,, you GY 25 France; 


ww 


—. 


Vinces. n 
ee | 


H„ZãAↄ !nv —ü— 


9 - 
n || «in{aIÞof the t abun, Pekin U Te the” 
e bent Lying; and che third to talk Nonſenſc. 


but, Mr. Martin, have you ever been at Paris * 
Fes, Eee berg At Baris; there's all theſe, 
it IN ©iSorts chere, tis a ire Chaos, a Crowd'in which, 
e every one is in Search after Pleaſure, bur no one 
„ „nds it, as far as I Habe been able to diſcover. 
i, I ©. Fhave ſpent x:few Days there; and was fobbed 
d' © fof all 1 had b by Wine SHMarpers ro at the: Foe 4 St. 
Gen. Nag I felt was taken 1 For a. 
© - E*& Robber, Pike was eight Days i Prifott {after 
( which I turned Corrector of fe, Fel th A- a 
mall Matter to earry me, on Fi 27 nd.” 


n 
es 
Kae che whold Tiibe öf Aith IA wi Male 701 
of ' vontents, diſaffechet er other wife. bey 7 
ſt People are very pollte in chat 0 TA 1 a - 
i believe them. | 
h © For my Part, Fase d Curioſity to ſee France, 2375 
p, Candida you may eaſily fancy that When 8 
1 4 erſon haus ones ſpent a Month at Eldbra, o 
d very indifferent. herber dhe fees Fur Thin 
elſe upon Earth 2 Miſs Cunis ava 5 Lam., 
: gag e vc fr he e e 
I chrough France 13 ur Way.,t ards ab: 

Won't you go a & with me? With all my 

© Heart, aid, Kreis they: ſay that Fenice''does* / 

not agree with any Nay the _— Venetians ; 


ud but, for. all at, they receive. Strangers NI 
of, . well; 5 pe 1030 f they have a. good deal of Maney ; 
3: 8 EIN 0 not FEES Ty 0 follows > 


the Wor! 0 0 Pe Ng 
5 d 50 ima ine that the, Es 
S 
| e FARCE Obes Mr artin, no 
i 


© more 


-_— Vs — — — —— 


— 


— 


— 


"IST. 4 
e —— — — 
— —— 


— | ————— — 


| 08 lon 


J 
gel mot han I do of all the.other Accounts: and 
Traditions, which have been for ſome Time 
-+ ſwallowed;,.in the World. But, for What 
End was the World created, then? ald Can- 
* didus. To, make one, mad, replied Mar- 
bin. Was not you vaſtlysſurprized at the two 
Girls, in the Country of the Oreillont, falling in 
Laoye f6r;thoſe;. two Apes, which I told you, of! 
Not a Bit, ſaid Ale fre nothing ſtrange in 
C it 3 for haut ſeen fo, many iſtrange Things al- 
e ready, that I can, look upon hothing as ſuch any 
70 r. Dou believe I Candidus, that Mau- 
Kind always gut one another's Ihroats, were al 
1% Mays Liare, Knaves, treacherous, and ingrateful; 
always Thieves .Syarpars, Highway men, lazy, 
6 envious, and Gluttons; always, Drunkards ; 
4 :Mifers,;)a0: bitious: 3 ad Blood chirſty; always 
Back- ers i Debauchoes, 1F anatics; Hyppcrites, 
£ and F ools?” Do you not believe, ſaid dgriin, 
that Hawks have always, prey d wpon Pidgeons, 
When 4hey).could. light; upon them? Certain, fei 
21% ſaid Candi. Well eng, ſaid Martin, if the 


— 
— — 
= 2 
r 


, 


ti 

66 Hawks, hayefaſways had tht ſame Nature, what f 
- | Reaſon-can vou give why Mankind ſhould ; baye pre 
changed theirs? Aye, aid. Candidus, there v2 me 
2 rent deal of Differences: becauſe; Free: will.“ att 
de id of this 1 nee b) 22.5 MN 
"Is he; Miah; of this Ee Gen a)” 


" Bourdequs- eee 


Sid yen 01 57K. too 
FFF i: 
zpw | 2603 yomMug] Bhi Run AXEL 3-7 4, | 1 
"What hajpmed to Ca Cling dus % Mart u 75 F. 1. 


Cf NDIDUS Nig at Bone, only 2 he 3 0 0 
e ang e 


furniſhe 


ites, 
ri 
ons 3 


inly, 


13 dy Ali B mins C divi vided by 2. 


441 


% 


r 


furniſhed himſelf with à Poft- Chaiſe large enough 
for two Perſons; for he could not part with his 
'Philofopher Martin: He was indeed very ſorry to 
part with his Sheep, that he left at the the Academy 


of Sciences at Bburdeauæ; who, very ſagaciouſſy 
propoſed the followed Subject for the Prize the next 


eur, The Reaſon wh ythe Sheep Wool was red; 


ind the Prize was a 22 to a great Man in the 


North, who'demonftrated by th Wick BAC Z, 


that the Sheep muſt be red, and die of the Rot. 

Butz all the Travellets, whom Cundidus met 
with on the Road telling him, they were going to 
Paris, it incited Candidus's Curioſity ſo much, that 
he had à Longing te go to fee Paris too, as it 


Was not much out of the uy his Journey to- 
| wards Venicte. 


He entered at the es 95 Margeaid,/ and 


ebald not help thinking himſelf in the worſt Vil- 
lege f in all ef phali. 


Candidus was ſcarce got to his Inn; when he was 
ſeived by a flight Indiſpofition cauſed by his Fa- 
tigues. As 5 had a very large Diamond on his 


Finger, and the People had taken Notice of a 
pretty heavy Casket among his Baggage, in a Mo- 


ment's Time he had no leſs than two Phyſicians to 
attend him, who did not ſtay to be ſent for ; a few 


intimate Friends, that never left Him, ſate up with 
him, together with à Couple of female Friends that 


took Care to have his Broths warmed. Says Martin 


to himſelf on this Occaſion; I remember when 


I] was ſick at Paris in my firſt Journey, that I was 
very low in Pocket, and could meet neither with 
F riends, Nurſes, nor Phyſicians ; ; but, thank 
God, Trieben e * 


7 


In 


1 
In the m Em while, what with Metin, opt (| 


Biiza 9 


eedings, andigdus's Dilordes 1 10 Ig tO, grow. 
Bleeding, he was waited on 4 e Clerk * "the ; 

Pariſh with a Bil drawn at. ght, to defray his 
Paſſage to the other World. . Candidus 18 to 1 
accept it, the Nurſes aſſured hin, that it was a new 2 
Faſhion. Candidu replieb, th at | he was reſolved + 
N 85 Faſhion, The 1 60 erk (ore, that 
Candidus ſhou! nþt |  burig . ar tin, {wore that 30 
he would bar) the erk, Jt 9005 16008 et about 


18 Bufine ft., The Ouarr h, an I Martin re 
took him by the 0 0% | e him, out of 40 
doors: his occaſiopins a great, deal of en | 
TUG, 260111 M1930 th 
an Aion we COmMMENC ed again of Fun. 4 — 
© Candidus recovered, and "i the while be ge 


upon the ending Hand, had the belt of 
250 175 ſup with. Fa They, gagied high, and 255 
id Was very much f\ urpri that he never could 
throw 2 an A but as 0 fee, he knew better. 
"Among hots: \ Who did 925 the unn of their 
Viſits, was. Ae Abbe. &d. 7 teparith, one 
of thoſe officious Peop KY t-appear always buly, 
always realy t to 'do y 7 ne Full'of Ceremony, 
pever to be led, accommodating themſelves 
1 every on one 1 os are Aa ſetting Tie 
ers 2s they are on their Journey, tell them .the 
hole Scandal of the Tow, ov would IT or 
them! on, ;any.\ ccaſi ion. Dir ent]ery an carried 
idus ans Martin to * by, the 5 Night 
' was acted. " -andidus. Found 4 inks Elf f placed, Nat 
ſome Es bat 4 85 1 d, 44855 5175 hien from « Cry3 


Res Wa THE WED ag 
= 12 


— 


18 6 ſome 9, 1 13 5 0 
45 Aeg. dp 72 Ny. 17 + 
} wits 4 0 
50 Fee e dee —4 5 
* 


24 fy 


. bah ö leeren art of 
Actor who plays with her is worſe than ſhe, and. 


Il bring you twenty, 
1 Fampblers again Fi by To morrow Morning,” 
Sir, {aid the A be. 


, 155 thouſand Ctowhis Glove-money.“ ae 
u 


6089 
I 


I 


— 


4 


LE 


get's Nec-ficy 16/26 to give Mig. Conicends 
© he ee 


he | 

e in Company with tht l 
is 1 Die of [ "4 24 8 Jo ! 
3 fancy, (aid the Abbe, that Miſs Cunigonda 


"fon for her, yoll.giy wall imagine F' 
"ite to Het, fe when Pheacg the way 
eng "4 liftle w le ter - which think God was 
* hot true, © 116 again, aſter I had found 21 


5 [94] 
J have now fent to her once more about two 
© thouſand ſive hundred Leagues from henct, and 
expect co hear from her every Moment. 

The Abbé heard him with great Attention,” and 
ſeemed to be in a brown Study. He ſoon took 
Leave of our two Strangers with a moſt affectionate 
Embrace. The next Day, as ſoon as Candidus 
was up, he received a Letter, "of" which the fol. 
lowing is a Copy. ebf 

A dure Los, 211 

have been conſined to my Room theſi eight 
80 Days by Sickneſs; and have leatnt that you are 
in this City \Fſhould f y to your Arms, if my 
Diſortſer would permit 3 J knew hof your 
6 Paſſage to'Bourdeaux, and have'left honeſt Ca- 
©: cambs and the old Woman there, who are to 
© follow me ſoon. The Governor of Buenos Ayres 
has ſeized on all your Effects, but I truſt he has 
left me your Heart. Come and ſee me, ſor your 
© Preſence will either reſtote/ me to Life, or my 
me with Pleaſure. 

This charming, this agree Letter, tran⸗ 
ſported. Candidus with as an inexpreſſible Joy as the 
Indiſpoſition of his dear Cuniponda affected him 
with Sorrow. Diſtracted between theſe two Paſ 
ſrons, he took his Gold and Diamonds, and got 
ſomebody to ſhew him and Martin the House 
where Miſs Cuni gonda lived. 

On his Entrance he trembled in every Liu 
his Heart beat quick, and his Voice was — 
up with Sighs; he was going to open the Curtains, 
and bid hem bring him a Light; „ Softiy, Sir, ſaid 
the Nurſe, ſhe can't bear a Light for the World, 
< \it'would/overpower her;“ and immediately ſhe 
drew the Curtain eloſe again. My dear Cuni- 
enda, ſald Cundidus * Teats in his: Eyes. 


* Lit . how 


—— 


[ 195) ] 
Þ how do you bnd yourſelf tho you can't ſee me, 
you. May ſpeak. to me. She can't ſpeak, ſaid 


Die Maid: 'T he Lady then put a plump Hand out of 


ed, which Candidus bathed with his Tears, 
wh caſteryrards filled; with, Diamonds, leaving a 
g full of Gold upon the Pillow. | 
the Middle of his Tranſport, comes in a Life- 
Caard⸗ man, followed by the Abbé Perigourdin 
nd a File of Soldiers. There's your two Priſo- 
ners, ſaid he.” They ſeized\ on them without 
ay: more: ado, and he ordered his Men to drag 


dem to Jail. + They don't treat Travellers in this - 


Manner at Eldorado, ſaid Candi dus. I am 
a ſtronger Muinichean than evex, ſaid Martin. 
But. pleaſe your, Honour. Where ate yon going 
to enrry us ? ſaid Candida. To a Hole in 
the Dungeon, ſaid: the Life guard man“! 

Martin now growing ſomewhat cool, fancied 
lat the Laſs, who ptetended to be Cunigonda, was 
JSham, and the Abbé Perigourdin a Sharper, 
who had taken Advantage of Canaidus's Simplicity, 
du the. Life - guard- man another Sharper; hom 
hey might eaſily get clear o. 

Rather than expoſe himſelf before. 2 Court of 
Jultice, » Candidus, in Compliance with his Ad- 
nee, and his great Impatience to ſee the real Cu- 
end, uffeted the Life - guard- man three ſmall 
Diamonds, worth about three thouſand piſtoles 
ech. . Ah, Sir, (aid our Officer, (though you 


had been guilty of all the Crimes you can ima- 


Fe) this Would make me think you are the be. 
hefe Gentl man in dhe Merl! Three Diamonds] 

* Worth/ 3000 Piſtoleb ;A-piece |... Six, inſtead of 
* pitting) you in by Dyngeon,. 1, would. laſe my 
Piste for you al 8 rs are arreſtsch here, but 
let we done et have a Brocher at Dye 


wod ? 


r 


96 
© in Normandy ; T'll ſend you to him, and if yo 
© have any Diamond to ſpare, you may aſſure your 
« ſelf he'll take as much Care of you, as I myſ-1f, W 

And why do they put all Strangers under Ar 
© reſt? ſaid Candidus. The Abbe Perigourdi 
then put in his Oar; © Becauſe, ſays he, a Begga 
© of Atrebatia liſtened to ſome fooliſh Stories 
* which made him guilty of a Parricide, not like 
© that in May 1610, but like that in December1 594 
© and juſt like thoſe, that a great many other Beg 
© gars have been guilty of, in other. Months and o 
© ther Years, after litening to fooliſh Stories.“ 

The Life-guard man then gave him a more par- 
ticular Account of their Crimes. Oh monſtrous! 
© cried Candidus; are there then ſuch terrible 
Crimes among People that can dance and ſing. 
© Pray ſhew me the ſhorteſt Way out of this Coun- 
„try, where Monkeys provoke Tygers, I have 
© ſeen Bears in my own Country, I never met with 
© them but at Eldorado; For od* s ſake, Mr Of- 
« ficer, tranſport me to Venice, where I am to" © 
© wait for Miſs Cunigonda. l can conduct you 
© no where except Lower-Normandy, ſaid our. 
© Mock Officer.” Immediately he ordered them to" 
ſtrike off his Irons, ſaid he was under a Miſtake, Ne! 
diſcharged his Men, conducted Candidus and Martin 
to Dieppe, and left them with his Brother. 

There happening to be a ſmall Holland Tradet 
in the Harbour, the Norman, by Means of three I 1 
more Diamonds, became the moſt ſerviceable Man ¶ 1H 
in the World, and ſaw Candidus and his Servants I 
ſafe on Board the Veſſel, which was bound to i nt 
Portſmouth in England. 

his was not indeed the Way to Venice, but uy 
Candidus thought he had eſcaped from Hell, and If b4 
reſolved to reſume his Voyage towards Venice the I ech 


firſt 1 that offered, | CHAP. BB +1: 


a; 


of Coafs aſt an: whit f 


bg. scho ni to — 


cen % 2 ng. 5 5 
Ine N e 1. 

— orld' is bu 

1 Daker 47 5 5 "oo 


BI e 


4 1 IC bris io bone IIs 

3 WOY 914 10 ol''9 9:1; wm Vi 4 
"If I. 1 a ws. 0 987 2 
Ar q ee 2 — * TRE FE 90 een 8 
dig . 

| pO op 

fe H r. 

like ll 1c4 & to y3'i: _ 9besm {4 

. Candida Mun Hs TR 


1bl 

ing. Von 1 e 

un- Hus been in Er 1 Condi fe 

ave lock as great — 1 th Fant very. 55 4 
vith M's d Marth: * Tor Mat the two 
O- Nations are u 27 about 10 Acres of 


told & Snow towards Hd, an ent more 
you in carrying n- this rf he =.) br n al Canada 
dur u“ is worth. T preveiid- to tn preciſely, 
toe ahether therd ade more People ftr ne Country 
ke, Nota make Slavwewof; than in thelother, is more 
„tin ütenan my.wenk-Uupacity is able" wo perform. All 
60 — aa — is; ut the People 

del vt we are ging an dare very melanthefic.“ 
ree ids they Meralchatting in this Mner, they 
avi ed at. Par e: be Shoreowas 2 
nes MY ich. vaſt Creed FOple, that zbeye employed 
00 dum looking. at alprtety Iuſty Mam wheowas knee 
ing, with ſomething tied bæfore Hs f yes, onthe 
put 1 875 af one gfunecdden of Wag four Soldiers, 
ind afwiare. Backdeppdite to biigyolbdged'\theey 
the ech wir eD16W01 29g840 V H »mul91 03 bavBabs 
b. 1 HAHD den ch Wr e Am 


ke at oi de bent 
= 4 N — "Wo _ FI 


E 
Balls a-piece in his Brains, with the greateſt 
Coolneſs imaginable, to the great Pleaſure of the 
Mob, who returned extremely well ſatisfied with 
what they had ſeen. What is the Meaning 
44 of this? ſaid Candidus; and what Demon is 
it that exerciſes his Dominion all over the 
6 Globe?” f 
He enquired who the luſty Gentleman was 
that was ſent out of the World with ſo much 
Ceremony. He is an Admiral *, replied ſome 
of them. Aye! and why was this Admiral 8 
killed in this Manner? “ Becauſe, ſaid they, he 
« did not kill Men enough himſelf, He engaged 
ce the French Admiral, and was found guilty of 
e not being near enough to him. gut then, ſaid 
& (Cardidus, was not the French Admiral as far 
cc off from the Engliſb Admiral, as he was from 
« him?” © That is what no one can queſtion, 
cc replied they. But in this Country it is of very 
& great Service to execute an Admiral now 
* and then, in order to make the reſt fight the 
« better. 7 1 
Candidus was ſo aſtoniſhed at what he had 
ſeen and heard, that he was reſolved to go on 
board again immediately, and agreed with the IF 
Maſter of the Dutch Veſſel (though he was ſure il 
to be robbed by him, as well as by his Country- IF cc 
man at Surinam) to carry him directly to Venice. * 
The Maſter was ready to ſail in two Days. 20 
They coaſted it all along France. Paſſing within e 
Sight of Liſbon, Candidus gave a very deep, * 
* The Engifp Reader need not be informed, our Author 


alludes to the Execution of Admiral Byng,, Whether his Ridi- 460 
cule is juſt, we ſhall not take upon us to determine. 


W171 


6 


— - — - 
= 
— — H — * 
— — = - 
S 


—— 
—— ————  —  — — 
- 


— EE 


—— — ous. Dc ta, 
* — — m1 =_ 


Groan, 


—— I vY 


n 


0 0 = @ 


1 99 ] 


Groan. They paſſed the Straits, made the Me- 


diterranean, and at laſt landed at Venice. 


«© The Lord be praiſed, ſaid Candidus, em- 


ce bracing Martin, it is here that I ſhall ſee the 
fair Cunigonda again] I have as good an Opinion 
« of Cacambo, as of myſelf. Every Thing is 
& right, every Thing goes well; every Thing is 
« the beſt that it can poſſibly be. 


1 


CHAP. XXIV. 


Concerning Paquetta, and Father 
- Girofflee, 


AS ſoon as they came to Venice, he got ſome- 
body to ſearch for Cacambo in all the Inns, 
Coffee-Houſes, and Bawdy-Houſes, but could not 
find him. He ſent every Day to all the Ships 
and Barques that arrived; but no News of Ca- 
cambo. © Well! ſaid he to Martin, I have had 


«Time enough to go from Surinam to Bourdeaux, | 


« from Bourdeaus to Paris, from Paris to Dieppe, 


from Dieppe toPortſmouth ; after that have coaſt- 


« ed along Portugal and Spain, and traverſed the 


« Mediterranean, and havenow been ſome Months 
« at Venice, and yet for all that, Cunigonda is not 
ce come. I have only met with a Bite, and the 
« Abbe Perigourdin, inſtead of her. Ah! it 
c would have been far better for me to have 
« ſtaid in that Paradiſe, Dorado, than to have 

. 3 c returned 


: 1: 200.5] 
cc returned again to this curſed Europe. You are 
ce certainly right, in ſaying, that all is Illuſion 
and Miſery here. 2 

He fell into a deep Melancholy; and never 
frequented the Opera, or the other Diverſions of 
the Carnival; nay he was proof againſt all the 
Charms of the fair Sex. Martin ſays to him, 
& You are very ſimple indeed, to fancy that ſuch a 
« Mongrel as he, with five or fix Millions in 
& his Pocket, would go to the End of the World 
ce to fetch your Miſtreſs, and bring her to Venice. 
ce Tf he meets with her, he'll get her for him- 
e felf : If he cannot find her, he'll get ſomebody 
&« elſe. Let me adviſe you to forget both your 
Man Cacanibs, and your Miſtreſs Cunigonda.“ 
Martin was a moſt wretched Comforter, and 
the Melancholy of Candidus increaſed ; , Martin 
never ceaſed preaching that there was but very 
little Virtue and as little Happineſs to be found 
on Earth, excepting, perhaps, at Eldorado, where 
it was almoſt impoſſible for any one to go. 

As they were diſputing on this important Sub- 
ject, and waiting for Cunigonda, Candidus per- 
ceived a young * Theatin in the + Place of St. 
Marc, leading a Girl along by the Arm. The 
Theatin Friar looked luſty and plump and full of 
Vigour; his Eyes were ſparkling, his Air bold, 
his Look lofty, and his Tread This Girl 
was tolerably handſome, and was ſinging a Song: 
| the ogled her Theatin Friar with a great Deal 


* An Order of Religions. 
＋ Place, is the ſame as our Squares, 


of 


} 


of 


) 
F nat | 
of Paſſion, and now and then would giye his 
fat Cheeks a Pinch. | 
6 You will ſurely grant me, ſaid Candidus to 
Martin, that theſe Folks are happy: I have 
« never found any but unhappy Wretches, till 
„now, all over this habitable Globe, excepting 
cc at Eldorado; but as for the Girl and the Friar, 
&« I will lay any Wager that they are as happy, 
as happy can be.” „Iwill lay they are not, ſaid 
& Martin.” Only let us invite them to Dinner, 
& ſaid Candidus, and then you ſhall ſee if I am 
60 2 or no.“ 2 | 
He immediately accoſted them, made them a 
Bow, and invited them to his Inn to eat Macaro- 
ni, Partridges of Lombardy, and Caviare, and 
to drink Monteſculeiano, Lachryma - Chriſti, 
Cyprus, and Samos Wine. The Lady bluſhed; 
the Theatin accepted of the Invitation, and his 
Girl followed him looking at him with ſome 
Surprize and Confuſion, - and ſhedding Tears. 
Scarce was ſhe entered into Candidus's Room, 
when ſhe ſaid to him: What, does not Maſ- 
« ter Candidus know his old Friend Paguetta 
e again?“ At theſe Words, Candidus, not having 
looked at her with any Degree of Attention, 
becauſe Cunigonda engroſſed all his Thoughts, 
ſaid to her, Ah! is it you, my Dear, who 
e tipped Doctor Panglos the Favour, and brought 
& him to that Pickle in which I ſaw him?“ 
Ah, vir! 'tis I, ſaid Paguetta, I find you 
© know the. whole Story; and I have been in- 
“formed of all the terrible Diſaſters which have 
<« happened to the Family of my Lady the Baro- 
e neſs, and fair Cunigonda. I was very virtuous 
H 3 „ when 


[ 102 J 
5c when you knew me. A Cordelier, who was 
© my Confeſſor, eaſily got the blind Side of me, 
c and ftole my Maiden-head. The Effects of 
5 jt were enough to make your Heart ach; I 
& was obliged to leave the Caſtle ſome time af- 
& ter the Baron kicked your A——e out of the 
& Door, If a celebrated Quack had not taken 
& Pity on me, I ſhould have been rotten before 
% now. I was the Quack's Miſtreſs ſome time, 
„ by way of Retaliation, His Wife was as jea- 
& Jous as Old Nick, beat me every Day without 
& Mercy; ſhe was a very Devil. The Doctor 
& was one of the uglieſt Fellows Jever ſet Eyes 
c. n, and I was certainly one of the moſt 
& wretched Creatures that ever exiſted, to be 
< beat every Day for a Man I hated. You need 
© not be told how dangerous it is for a Scold to 
& be married to a Doctor. Being quite exaſ- 
ce perated with his Wife's Behaviour, he gave 
her a Draught one Day, to take for a High 
Cold ſhe had, which was ſo ſtrong, that ſhe 
« died in two Hours after, in ſtrong Convul- 
« ſions. My Miſtreſs's Relations entered an 
Action againſt my Maſter ; he fled, and I was 
& carried to Jail. My Innocence would never 


have ſaved me, if I had not had a good Face. 


The Judge acquitted me, on condition of his 
* ſucceeding the Doctor. I was ſoon afterwards 
„ ſupplanted by a Rival, driven out of Doors 
without any Acknowlegement, and obliged to 
continue this abominable Occupation, which 
4 2 it affords ſo much Pleaſure to your 
Sex, ) produces nothing elſe but Miſery to ours. 
] am come to practice my Profeſſion at Venice. 
5 f cc Ah, 


r AG a aa aA a 4 © a eto 


* 
nn — 1 ann. A 


Wl 


mv 


w TOih o 5 Foy 


L og - } 


Ah, Sir, if you knew what it is to be obliged to 


< careſs an old Merchant, a Monk, a Gondo- 
« lier, or an Abbe, without the leaſt Difference; 
to be expoſed to all Sorts of Inſults, and Out- 
„ rages; to be often obliged to go and pawn a 
6 Petticoat, to have it taken out again by a 
« Perſon that one abhors ; to be robbed by one 
“ Gallant of what one has got by another; to 
be ranſomed by the Peace Officer, and to have 
& nothing elſe in proſpect but a frightful old Age, 
& a Lock H—pit—], or a Dunghill; you would 
c confeſs that 1 am one of the unfortunate 
& Creatures in the World.” 

Paguetta unboſomed herſelf in this Manner 
to the good Candidus in his Cloſet, in the Pre- 
ſence of Martin, who ſaid to Candidus, „ You 
<< ſee I have won one Half of the Wager already. 

Brother Girofice waited in the Dining-room, 
and took a Whet before Dinner. But, ſays 
&« Candidus to Paquetta, you appeared ſo gay, fo 
<« eaſy, when I firſt met you, you ſung, and car- 
ce reſo the Theatin with ſo much Warmth, that 
< I thought you as happy then, as I think you 
< miſerable now. Ah, Sir, replied Pagquetta, this 
ce js one of the Miſeries of the Trade. Yeſter- 
cc day I was robbed and beaten by an Officer, 
« and To-day I am obliged to appear in high 
Spirits to pleaſe my Monk.” Candidus was 
ſatisfied, and owned that Martin was in the 
Right. They fat down to Table, in Company 
with Paguetta and the Theatin; the Entertain- 
ment was very agreeable ; and toward the End 


they began to ſpeak to each other with ſome De- 


gree of Confidence. My Father, faid Candi- 
| H 4 Aus 


L 104 J 
& dus to the Monk, you ſeem to be a Perſon 
ce whom every one might look on with Envy: 
Health ſeems to bloſſom on your Countenance, 
and E ſpeaks nothing but Hap- 
$ 


*“ pineſs ; you have a very pretty Girl to divert 
cc you, and you ſeem to be fatished with your 
ce Station, as a Theatin Monk.” 

& Faith, Sir, ſaid Brother Giroffce, I wiſh all 
& the Fraternity were at the Bottom of the Sea. 
T have been tempted an hundred Times to ſet 
& Fire to the Convent, and afterwards turn 
& Turk. My Relations forced me to put on this 
cc curſed Habit, when I was Fifteen, to enrich 
cc my. elder Brother, the Devil take him. Jea- 
& louſy, Diſcord, and Fury have ſecured their 
& Reſidence in the Convent. I muſt own, in- 
& deed, I have preached a few paltry Sermons, 
« which brought me in a little Mons; one 
c Part of which the Prior robbed me of, the 
c Remainder ſerves me to ſpend upon the Ladies; 
<« every Evening when I enter the Monaſtry, I 
am ready to daſh out my Brains againſt the 


% Wall of the Dormitory; and all the Bro- 


& therhood would not ſtick to follow my Ex- 
&« ample. | 

Martin turning towards Candidus, with his 
uſual Indifference, Well, ſaid he to him, have 
not won the whole Wager now?“ Candiaus 
made a Preſent of two Thouſand Piaſtres to 
Paguetta, and one Thouſand to Brother G:- 
office. I'Il be bound for it, ſaid he, © this will 
* make them happy. I dor t believe a Word 
<« of it, ſaid Martin, you may, perhaps, make 


< them a great deal more miſerable by your Pi- 
ts. ce res.“ 


FM A 1 vw ». ad 


—_ 
* 


* 0 "op ² . WW WAY " WY 5 WW 0» © = 


0 3 —” SD we 


L 105 ] 

cc aftres.” What muſt be, muſt be, ſaid Candi- 
** dus e But one thing gives me no ſmall Comfort, 
* I ſee that one often finds thoſe Perſons, 
„ whom one never expected to find any more; 
ce and as I have found my red Sheep and Pa- 
&« guetta again, it may be, I may find Cunigonda 
© again too. I wiſh, ſaid Martin, that ſhe may 
© one Day make you happy; but 'tis what 1 
© very much queſtion. You are very incredu- 
e lous, ſaid Candidus. That is what I alway was, 
&« faid Martin. 

<« But only look on thoſe Gondoliers, ſaid Can- 
ce didus, are they not merry from Morning till 
„Night? You don't ſee them at Home, with 
e their Wives, and their Monkies of Children, 
e faid Martin. The Doge has his Inquietudes, 
% and the Gondoliers have theirs. Indeed, ge- 
« nerally ſpeaking, the Condition of a Gondo- 
« lier is preferable to that of a Doge; but I be- 
<« lieve that the Difference is ſo ſmall, that it is 
© not worth examining into. 

J have heard great Talk, ſaid Candidus, of 
e Seignior Pococurante, who lives in that fine 
Palace upon the Brenta, and is noted for his 
« Hoſpitality to Strangers. They would have 
« you believe he never knew what it is to be 
« uneaſy, I ſhould be glad to ſee ſuch a Prodigy, 
« ſaid Martin. On which Candidus ſent to 
deignior Pococurante to get Permiſſion to pay him 


a Vilit the next Day. 


CHAP. 


20+. 7 


FCC 
CHAP. XXV. 


The Viſit to Seignior Pococurante, be 
| Noble Venetian. 


ANDIDUS and Martin went in a Gon- 
dola on the Brenta, and arrived at the Palace 
of the noble Pococurante / His Gardens were 
very ſpacious, and ornamented with fine Statues 
.of Marble, and the Palace itſelf built in an excel- 
lent Taſte. The Maſter of the Houſe, a very rich 
Man, about threeſcore, received our two Tra- 
vellers with a great deal of Ceremony, but very 
little Heartineſs ; which, though it confuſed Can- 
digus, did not give the leaſt Uneaſineſs to Mar- 
tn, 
A Couple of young Girls, very well drefled, 


ſerved them with Chocolate, which was frothed 


like whipt Syllabub. Candidus could not help 
dropping them a Compliment on their Beauty, 
their Politeneſs and Addreſs : < They are toler- 
« able Creatures, ſaid Pococurante ; | ſometimes 
« make them lie in my Bed, for I am quite tired 
& of the Girls of the Town, and their Jeal uſies, 
4 uarrels, Humours, Childiſhneſs, Pridé, Fol- 
fies, and the Sonnets one is obliged to make, 
« or. hire others to make for them; but after 
dall, theſe two Girls begin grow tireſome 
« to me,” | a 


£ | After 


9 


L 107 ] 

After Breakfaſt, Candidus took a Walk in his 
long Gallery, and was charmed, with the Beau 
of his Pictures. He aſked him, what Maſter 
e had painted the two Firſt, They are done by 
&« Raphael, ſaid the Senator; I gave a large Sum 
„of Money for them, purely out of Oftenta- 
tion, ſome Years ago; but they don't pleaſe 
% me at all; the Colours are dead, the Figures | 
not finiſhed, and don't appear with Relief 
cc enough; the Drapery is very bad. In ſhort, 
let People ſay what they will, they are by no 
&« Means natural. I don't like a Piece, unleſs it 
c makes me think I ſee Nature itſelf ; but there's 
& no ſuch Pieces to be met with. I have, indeed, 
&« large Collection, but I don't value them 
« at all.” | 

While they were waiting for Dinner, Pococu- 
rante entertained them with a Concert; Candi- 
dus was quite charmed with the Mulick,- <5 This 
&« Noiſe, ſaid Pococurante, might divert one for 
half an Hour, or ſo, but if it were to laſt any 
„longer, it would grow tireſome to every body, 
though no Soul would chuſe to ſay ſo. Mu- 
ce fic, is, now-a-days, nothing elfe but the Art 
&« of executing Difficulties ; and what has no- 
thing but Difficulty to recommend, does not 
6 pleaſe at the long run. 

might, perhaps, take more Pleaſure in the 
c“ Opera, if they had not found out the Secret to 
% to make ſuch a Monſter of it, as ſhocks me. 
Let thoſe go that will to ſee bad Tragedies ſet 
ce to Muſic, where the Scenes are compoſed 
“only to lugg in, by the Head and Ears, two or 
te three ridiculous Songs, in order to let off the 


„Pipe 


L 108 J 


cc Pipe of an Actreſs. Any one may die away 
« with Pleaſure, for me, that will, or that can, 
ce at hearing a Eunuch trilling out a Speech of 
c Cæſar and Cato, and ſtrutting upon the Stage 
c with a ridiculous and affected Air. For my 
<« Part, I have, long ago, bid adieu to thoſe Pu- 
<« erilities, which are at preſent the reigning 
„ Taſte of Itah, and purchaſed by crowned 
Heads ſo extravagantly dear. Candidus con- 
ec tradicted him a little, but with great Submiſ- 
« ſion. Martin was entirely of the ſame Senti- 
£ ments with the Senator. 

They fat down to table, and, after an excel- 
lent dinner, went into the Library. Candidus 
caſting his Eyes upon an Homer very handſomely 
bound, praiſed his High Mightineſs for the 
Goodneſs of his Taſte. “ That book, ſaid he, 
„was the favourite of the great Pangloſi, the 
< beſt Philoſopher in Germany! It is none of 
«c mine, ſaid Pococurante, with great Indiffe- 
„ rence; I was made to believe formerly that! 
read him with Pleaſure: But that continued 
“Repetition of Battles that reſemble each other; 
his Gods who are always very buſy without 
<< bringing any thing to a Decifion ; his Helen, 
<© who is the Subject of the War, and has ſcarce 
& any thing to do in the whole Piece; that Troy, 
& which is beſieged, but never taken; I ſay, all 
<* theſe Defects give me the greateſt Difuſt 1 


have aſked ſome Scholars, if they peruſed him 
« with as little Pleaſure as I did ? Thoſe who 
<< were any ways ingenuous profeſſed to me, that 
they could not keep the Book in their Hands: 
** But that they were obliged to give it a Place 

| 46 in 


L109 J 
© in their Libraries, as a Monument of Anti- 
& quity, fo? the ſame Reaſon as they do old ruſty 
« Medals, which no one will take for Money. 

& Your Excellence entertains more favourable 
cc Sentiments of Virgil, ſaid Candidus. I con- 
&« feſs, reply'd Pococurante, that the Second, the 
«Fourth, and the Sixth Book of the Æneid are 
& excellent; but as for his pious Aneas, his 
& brave Cloanthus, the little Aſcanius, the infirm 
« King Latinus, the Burgeſs Amata, and the 
&« infipid Lavinia, I don't think any thing can 
ebe more frigid, or more diſagreeable. F pre- 
« fer Taſſo, and Arioſto's Tales far before him. 

« Give me Leave to aſk you, Sir, ſaid Can- 
& didus, whether you do not reap a great deal 
© of Pleaſure in peruſing Horace? There are 
« ſome Maxims, ſaid Pococurante, which may 
cc be of ſome ſervice to a Man, who knows the 
« World, and being delivered in expreſſive Num- 
ce bers are engraved more eaſily on the Memory. 
« But I can't ſay I am much affected with his 
« Voyage to Brunduy/ium, his Deſcription of his 
c bad Dinner, and the Bulings-gate Squabble 
& between one Pupillus, whoſe Speech he ſaid 
c was full of pus, and another whoſe Words 


« were as ſharp as Vinegar, I never could read 


ce his indelicate Lines againſt the ald Woman, 
ce and Witches, without great Diſguſt ; and I 
can't ſee any Beauty in his telling his friend 


«© Maecenas, that if he ſhould be reckoned - 


*« amongſt the Lyric Poets, by him, he'd knock 
e his ſoaring Forehead againſt the Stars. Some 
© Fools admire every Thing in an Author of 
% any. Repute ; for my Part, I read only for 

«© myſelf; 


2222. Ee 


(- 20-1 


„ myſelf; I approve nothing but what ſuits my 
« own Taſte.” Candidus, having been taught 
to judge of Nothing for himſelf, was very much 
ſurprized at hearing him ſpeak in this Manner ; 
but Martin looked upon the Sentiment of Poco- 
curante as very rational. 


« Oh, here's Cicero, ſaid Candidus, J fancy 
© you are never tired of reading him.” I ne- 
ver read him at all, reply'd the Venetian. What 
© js his Oration for Rabirius, or Cluentius to me ? 
« I have Trials enough of my own; I might, 
indeed, have been a greater . riend to his phi- 
& loſophical Works, but when I found he doubt- 
<« ed of every Thing, I concluded I knew as 


& much of the Matter, as he did, and that I had 


© no need of a Tutor to learn Ignorance. 
„Well! here's four and twenty Volumes of 
« the Academy of Sciences, cried Martin; its poſ- 
<« ſible there may be ſomething worth looking at 
ein them. There certainly would, ſaid Poco- 
« curante, if but one of the Authors of this 
% Hodge-podge, had been only the Inventor of 
 « the Art of making Pins; but there's nothing 

ein all thoſe Volumes but chimerical Hypotheſes, 
c and ſcarce a ſingle Article of real Service. 

«© What a prodigious Number of Plays you 
c have got here] ſaid Candidus, in Italian, Spa- 
« ib, and French. Yes, ſaid the Senator, there 
& are about three thouſand ; and not three Do- 
© zen good ones among them all. As for that 


„ Collection of Sermons, which are not worth 


one Page of Seneca, take them all together, 


and all thoſe large Volumes of Divinity, you 
| 66 mult 


L mx |] 
© muſt think that they are never touched either 
dy me or any Body elle.” ; 

e Martin perceiving ſome of the Shelves filled 
© with Engliſb Books; I fancy, ſaid he, a Re- 
„ publican, as you are, muſt generally be pleaſed 
with Compoſitions, that are writ with fo great 
a Degree of Freedom: © Yes, ſaid Pocacu- 
& rante, it is commendable to write what one 
« thinks, *tis the Privilege of our Species. But 
throughout Italy they write nothing, but what 
they Jon't think ; thoſe who now inhabit the 
Country of the Gz/ars and Antonines, dare not 
© have a fingle Idea, without taking out a Li- 
«© cence from a Jacobin. I ſhould be very well 
« ſatisfied with the Freedom that breathes in the 


M* Engliſh Writers, if the Spirit of Party did not 


« corrupt all that was valuable in it. 

Candidus diſcovering a Milton, aſked hi 

F he did not look upon that Author as a great 
Genius. What! ſaid Pecocurante, that Block- 


« head, that has made a long Commentary in 


ten Books on the difficult Paſſages in the firſt 
Chapter of Gene/is. That groſs Imitator of the 
« Greeks, who has disfigured the Creation ; for 
« when Moſes has repreſented the Deity as pro- 
« ducing the World by a Word, he makes the 
« Meſfiah take a large Pair of Compaſſes from 
the Armory of God, to mark out his Work. Do 
« you think, I can have any Eſteem for one who 
10 tha ſpoilt the Hell and Devils of Ta; who 
turns Lucifer ſometimes into a I oad, and 
“ ſometimes into a Pigmy ; makes him ſpeak the 
* ſame Speech a hundred times over; repreſents 

| | | « him 


ſl 
4 
| 
| 
E. 
ö 


| 1 
ce him diſputing in Divinity; and turns —_— 
cc comical Deſcription of the Invention of Fire 
ce arms into a grave one, and makes the Devils let 
cc off their Cannon in Heaven. Neither I, nor an 
cc one elſe in Italy, has it in his Power to be 
cc pleaſed at theſe Outrages againſt commo 
« Senſe: but the Marriage of Sin and Death 
<« and the Snakes that proceed from her Womb, 
cc are enough to make a Perſon of the leaſt De- 
& licacy vomit. This obſcure, fantaſtical and dif. 
<« guſting Poem was deſpiſed at its firſt Publica- 
tion: And for my Part, I treat the Author now 
in the ſame Manner as he was treated by his 
« Cotemporaries. By the bye, I ſpeak what 
e think, and I give myſelf no Uneaſineſs, whe- 
< ther or not, other People think as I do.“ 

Candidus was ſomewhat affected by this Diſ- 
courſe, for he reſpected Homer, and was fond of 
Milton. Ah! ſaid he, whiſpering to Martin, 
] am very much afraid, if this Man here has 
e not a ſovereign Contempt for our German 
c Poets.” There is no Harm in it, if he has, 


e ſaid Martin.” © Oh what an extraordinary 


Genius! ſaid Candidus, muttering to himſelf: 
What a great Man is this Pococurante ! He is 
* pleaſed with nothing.” 

After taking a view of his Library, they went 
down into the Garden. Candidus expatiated upon 
all its Beauties. I never ſaw any Thing in ſo 


„bad a Taſte, ſaid the Maſter, we have nothing 


* but Gewgaws here; but a Day or two hence, 


„ ſhall have one laid out upon a more noble 


&« plan.“ 
9 When 


[: wat 

When our two Inquiſitives had taken their 
Leave of his Excellence, Now ſure, ſaid Can- 
& didus to Martin, you will confeſs that he is 
% one & the happieft Men upon Earth, for he is 
« above every Thing that he has.” Don't 
& you ſee, ſaid Martin, that he is diſguſted with 
every Thing that he has. Plato has ſaid a long 
Time ago, that the beſt Stomachs are not thoſe 
& which caſt up all Sorts of Victuals.“ But, 
& ſaid Candidus, is not there a great Pleaſure in 
&* finding Fault with every Thing? in perceiving 
« Defe&ts where other People fancy they ſee 
« Beauties?” © That is as much as to ſay, re- 
« plied Martin, that there is a great Pleaſure in 
6 having no Pleaſure.” If that is the Caſe, 


c ſaid Candidus, no Soul will be fo happy as my- 


< ſelf, when I ſee Cunigonda again.” © We 
„ ſhould always hope for the 5%, faid Martin.” 

In the mean Time Days and Weeks paſſed 
away : but no Cacambo was to be found. And 
Candidus was ſo immerſed in Grief, that ke did 
not recollect, Paguetta and Brother Girofflce 
were come purely to return him Thanks. 


[ſr wer Þ 
CHAP. XXVI. 


Of Candidus and Martin's ſupping with 
Aix Strangers, and who they were. 


NE Night, as Candidus, with Martin be- 
hind him, was going to ſeat himſelf at 
Table with ſome Strangers, who lodged in the 
ſame Inn, a man of a very dark Complexion 
came behind him, and taking him by, the Arm, 
ſays to him, Get ready to go along with us; 
don't fail! He turned his Head, and ſaw Ca- 
cambo. Nothing but the Sight of Cunigonda could 
have given him more Surprize or Pleaſure. He 
was ready to run mad for joy. Embracing his 
dear friend, Cunigonda is here, ſays he, with- 
out doubt; where is ſhe? Carry me to her, 
and let me die with joy in her Company!“ 
« Cunigonda is not here, 110 1 is at 
„ Conſtantinople,” O Heavens] at Con/tan- 
e tinople? But, if ſhe was at China, I would fly 
to her; let us ſet out.” We will go after 
«« Supper, replied Cacambo; I can only juſt tell 
« you, that I am a Slave; my Maſter expects 
eme, and I muſt go and wait at Table; don't 
tell zny Body: go tg Supper, and hold yourſelf 

in Readineſs.” | 
Candidus, diſtracted between Joy and Grief, 
charmed at having ſeen his truſty Agent, * 
| | ec 


Go, 


ſ e634 ] 

ed at his being a Slave, full of the Idea of find- 
ing his Miſtreſs again, his Heart palpitating, and 
his Underſtanding confuſed, fat himſelf down, 
with Martin, at the Table, who heard of all theſe 
Particulars without the leaſt Emotion, together 
with ſix Strangers that were come to ſpend the 
Carnival at Venice. 

Cacambo, pouring out a Glaſs of Wine for one 
of the Strangers, whiſpered him in the Ear, when 
the Supper was near over, and ſaid to him, 
« May it pleaſe your Majeſty, you may ſet out 
& when you think proper, the Ship is ready.” 
On ſaying theſe Words, he went out of the 
Room. The Gueſts were ſurpriſed, and looked 
at each other, without ſpeaking a Word ; when 


another Servant approaching his Maſter, ſaid to 


him: © Sire, your Majeſty's Poſt-Chaiſe is at 
& Padua, and the Vacht is ready.” The Maſter 

ave a Nod, and the Domeſtic retired. , All the 
Gueſts ſtared at one another again, and their Sur- 
prize was increaſed, A third Servant approach- 
ing likewiſe the third Stranger, ſays to him : 
« Sire, believe me, your Majeſty muſt not ſtay 
here any longer; ** and immediately he diſap- 


peared, 


Candidus and Martin began by this Time to 


perſuade themſelves that this was a Maſquerade 


of the Carnival. A fourth Domeſtic ſays to the 
fourth Maſter: * Your PK may depart 


<« whenever you pleaſe; and wetit out in the - 


fame Manner as thoſe before him. The fifth 
Servant expreſſed himſelf in Terms to the ſame 
Effect as the fourch : But the ſixth Servant ſpoke 
in a different A ray p96 ſixth Stranger, who 

| 2 ſat 


1 116 J 
ſat near Candidus © Faith, Sir, ſays he, no one 
< will truſt your Majeſty any longer, nor myſelf 
< neither ; and we may both be arreſted this ve 
«© Night; I ſhall however take Care of -myſelt, 
« and ſo, Good bye t'you 1” 

All the Domeſtics were gone out of the Room, 
and as for Candidus and Martin, they remained 
in a profound Silence. At laſt Candidus broke it: 
« Gentlemen, ſaid he, this is ſomething very 
c drole ; are you really all of you Kings? For 
« my Part I tell you before-hand, that neither 1 
tc nor Martin are.“ 

Cacambes Maſter anſwered very gravely in 
Italian: © I aſſure you I am not in Felt, 

« Aehmet III. I was Grand- Sultan for ſeveral 
« Years ; I dethroned my Brother; my Nephew 
« dethroned me; my Viſirs were beheaded : I 
ce finiſh my Days in the old Seraglio. My Ne- 
tc phew, the Grand-Sultan Mahmoud, permits 
cc me to take a Voyage ſometimes for the Sake 
« of my Health, and I am come to paſs the Car- 
cc nival at Venice. U | 

A young Man, who ſat near Achmet, ſpoke 
next, and faid: < My Name is Ivan; I was 

« Emperor of all Ruſſia: I was dethroned in 
c my Eradle, my Father and Mother were con- 
« fined; I was brought up in Priſon. I have 
te ſometimes the Permiſſion to travel, accompa- 
ce nied with two Perſons as Guards; I am alſo 

« come to paſs the Carnival at Venice.“ 
The third ſaid : “ I am Charles Edward, King 
* of England, niy Father has ceded his Rights to 
the Throne to me. I have fought to ſupport 
'« them; eight hundred of my Adherents — 
0 f 66 t eir 


4 
* 
[4 
6 
6 


a Aa a> & a a #©a 


( m7 ] 
« their Hearts taken out alive. I myſelf have 
<< been in Priſon : I am going to Rome to pay a 
e Viſit to my Father, who is dethroned as well 
« well as myſelf and my Grand-father, and am 
&« come to Venice to celebrate the Carnival.” 

The fourth ſaid : I am King of Poland; the 
& Fortune of War has deprived me of my here- 
« ditary Dominions, my Father has experienced 
t“ the fame Misfortune ; I reſign myſelf to Pro- 
<« vidence, oh the Sultan Achmet, the Emperor 
& Ivan, and Charles Edward, whom God long 
c preſerve; and I am come to the Carnival of 
te Venice. | 

The fifth ſaid : “I am likewiſe the King of 
« Poland; I have loſt my Kingdom twice, but 
Providence bas given me another Government, 
„in which I have done more good, than all the 
Kings of the Sarmatians, together, have been 
« able to do on the Banks of the YViftula, I re- 
c ſign myſelf likewiſe to Providence, and am 
come to paſs the Carnival at Venice.“ 

It now was the ſixth King's Turn to ſpeak. 
Gentlemen, ſaid he, I am not of ſo great a 
„Family as any of you may be: but for all that 
<< | have been a King as well as the beſt of you. 
« I am Theodore; I was elected King of Corfica, 
I was once called Nour Majeſiy, but at prefent 
« am ſcarce called plain Sir. I have coined 
«© Money, but am not Mafter, at preſent, of a 
« Farthing, I have had two Secretaries of State, 
<< but now have ſcarce a ſingle Servant. I have 
c ſeen myſelf on a Throne, and have for ſome 
Time laid upon Straw in a common Jail in 
London. I have been vaſtly afraid of meeting 

| LT « with 


/ 


on. =» 


& with the ſame Treatment here, though I am 
% come, like your Majeſties, to paſs the Car- 
& nival at Venice. 

The five other Kings heard this Speech with 
a noble Compaſſion, Each of them gave King 
Theodore twenty Sequins -- to buy him ſome 
Cloaths and Shirts, and Candidus made him a 
Preſent of a Diamond worth two thouſand Se- 
quins more. Who, ſaid the five Kings, can this 
<< private Perſon be, who is both able to give, and 
really has given an hundred times as much as 
& either of us? 

At 'the very Inſtant they diſappeared, came 
into the ſame Inn four Serene Highneſſes, who 
had likewiſe loſt their Dominions by the For- 
tune of War, and were come to paſs the Carni- 
val at Venice But Candidus was ſo entirely en- 
groſſed with the Thoughts of going to Conſtan- 
tinople to find his dear Cunigonda, that he took 
little Notice of them, tart © 


CI IAG IKIHITI c IDES 
CHAP. XXVII. 
Candidus's Voyage to Conſtantinople. 


T HE truſty Cacambo had already prevailed on 
the Turkiſh Captain, that was going to carry 
Sultan Achmet back again to Conſtantinople, to re- 
ceive Candidus and Martin on board. They both 
of them took up their Quarters there, after they had 
| 1 0 proſtrated 


FI . — nan a a. „ EC A mm ou 


( 119 ] 
4 
proſtrated themſelves before his miſerable High- 
neſs. As Candidus was on his Way, be ſaid to 
Martin: There were ſix dethroned Kings that 
c ye ſupped with, and, what is ſtill more, among 
i theſe ſix Kings there was one that I gave 
« Alms to. Perhaps there may be a great many. 
c other Princes more unfortunate ſtill, For my. 
&« Part, I have loſt only an hundred Sheep, and 
© am going to fly into the Arms of Capo "oy 
« My dear Martin, I muſt yet ſay, Panglaſs was 
in the right; all Things are for the be/f. 
I with they were, ſaid Martin.” * But, ſaid 
&« Candidus, „, wah we met with at Venice, 
« is ſomewhat romantic. Such a Thing was 
<< neyer heard of, that ſix dethroned Kings ſhould 
« ſup together at a common Inn.“ This is 
not more extraordinary, replied the other, than 
e the greateſt Part of what has befallen us. No- 
« thing is more common, than for Kings to be 
s dethroned; and with reſpect to the Honour 
„ that we had of ſupping with them, it is a 
& 'I rifle not worth one's Notice.” 

Scarce was Candidus got on board, when he 


leaped on the Neck of his old Servent and Friend 


Cacambo. Well, then, ſays he; how does 
* Cunigonda do? Is ſhe ſtill a Miracle of Beauty ? 
& Does. ſhe love me ſtill? How does ſhe do? 
% You have bought her a Palace at Conftantinople, 
„I warrant you.” My dear Sir, replied Ca- 


* cambo, Cunigenda waſhes Diſhes on the Banks 


& of the Propontis, at the Houſe of a Prinee, who 
& has very few to waſh: the is a Slave in the 
© houſe of an old Nobleman named Ragots4y, 


«« whom the Grand- Turk allows three Crowns 
1 4 «6 A * 


| [ 0 J 
ce 2 Day to fupport him in his * pra : but, what 
« is worſe than all, ſhe has loſt her Beauty, and 
is become ſhockingly ugly.“ Well, ſaid he, 
* handſome or ugly, I am a man of Honour, 


And it is my Duty to love her, as long as 1 


«> Jive. But, how came ſhe to be reduced to 
e fach Extremities, with the five or ſix millions, 
ce you carried her? * And well, ſaid Cacambo, 
as not 1 to give two Millions to Signior Don 
Fernunder d Tharaa, y Figueora, y Maſcarenas, 
« y Lampourdos, y Souza, the Governor of Bue- 
& . Hyres, for the Permiſſion of taking Miſs 
« Cimigentia back again? And did. not a pirate 
rob us of all the reſt ? Did not this Pilot carry 
& us to Cape Matapans, to Milo, to Nicaria, to 
& gamos, to Dardantlles, to Marmora, to Scutari. 
e Cunigonda and the old Woman are Servants to 

ec the Prince I told you of, and I am a Slave of 
«the dethroned Sultan.” What a Chain of 
aſtoniſhing Calamities! ſaid Candidus. But 
after all, I have ſome Diamonds, I ſhall eaſily 
purchaſe Cunigondas Liberty. It is Pity that 
ie ſhe is grown ſo ugly.” Then turning him- 
ſelf to Hartin. Tei me, ſays he, which 
do yon think is moſt to be pitied, the Sul- 
tan Hehmet, the Emperor Ivan, the King 
& Charles Edward, or myſelf?” „I cannot 
«tell, ſaid Martin, unleſs I could ſee your 
e Hearts.“ Ah, faid Candidus, if Pangloſs was 
& here, he would tell us.” * I know not, 
et replied he, what Scales your Pangh/s had 
«to weigh the Misfortunes of Mankind, or tare 
ce their Sorrows in. All that I can venture to ſay 
ce on this Subject, is, that there are Millions of 

„Men upon Larth: a hundred times more to be 
e | | c pitied 


W 


Gerne 


Zr oer www 


2 £ 


® 


— 1 | 
« pitted than the King Charles Edward; the 
& Emperor Ivan, or the Sultan Achmet. That 
* js poſſible, ſaid Candidus. | 
In a few Days they came to the Black-Sea. 
Candidus made a Beginning in ranſoming Ca- 
cambo at an extravagant Price, and, without 
_ Loſs of Time, got into a Galley with his Atten- 
dants, to go to the Banks of the Propontis, in 
Search of Cunigenda, notwithſtanding her Loſs 
of Beauty, | 
Among the Crew there were two Slaves, that 
row'd very ill, whom the Levant Trader would 
now and then favour with a few Strokes with 
a Bulls Pizzle a croſs the Shoulders. Candidus, 
by a natural Sympathy, took more Notice of 
them than the Re of the Galley-Slaves, and 
went up to them with an aching Heart. Some 
Features of the Faces, which were very much 
disfigured, ſeemed to bear ſome reſemblance 
to thoſe of Pangh/s, and the unfortunate Jeſuit, 
the Baron, the Brother of Miſs Cunigonda. This 
Fancy affected him, and made him very dull, He 
looked at them again more attentiveh). Really, 
« ſaid he to Cacambo, if I had not teen Pangleſs 
* hanged, and had not had the Misfortune to 
« kifl the Baron myſelf, I ſhould think that 
« thoſe two Slaves were them.” At the Names 
of the Baron and Pangloſs, the two Galley Slaves 
gave a loud Shriek, held faſt by the Seat, and 
let their Oars drop out of their Hands. The 
Maſter of the Levanter run up to them, and let 
fall a whole Shower of Laſhes from the Bull's 
Pizzle upon them. „ Hold! hold! Seignior, 
e cried Candidus, I will give you what you pleaſe.” 
It is Candidus ] ſaid one of the Galley — ; 
6 is 


2 


Fl! 


«© Tig Candidus! ſaid the other.” „Do dream? 


„ ſaid Candidus; Am I awake? Am I in this 
* Galley ? Is that Maſter Baron, whom killed? 
ls that Maſter: Fg whom I ſaw hanged.” 
„Ves, it is we! *Tis we! replied they.” 
« What! is that the great Philoſopher, ſaid 
&« Martin.” © Hip, you, Maſter Captain, ſaid 
* Candidus, what will you take for the Ranſom 
<« of Maſter Thunder-ten-tronck, one of the firſt 
* Barons of the Empire, together with Maſter 
„ Panglsſs, the moſt profound Metaphyſician of 
Germany Lou Chriſtian Dog, ſaid our 
* Levanter, ſince theſe two Chriſtiam Dogs of 
“ Galley- Slaves are Barons and Metaphyſicians, 
* which is, no Doubt, a great Degree of Dignity 
in their own Country, you ſhall pay me fifty 
„ thouſand Sequins.“ Lou ſhall have them, 
Sir, carry me back again, like Lightning to 
„ Conſtantinople, and you ſhall be paid down 
upon the Nail. But, ſtop, carry me to Miſs 
& Cunigonda firſt.” The Levanter, on the. firſt 
offer of Candidus, had turned the Head of the 
Veſſel towards the City, and made the Slaves 
row as faſt as a bird could fly. | 
& Candidus embraced the Baron and Panglo/s 
« hundred times. How comes it, that I did 
& not kill you, my dear Baron? and my dear 
« Pangleſs, how came you to Life again, after I 
tc faw you hang'd? and how came you, both of you 


to be Galley-Slaves in Turky® Is it true that 


t my Siſter is in this Country ? ſaid the Baron; 
« Yes, replied. Cacambo. I then ſee my dear 
« Candidus, once more, ſaid Pangloſs.” 


, | | Candidus 


Li: 22g: 1 

| Candidus preſented Martin and Cacambo to 
them; they embraced each other, and ſpake all 
at the ſame. Time, The Galley fled like Light- 
ning, and they were already in the Port. A few 
was ſent for, to whom Candidus fold a Diamond 
for fifty thouſand Sequins, which was worth a 
hundred thouſand, and he notwithſtanding, ac- 
cording to Cuſtom, ſwore by Abraham, that 
he could not give any more. He immediatel 

aid the Ranſom of the Baron, and Pangbf,. 

he latter threw himſelf at the Feet of his De- 
liverer, and bathed them with his Tears ; as for 
the other he gave a Nod, and promiſed to repay | 
him the firſt Opportunity. But is it poſſible, 
that my Siſter is in Turiy? ſaid he. © Nothing 
is more ſo, replied Cacambo; for ſhe is a Chair- 
„Woman at the Houſe of a Prince of Tranſyl- 
% vania!/” A couple more Jews were fetched, 
to whom Candidus fold ſome more Diamonds, 
and they ſet out again all together in another 
(alley to deliver Cunigenda. | 


NANA AA pi BEAR LSE 
HAP. XXVIIL 


What happened to Candidus, Cunigonda, 
Pangloſs, Martin, &c. 


6 1 Aſk your Pardon, once more, ſaid Candidus 
to the Baron, I aſk Pardon, my Revereind 


Father, for having given you a thruſt through 
"px the 


% 


| ſ req J 

cc the Body: Don't let's ſay any more about it 
« ſaid the Baron, I was a little too haſty, I 
tc muſt confeſs, but ſince you defire to know by 
er what Misfortune I came to be a Galley-Slave, 
« you muſt know, that after I was cured by a 
Brother, who was Apothecary to the College, 


J was attacked and carried off by a Party of 


& Spaniards, who confined me'inPrifon at Buenos- 
<« tyres, juſt as my Siſter, was ſetting out from 
< thenee. I petitioned to be ſent to Rome, to 
& our Father-General. I was pitched upon to 
« 90 as Almoner to Conftantinople, with the 
& French | Ambaſſador. I had ſcarce exerciſed 
« my Function eight Days, when I met with a 
ec young well-made /coghlan, about Duſk. It was 
© then very hot; the young Man went to bathe 
<* himſelf, and 1 took this Opportunity to bathe 
„ myſelf too. I did not know that it was an 

4 Crime for à Chriſtian, to be found naked with 
& 2 young Muſſulman. A Caui ordered me to 
receive a hundred Strokes of the Baftinado on 
<« the Soles of my Feet, and condemned me to the 


* Galleys. I am ſure there never was a greater 


. Piece of Injuſtice.— But, I ſhould be glad to 
known how it comes about, that my Siſter is 
„ Diſh-waſher in the Kitchen of a Tranhlvanian 


Prince, that is a 3 among the Turks. 
„But then for your 


att, my dear Panglofs, 
< how came I ever to ſet Eyes on you again! 
« ?Ts true indeed, ſaid Panglo/s, that you ſaw 
„me hanged; I ought indeed to have been 
'« burnt; but you may remember that it rained 


_ «© prodigioufly, when they were going: to roaſt 


„me: the Storm was ſo violent, that they did 
| | 1e | \ 


ö 1 4 


-66 nat br 
. 


F 
not think it poſſible to light the Fire; I was 
** hanged therefore becauſe they could not get 


** rid of me any other Way. A Surgeon bought 
my body, and it was carried to him, in order to 
* be diſſected. He made a crucial Inciſion on 
© me from the Umbelicus to the Clavicula, No 
* one was ever worſe hanged then I. The 
Executioner that belonged to the holy Inqui- 
© ſition, who: was a Subdeacon beſides, burnt 
“indeed to a Miracle, but had no hand at 
hanging, for want of Practice; the Cord being 
** wet, did not flip, and the Nooſe was a very 
© bad one; to be ſhort, I was not quite dead; 
© the crucial Inciſion made me give ſuch a great 
„ Shriek, that my Surgeon fell down backwards, 


and fancying he was diſſecting the Devil, be 


run away ready to die with the Fright, and 
fell down a fecond time on the Stair-caſe, as 
he was making off, His Wiſe: run out of a 


4; Cloſet on hearing the Noiſe, ſhe ſaw me ex- 
„ fended on the Table with my crucial Inciſion, 
* and being more frightened than her Huſband, 


* run away and fell over him. When they 
were come to themſelvos again, I heard the 
© Surgeon's. Lady ſay to him: My Dear, how 
come you to be ſo weak as to venture to dif- 
< ſect'an Heretic? Don't you know. that the 


Devil always takes Poſleſſion of their Bodies? | 


«I will go immediately and fetch, a, Prieſt to 
« exorciſe it. I ſhuddered at this Propoſal, and 


& collected all the Strength I had left to cry. out, 


Oh, have Pity upon me ! The Portugueſæ Bar- 


ber took Courage, ſowed up my Skin, and his 


Wife nurſed me ſo well, that I was uy 
Feet 


—_—_——— 
OG 


[ 126 7 


Feet again in about a Fortnight. The Bar- 


© ber got me a Place to be a Footman to a 
Knight of Malta, who was going to Venice; 
<< but my Maſter not being able to pay me my 
«6 Wages, © I hired myſelf to a Venetian Mer- 
<< chant,” and went along with him to Conffan- 


—_ | | 
One Day the Maggot took me to 20 into 
« a Moſque; there was nobody there but an 
* old Iman and a young Devotee, 77 7 hand- 
< ſome, ſaying her Prayers, ſhe had a beautiful 
«© Noſegay of Tulips, Roſes, Anemones, Ra- 
<-nunculuſes, Hyacinths, and Auriculas, in her 
% Boſom ; ſhe let her Noſegay fell, on which 
« F picked it up with a reſpectful Officiouſneſs. 
„ However, I was fo long in giving it to her 
* again, that the Iman fell in a Paſſion, and ſeeing 
<« | was a Chriſtian, called out for Help. I was 
4 carried before the Cadiz” who ordered me to 
« receive a hundred Baſtigadoes, and to be ſent 
, to the Gallies. I was chained to the very ſame 
% Galley and the ſame Bench as the Baron. 
« There were on board four young Men from 
„ Marſeilles, five N-apolitan Prieſfs, and two 
Monks of Corfu, who told us theſe Things 
% happened every Day. The Baron ele. 
that he had been uſed with more Injuſtice than 
<« ] ; but J replied, that it was not ſo bad to put a 
*-Noſcgay into a Woman's Boſom, as to be found 
* ſtark naked with an Icoghlan. We were per- 
** petually diſputing, and received twenty Laſhes 
every Day with a Bull's Pizzle, when he Chain 
*« of Events of this World brought you to our 
„ (alley, and you ranſomed us, 4 
„ But 


les 
ain 
bur 


But 


| 1 127 J 

d But then, my dear Pangloſi, ſaid Candidus 
to him, when you was hanged, diſſected, beat 
to a Jelly, and was a Slave in the Galley, did 
« you always think that Things were 2 the 
& beſt ? I always ſtick to my firit Opinion : For 
as I am a Philoſopher, it would be inconſiſtent 
« with my Character to contradict myſelf ; eſpe- 
* cially as Leibnitz could not be in the wrong; 
5 his pre- eſtabliſned Harmoney is certainly the 
& beſt Syſtem in the World, as well as his Ple- 
num, and ſubtile Matter. 


FEE EEEEEEEEEELEE LEE 
CHAP.. XXIX. 


Hrw Candidus finds Cunigonda, and 
| the Old Woman again. 


W HIL E Candidus, the Baron, Pangleſs, 
Martin, and Cacambo related their Adven- 
tures to each other ; and diſputed about Contin- 
gencies, and Non-contingencies, as they reſpected 
the Events of this World, and while they argued 
upon Effects and Cauſes, moral and phyſical 
Evil, on Liberty and · Neceſſity, and the Com- 
forts a Perſon may experience, in the Gallies in 
Turkey, they arrived at the Coaſts of the Propon- 
tis, by the Houſe of the Prince of Tranſylvania. 
The. firſt Objects which preſented themſelves 
were Cuni 5 and the Old Woman, hanging 
out ſome Table Linen to dry, The Baron grew 

Pr DT, pale 


— ——-— . . 


— 
— — 


Bok L 128 J | 
pale at this Sight. The affeRionaie Candidu; 


ſeeing his fair Cunigonda 9 tanned, 


with her Eye - lids reverſed, her Neck withered, 
her Cheeks full of Wrinkles, her Arms red, and 
all full of Scales, jumped near three Yards back- 
wards at the Shock, but went towards her im- 


mediately afterwards, in point of good Breeding. 


She- embraced Candidus and her Brothes, who, 
each of them embraced the Old Woman, and 
Candidus ranfomed both of them. There was a 
little Farm in the Village, which -the Old Wo- 
man adviſed Candidus to hire, till they could meet 
with better Accommodations for their whole 
Company. As Cunigonda did not know that ſhe 
was grown fo very ugly” no Body having trou- 
bled themſelves. to tell her fo ; ſhe put Candidus 
in mind of his Promiſe, in ſo peremptory a Man- 
ner, that the poor Man could not ly.deny 
her. He then informed the Baron of his wang 
tions to marry his Siſter. I never will ſuffer, 
« ſaid the Baron, ſuch a Meanneſs on her Side, 
© nor ſuch a Degree of Inſolence on your's ; it 
c never ſhall be told me, by way of Reproach, 


that my Siſter's Children have no Right to ſit 


jn the Diets of the Empire. No, my Siſter 
c ſhall never marry any, but a Baron of the 
« Empire,” Though Cunigonda caſt herſelf at 
kis Feet, and bathed them with her Tears, he 
remained inſenſibte. ou fooliſh Puppy you, 
<« ſaid Candidus to him, I delivered you from the 
© Gallies, I paid your Ranſom, aye, and your 
« Siſter's too; ſhe was a Scullion here, and is 
« very ugly, and when I have the Nature 
to make her my Wife, ſhall you pretend to re- 


ec fuſe 


- 
| 


L 129 1 


ce fuſe your Conſent ; if you put me in a Paſſion, I 


& ſhall certainly kill you again.” * You may, in- 


&« deed, kill me again, ſaid the Baron, but as for 
“ marrying my Siſter, that's what you ſhan't do, 
«while I have Breath.“ | ; Pp 


- 


ieee eee eee kh: 


CHAP. XXX... 
The Conclufion. 14: 


C4 NDIDUS had no great Deſire, at the 
Bottom of his Heart, to marry Cunigonda. 
But the extreme Impertinence of the 5 

made him reſolute to conclude the Marriage, 
which Cunigonda teized him ſo much to do, that 
he could not refuſe it. He adviſed with Pangleſs, 
Martin, and the truſty Cacambo. Pangloſ drew 
up a very clever Piece, in which he proved that the 


Baron had no Right over hisSifter, and that ſhe 
might, conſiſtent with all the Laws of the Em- 


pire, give her Hand to Candidus. Martin was 
for throwing the Baron into the Sea: Cacambo, 
was humbly of Opinion, that it would be beſt to 
ſend him back again to the Levanter, and make 
him work at the Gallies, after which, they might 
fend him to Rome, by the firſt Ship, This Propofal 
was approved of ; they kept it a Secret from his 
Siſter 5 the Affair was brought to bear for a trif- 
fling Expence, and ſo wy had the Pleaſure of 


aut- 


Aron 


J ——— — — 


1 1301 
out witting a Jeſuit, and puniſhing the Pride of 
a German Baron, 

Its natural to ſuppoſe, that, after theſe Misfor- 
tunes, Candidus married his Sweet-heart ; and 
living with the Philoſopher Pangls/s, the Philoſo- 
pher Martin, the diſcrete Cacambo, and the Old 
Woman, and eſpecially as he had brought fo ma- 
ny Diamonds from the Country” of the ancient 
Incas, that he muſt live the happieſt Life of any 
Man upon Earth. But he was duped fo often "4 
the Jetus, that he had nothing left but the ſmall 
Farm; and his Wife growing ftill more ugly, 
turned an intolerable Scold. The Old Woman 
was very infirm, and worſe tempered than Cuni- 
gonda © herſelf. Cacambo, who worked in the 
—ͤ—ů 2 and fold the Produce at Caꝝſtantinople, 
was worn, out with Labour, and curſed his Fate. 
Pangleſs was ready to run mad, becauſe he did 
not cut a Figure in ſome German Univerſity. As 
for Martin, as he was firmly perſuaded, that ey FAY 
one is equally miſerable ;, be bore Things 
Patience. Candidus, Martin, and Pang 5: diſ- 
puted ſometimes as uſual, in Metaph fans on and 
Ethics. They took Notice, that they 2 Boats 
full of Effendis, Baſhaws, and Cadys frequently 
paſs under their Windows, in their he to Lem- 
nos, Mitylene, and Erzernm, to which Places they 
were baniſhed. They obſerved, that other Cadys, 
other Baſhaws, and other Effendis ſucceeded in 
the Poſts of thoſe who. were baniſhed, and that 
they themſelves were, baniſhed in their Turns, 
They ſaw every Day the Heads of certain Chiefs 
very decently fixed upon Poles, and ſent as ys 

: ents 


/ 


| I 2928; ] 
ſents to the ſublime Port. Theſe Spectacles gave 
freſh fuel to their Diſcourſes, and when their 
Diſputes were dropped, they were ſo prodigiouſly 
uneaſy and unquiet in themſelves, that the Old 
Woman took the Liberty to ſay to them, which 
c is the worſt, to be raviſhed an hundred Times 


c by Negro Pirates, to have one Half of one's 


* Backſide cut off, to run the Gauntlet among 
the Bulgarians, to be whipped and hanged at 
c an Auto-da-Ft, to be diſſected, to be a Gal- 


<« jley-Slave; in one Word, to have ſuffered all 


ce the Miſeries we have undergone here, or to 
<« ſtay without doing any Thing?“ “ That's a 
« a Queſtion not eaſily to be determined, ſaid 
CERES: 2. -. | 

This gave Riſe to new Reflections, and Mar- 


tin cone uded, upon the whole, that Mankind 


are born either to live in the Diſtractions of In- 
quietude, or the Lethargy of Diſguſt. Candidus 
could not be of his Opinion, but remained in a 
ſtate of Suſpence, 9 confeſſed, that he 
had undergone terrible Trials, but having once 
maintained, that all Things were for the 5%, he 
ſtill kept firm to his Hypotheſis, though quite 
oppolite to his real Sentiments, | 

hat contributed toconfirm Martin in hisſhock- 
ing Principles, tomake Candidus fluctuate more than 
ever, and to embarraſs Pangloſs, was their ſeeing 
Paquetta and Brother G:roffice land, one Day, in 
in the greateſt Diſtreſs, at the Farm: They ſoon 
ſaw the laſt of their three thouſand Piaſtres, part- 
ed, were reconciled, quarrelled again, had been 
conhned in Priſon, EINE their Eſcape, and, 
' 2 . 


7 


( 132 J 
to be ſhort, Father Giroſſtie had turned Turk. 
Paguetta continued the old Trade, wherever ſhe 


went, but was not a Farthing the richer for it. 


I could eafily foreſee, ſaid Martin, that your 
< Preſents would ſoon be ſquandered away, and 
« would only tend to encreaſe their Miſery. You 
„ and Cacambo have fwallowed Millions of Pi- 
< aftres, and are not a Bit happier than Brother 
« Girofflee and Paquetta.” Aye, aye! has 
& Providence then brought you amongſt us again, 
« Child ! faid Pangleſs, to Paguetta. Do you 
« know that you have coſt me the End of my 
- «+ Noſe, one Jes and one of my Ears, as you 
may ſee you have? What a World is this!“ 
This new Adventure ſet them a philoſophizing 
more than ever, | 
In the Neighbourhood lived a very famous 
Derviſe, who was reputed the greateſt Philoſo- 
pher in Turkey : They applied to him for Advice. 
— being choſen Speaker, ſaid to him, 
c Ma 
us, why ſuch a ſtrange Being as Man was 
<« created. 
What's that to you, ſaid the Derviſe, is it any 
& Thing to you ?” „“ But my Reverend Father, 
&« ſaid Candidus, there is a ſhocking Sight of Evil 
upon Earth.” What ſignifies, ſaid the Derviſe, 
„ whether there be Good or Evil? When his 
<& ſublime Highneſs ſends a Veſſel to Egypt, does 
& he concern himſelf, whether the Mice on 
board, have Room or not?“ What would you 
& have one do then, ſaid Panglss ?”* Hold your 
Tongue, ſaid the Derviſe,” 5 I promiſed myſelf 
9 ce the 


* 


r, we are come to deſire you would tell 


Ss „eee „ „ ca 


—— — * 


— a —_ 


PR > 

4 the Pleaſure, ſaid Pangloſs, of Reaſoning with 
you upon Effects and Cauſes, the be/? of poſſible 
Worlds, the Origin of Evil, the Nature of 
the Soul, and the pre- eſtabliſhed Harmony — 
The Derviſe, at theſe Words, ſhut the Door 
againſt them. 8-1 this Conference, News 
was brought that two Vizirs and a Mufti were 
ſtrangled at Con/tantinople, and a great many of 
their Friends impaled. This Cataſtrophe made 
a great Noiſe for ſome Hours. Panglys, Candi- 
dus, and Martin, in their return to the little 
Farm, met a good-looking Old Man, taking the 
Air, at his Door, under an Arbor of Orange 


Trees. Panghſs, having as much Curiofity as 


Philoſophy, aſked him the Name of the Mufti, 
who was lately ſtrangled. I know nothing at all 
& about it, ſaid the good Man, and what's more, 
& I never knew the Name of a ſingle Mufti, or 
« Vizir in my Life, I am an entire Stranger to 
the Story you mention f and preſume, that, 
&« generally ſpeaking," they, who trouble their 
0 leads with State Affairs, ſometimes die ſhock- 
ing Deaths, not without Yeſerving it; but I 
e never trouble my Head about what is doing at 
& Conſtantinople ; 1 content myſelf in ſending my 
% Fruits thither, the Produce of my Garden, 
£ which I cultivate with my own *I After 


into his Houſe ; whom his two Daughters and two 
Sons ſerved with ſeveral Kinds of Sherbet, which 
they made themſelves, beſides Caymac, ene] 
with the-Peels of candied Citrons, Oranges, Ci- 
trons, Lemons, Piſtachio Nutts, and Mocas Coffee, 


un- 


1 


ſaying theſe Words, he introduced the Strangers 


„ nels, Vice, and Want.” | 
towards his Farm, he made deep Reflections on 
what he had heard from the Turk. Said he to 


„ Kg Nada, th 


( * 
iidtrbwusl ß f: 
unadulterated with the bad Coffee of Batavia and 
the Iſles. After which, the two Daughters of 
of this good Muſſulman, perfumed the Beards of 
Candidus, Pangloſs, and Martin. You muſt 


| << certainly, ſaid Candidus to the Turk, have a 
<< very large and very opulent Eſtate! I have 


4 ny twenty Acres, ſaid the Turi; which I 
and my Children cultivate, Labour keeps us 
<« free from three of the greateſt Evils, Tireſome- 


 Pangloſs and Martin, The Condition of this 
« good Old Man, ſeems to me, preferable to 
<« that of the ſix Kin 
ce with,” © The deurs of UT. ſaid 
& Pangleſs, are very precarious, in the Opinion 
© of all the Philoſophers. For, to be ſhort, 


% Eglon, King of the Moabites was aflaſſinated 


. 7 Chud ; Abſolom was hung by the Hair of his 
Head, and pierced through with three Darts. 
on of 7eroboam, killed 
2 adſba; King Elah by Zinri; Ahaziah by 
Jebhu, Athaliah by Fahoiada; the Kings Foachim, 
& FJechoniat, and Zedetias, were carried into Cap- 
& tivity. . You know the Fates of Cra/us, A/ty- 


cc ages, Darius, Dionyſius of Syracuſe ; Pyrrhus, 


_ © Perſeus, Hannibal, Jugurtha, Arioviſius, Cæ- 
&* far, Pom 4 Nero, Otho, Vitellius, Domt- 
& tran, Richard II. Edward II. Henry VI. Ki- 


III. Mary Stuart, and Charles I. of 
ana, the three Henries of France, and the 


„Emperor Henry IV. You know —— 7, 1 
1 | hy. « know 


«70 * 


* 
— 


As Candidus returned 


I had the Honour to ſup 


n 


— Od 


„„ 
& know very well, ſaid Candidus, that we ought 
“to look after our Garden.” „ You are in 
& the right, ſaid Pangls/s, for when Man was 
& placed in the Garden of Eden, he was placed 
& there, ur OPERARETUR kun, to cultivate 
it; which proves that Mankind are not creat- 
«ed to be idle.” © Let us work, and not diſ- 
“pute, ſaid Martin; it is the only Way to ren- 
&« der Life ſupportable.” All their little ſocie- 
Y joined in ſo laudable a Deſign, according to 
eir different Abilities. - The little ſpot pro- 
duced a plentiful Crop. Though Cunigonda was 
very ugly,'ſhe turned out very famous for Paſtry. 
Paguetta wrought Embroidery, and the Old Wo- 
man took Care of the Linen, There was no 
idle Perſon in the Company, not excepting even 
Brother Giroſſtie; he made a very good Carpen- 
ter, and, what was ſtill more extraordinary, 
turned an honeſt Man. 4 
Pangloſ would ſometimes ſay to Candidus : 
All Events are linked together in this heft of 
© all poſſible Worlds. For, if you had not been 
kicked out of a very fine Caſtle, on account 
of your Paſſion for Mes. Cunigonda ; if you had 


not been put into the Inquiſition ; if you had. 


© not travelled through America on Foot; if you 
had not given the Baron a charming Thruſt 
with your Sword ; if you had not loſt all the 
© Sheep that you brought from that good coun- 
try Eldorado, you would not have eat preſerved * 
Zitrons and Piſtachio Nuts here.” „That 
true, ſaid Candidus but let us go to work 

he Garden.” | 
THE E N D. 


