586% %%% 4444“ 


CAMD1 TTY. 
O R, 


| ALL FOR THE BEST. 


IN TWO PARTS, 


$$40000000$0000$00004404$ 


| 


— 


CAN DID US; 
63 


ALL FOR THE BEST: 


rr 


Tranſlated from the Farncu of 


M. Ds VOLTAIRE, 


C— 
E DIN B UR GH: 


Printed by ALSXANDER DoxalDs0N, 


Sold at his Shop, No. 48. in. St. Paul's Church - 
yard, the corner next Cheapſide, London; and 
at Edinburgh, | 


4 ——— 
M. DCC. LXXIII. 


— —ͥ— f r 2 7 


ad 
mn — — 
— — . F 


0 
\ 
1 
. 
1 
a. 
4 L 


—» SIA 


— 


©-0 N TBE 9 
* | 


r 


nr. 
OW Candidus was brought up in à fine caſile, 
and how he was expelled from thence, Page 1 
. 
What became of Candidus among the Bulgarians, 5 


G6 A.F. MM 


How Candidus made his eſcape from the Bulgarians, 
and what afterwards befel him, 8 


rr. : Fi 


How Candidus met his old maſter of philoſopy, Dr. 
Panghys and what happened to them, 11 


ee. 


Tempeſt, ſhipwreck, earthquake, and what became 
of Dr. Pangleſt, Candidus, and James the Ana- 


_ baptifl, - i5 
c H A p. VI. J 


How a fine auto- da fe was celebrated, to prevent 
earthquakes ; and how Candidus was whipped, 19 


3 CHAP, 


e O/N TENT 8. 


1 CHAP. vn. 
How an old woman took care of Candidus, and how 
he found the object he loved, 11 

. Cim At. vl 
The hiſtory of Cunegonda, 24 


pin 42 in 
What happened to Cunegonda, Candidus, the grand 
inguiſitor, and the Jew, 28 
Cn AT, 3. 


In what diſtreſs Candidus, Cunegonda, and the old 
woman, arrived at Cadiz, and of their imbark- 
ation, 30 


. 
The hiſtory of the old woman, 33 


E H Ar. XII. 
The ſequel of the old woman's adventures, 37 


is. A ©; A. 


How Candidus was obliged to part from the fair 
Cunegonda and the old woman, 42 


Ci A Ff. . 


How Candidus and Cacambo were received by the 
Teſuits of Para, uay, 46 


CHAP, 


Erne vil 


C H Ap. XV. 
How Candidus killed the brother of his dear Cune- 
gonda, 50 


. 1X. 


What paſſed between our two travellers, and two 
girls, two monkeys, and the ſavages called Oreil- 
lons, | 53 


CRAP.  IVIL 


The arrival of Candidus and his man at the country 
of Eldorado, and what they ſaw there, 59 


. 
What they ſaw in the country of Eldorado, 64 


r 


What happened to them at Surinam, and how Candi- 
dus got acquainted with Martin, 72 


. 
What happened at fea to Candidus and Martin, 80 


r 


Candidus and Martin drew near to the coaſt of 
France, and diſpute, 8; 


. X36 
IWhat happened in France to Candidus and Martin, 86 


CHAP, 


u CONTENT 8s. 


CH A PF, Al. 
Candidus and Martin go to the Engliſh 02 and 


what they ſaw there, 93 
C'H A P, XXIV. 
Concerning Paguetta and Father Girofflee, 95 


CH A F. Nr. 
The viſit to Seignior Pococurante, the Meble Vene. 
netian, 101 


Ae 
Of Candidus and Martin's ſupping with fix flran- 


gers, and who they were, 109 
A FP. I. 
Candidus s voyage to Conſtantinople, 113 


nF. II. 


What happened to Candidus, Cunegonda, Pangleſs, 
Martin, &c. 118 


c H A p. XXIX. 


Hou Candidus found Cunegonda and the old woman 
again, 122 


A F. . XXX. 


The concluſion, 123 


C ON. 


— 


—_ _— 


* th 


1 
1 


N T N 
o F 


1 


. 
OW Candidus parted from bis company, and 
what reſulted from it, 133 


r 


What happened to Candidus in = houſe, and how 
he left it 3 1 | "37 


CHAP, MI, 

Candidus's reception at court, and what followed, 141 
. 

Candidus receives new favours, His elevation, 144 


t 


How Candidus was a great prince, but not ſa- 
tisfied, 147 


4 P. VI. 
Candidus's m__ 148 


x ere. 


G12 AP Vi 
The Hiſtory of Zirza, 152 


E-H A Fr Vil. 
Candidus's diſguſt, A meeting which he did not ex- 
ped, 155 


r 


Candidus's diſgrace, travels, and adventures, 1 59 


US 


The arrival of Candidus and Panglaſi in Propontis, 
what they ſaw there, and what became of them, 163 


F 


Candidus continues his journey ; and in what capa- 
city, 165 


' C H A P. XII. 8 
Eandidus continues his journey. New adventures, 168 


| . 
The flory Zenoide.— How Candidus became ena - 


moured with her, and the conſequences, 174 
r 
Continuation of Candidus's amour, 177 


| GC HA 
The arrival Volball. Journey to Copenhagen, 182 


CHAP. 


1 
CRT EWTSE 4 | 


How Gandidus found his wife again, How he laſt 
his miſtreſs, 184 
c HAP. XVI. 
How Candidus intended to kill himſelf, and did not 
effefluate it. What happened to him at an inn, 187 
e H A P. XVII. 
Candidus and Cacambo retire to an hoſpital. Adven« 


ture there, 191 
eee 
New Adventures, 193 


GG F AK; 
The continuation of Candidus's misfortunes ; how he 


found his miſtreſs again, and what was the con- 
ſequence, | 198 


n 
— 
— 


— — — rar 


* 
1 : 
of 12 
= * 
4 
EZ 
1 
* 
in 
. 
1 
1 


| 
| 


| 


C A N- 


mt 


3 
8 * AW 


Fu” o 
FR 
— IR 

ea 


G 


r 


64 — 
Probes, 
8 


">." 


ts 


X-. u. 
L ASE Rf 


A Kendo E 
RS RS RUNS? 


CAN DID US; 
O R, | 


ALL FOR THE BEST. 


ert 


een 


How Candidus was brought up in a fine caftle, and 
how he was expelled from thence. 


"HERE lived in Weſtphalia, in the caſtle 

| of my Lord the Baron of Thunder-ten- 
tronckh, a young man, on whom nature 

had beſtowed the moſt agreeable manners. His 
face was the index of his mind. He had an up- 
right heart, with an eaſy frankneſs; which, I be- 
lieve was the reaſon he got the name of Candidus. 
He was ſuſpected, by the old ſervants of the fa- 
mily, to be the ſon of my Lord the Baron's ſiſter, 
by a good honeſt gentleman of the neighbour - 
hgod, whom that young lady declined to marry, 
0 A becauſe 


* di. ” 


2 CANDIDUS; or, Chap. r. 


beeauſe he could only produce ſeventy-one ar- 
morial quarterings, the reſt of ts genealogical 
tree having been deſtroyed through the injuries 
of time. 

The Baron was one of the moſt power ful lords 
in Weſtphalia; for his caſtle had both a gate and 
windows; and his great hall was even adorped 
with tapeſtry. The dogs of his outer yard com- 
.poſed his pack upon occaſion ; his grooms were 
huis huntſmen; and the vicar of the pariſh was his 
great almoner. He was called by every body, 
My Lord; and every one would laugh when he 
Told his Rory. : 

My Lady the Paronelh who weighed about 
three hundred and fifty pounds, attracted by that 
means very great regard, and did the honours of 
the houſe with a dignity that rendered her ſtill 
more reſpectable. Her daughter Cunegonda, 
aged about ſeventeen years, was of a high com- 
plexion, freſh, plump, and the object of deſire. 


The Baron's ſon appeared to be in every reſpect 


worthy of his father, The preceptor, Pangloſs, 


" Fas the oracle of the houſe, and little Candidus 


liſtened to his lectures with all the ſimplicity that 
| oe. rote to his age and his character. 

angloſs taught metaphyſico-· theologo-coſmo- 
lonigology. He proved moſt admirably, that 
rhere could not be an effect without a cauſe ; 
that, in this beſt of poſſible worlds, my Lord the 
Baron's caſtle was the moſt magnificent of caſtles, 
and my. 9 7 che beſt of baroneſſes * N 
could be. $34 | 


n 


Chap. 1, ALL rox THE Brsr. 3 


It is demonſtrable,” ſaid he, that things 
cannot be otherwiſe than they are : for all things 
having been made for fome end, they muſt ne- 
ceſſarily be intended for the beſt end. Obſerve 
well, that the noſe has been made for carrying 
ſpectacles, therefore we have ſpectacles. The 
legs are viſibly deſigned for ſtockings, aud r 
fore we have ſtockings. Stones have been for 
ed to be hewn, and to make caſtles; — 1d 
wy Lord has a very fine caſtle; and the greateſt 
bacon of the province ought to be the beſt lodgr 
ed. Swine were made to be eat; therefore we 
eat pork all the year round: conſequently, thole 
who have aſſerted, that all is good, have aid ; a 
fooliſh thiog ; they ſhould have ſaid, that all is 
for the beſt,” 

Candidus liſtened attentively, and believed i im- 
plicitly ; for be thought Miſs Cunegonda ex- 
tremely handſome, though he never had the coy- 
rage to tell her ſo. He concluded, that next to 
the good fortune of being born Baron of Thun- 
der-ten-tronckb, the ſecond degree of happineſs 
was that of being Miſs Cunegonda, the third to 
ſee her every day, and the fourth to hear Maſter 
Pangloſs, the greateſt philoſopher of the province, 
and conſequently of the whole world. 
One day Cunegonda having taken a walk hard 
by the caſtle, in a little wood, which they called 
the park, eſpied among the buſhes Doctor Pan- 
gloſs giving a lecture in experimental philoſophy 
to her mother's chambermaid, a little brown 
wench, very handſome, and very tractable. As 
ils Cuncgonda had a ſtrong inclination for the 
A 2 ſciences, 


1 CAN DTD US; or, Chap. r. 


ſciences, ſhe obſerved, without making any noiſe, 
the experiments repeated before her eyes ; ſhe 
ſaw very clearly the ſufficient reafon of the Doc- 
tor, the effects and the cauſes ; and ſhe returned 
grewly flurried, quite penſive, and full of defire 
to be learned ; imagining that ſhe might be a ſuf- 
ficient reaſon for young Candidus, as he alſo 
= wight be the ſame to her. 

In her return to the caftle ſhe met Candidus, 
and bluſhed ; Candidus alſo bluſhed : ſhe wiſhed 
him good-morrow with a faultering voice ; and 
Candidus made anſwer, without knowing what 

de ſaid. The next day, after dinner, as they roſe 
from table, Cunegonda and Candidus happened 
to get behind the ſcreen. Cunegonda dropt her 
handkerchief, and Candidus took it up; ſhe, not 
thinking any harm, took hold of his hand ; and 
the young man, not thinking any harm neither, 
kiſſed the hand of the young lady, with an eager · 
neſs, a ſenſibility, and grace, wholly fingular ; 
their mouths met, their eyes ſparkled, their knees 
trembled, their hands ſtrayed. ——The Baron of 
Thunder-tcn-tronckh happening to paſs cloſe by 
the ſcreen, and obſerving this cauſe and effect, 
kicked Candidus out of the caſtle, with luſty 
blows on the back ſide. Cunegonda fell into a 
ſwoon ; and as ſoon as ſhe came to herſelf, was 
heartily cuffed on the ear by my Lady the Baro- 
neſs. Thus all was thrown into confuſion in the 
fineſt and moſt agreeable caſtle poſſible, 


CHAP, 


Chap. 2. ALL rox THE BEST. 5 


0 H A P. II. 
Mat became of Candidus among the Bulgarians. 


Andidus-being expelled the terreſtrial para- 
diſe, rambled a long while without know- 

— where, in tears lifting up his cyes to heaven, 
and ſometimes turning them towards the fineſt 
of caſtles, which contained the handſomeſt of 
baroneſſes,' He laid himſelf down, without his 
ſupper, in the open fields, between two furrows, 
while the ſnow fell in great flakes. Candidus, 
almoſt frozen to death, crawled next morning ta 
the neighbouring village, which is called #aldbers 
ghoff-trarbk-dikdarf. Having no money, and dy- 
ing with hunger and fatigue, he ſtopped in a de- 
jected poſture before the gate of an inn. Two 
men dreſſed in blue obſerving him in ſuch a ſitu- 
ation, Brother,“ ſays one of them to the other, 
there is a young fellow well built, and of 2 
proper height.” They accoſted Candidus, and 
invited him very ciyilly to dinner. Gentle» 
men,” replied Candidus with an agreeable mo- 
deſty, you do me much honour, but I have no 
money to pay for my ſhot,” O dir,“ ſaid one 
of the blues, ** perſons of your appearance and 
merit never pay any thing : are you not five feet 
five inches high? Tes, Gentlemen, that is my 
height,” returned he, making a bow, * Come, 
Sir, fit down at table: we will not only treat you, 
but we will never let ſuch a man as yqu want 
Money : men are made to aſſiſt one another.“ 
A. 3 „Lou 


6 CANDIDUS; or, Chap. 2. 


* You are in the right,” ſaid Candidus ; © that 
is what Pangloſs always told me, and I ſee plainly 
that every thing is for the beſt.” They intreat 
him to take a few crowns ; which he accepts of, 
and would have given them his note, but they 
refuſed it, and fat down to table. * Do not you 
love tenderly——?” O yes,” replied he, I 
love tenderly Miſs Cunegonda.” „No,“ faid 
one of the gentlemen ; © we aſk you if you do 
not love tenderly the King of the Bulgarians ?” 
% Not at all,” ſaid he, for I never faw him.” 
© How! he is the moſt charming of kings, and 
you muſt drink his health.“ „O, with all my 
heart Gentlemen, and drinks. That is e- 
nough,“ ſaid they to him; “ you are now the 
bulwark, the ſupport, the defender, the hero of 
the Bulgarians ; your fortune is made, and you 
are certain of glory.” Inſtantly they clap him in 
irons, and carry him to the regiment. He is 
made to turn about to the right, and to. the left, 
to draw the rammer, to return the rammer, to 
preſent, to fire, to double; and they give him 
thirty blows with a cudgel. The next day he 
performs his exerciſe not quite ſo bad, and re- 
ceives but twenty blows ; the third day the blows 
are reſtricted to ten, and he is looked upon by his 
fellow-ſoldiers as a kind of prodigy. 

Candidus, quite ſtupified, could not yet well 
conceive: how he had become a hero. One fine 
day in the ſpring it came into his head to take a 
walk, going ſtraight forward, imagining that the 
buman, as well as the animal ſpecies, were inti- 
tled to make whatever uſe they pleaſed of their 

The! ' limbs, 


4 
1 


0 


Chap. 2. ALL rox THE Bes r. 7 


limbs. He had not travelled two leagues, when 
four other heroes, fix feet high, came up to him, 
bound him, and put him into a dungeon, He is 
| aſked by a court-martial, Whether he chuſes to 
be whipped fix and thirty times through the 
whole regiment, or receive at once twelve bullets 
through the forchead ? He in vain argued that 
the will is free, and that he choſe neither the one 
nor the other ; he was obliged to make a choice : 
he therefore reſolved, in virtue of God's gift, 
called free will, xo run the gauntlet ſix and thirty 
times. He underwent this diſcipline twice, - The 
regiment being compoſed of two thouſand men, 
he received four thouſand laſhes, which laid open 
all his muſcles and nerves, from the nape of the 
neck to the poſteriors. As they were proceeding 
to a third operation, Candidus, being quite ſpent, 
begged as a favour that they would be ſo kind as 
to ſhoot him: he obtained his requeſt ; they 
hoodwink him, and make him knecl: the King 
of the Bulgarians paſſing by, inquired into the 
crime of the delinquent z and as this prince was 
a perfon of great penetration, he diſcovered from 
what he heard of Candidus, that he was a young 
metaphyſician, entirely ignorant of the things of 
this world; and he granted him his pardon, with 
a clemency which will be cxtolled in- all hiſtories, 
and throughout all ages. An experienced ſur. 
geon cured Candidus in three weeks, with emol- 
lients preſcribed by no leſs a maſter than Dioſco- 
rides. He had now acquired ſome ſkin, and was 
able ro walk, when the King of the Bulgarians 
gave battle to the King of the Abares.. 


CHAP, 


8 CANDID US; or, Chap. 3. 


9. 


How Candidus made his eſcape from the Bulgarians, 
and what &fterwards befel him. 


Othiog eould- be ſo fine, ſo neat, fo brilli- 
ant, ſo well diſpoſed, as the two armies, 
The trumpets, fifes, hautboys, drums, and the 
cannon, formed an harmony ſuperior to what 
hell could invent. The cannon ſwept off at firſt 
about ſix thouſand men on each fide; afterwards 
the muſketry carried away from the beſt of 
worlds, about nine or ten thouſand raſcals that 
infected its ſurface, The bayonet was likewiſe 
the ſufficient reaſon of the death of ſome thou- 
fands of men, The whole number might amount 
to about thirty thouſand ſouls. Candidus, who 
.trembled like a philoſopher, hid himſelf as well 
as he could during this heroic butchery. 

In ſhort, while each of the two kings were 
cauſing e Deum to be ſung in their reſpective 
camps, he reſolved to go ſomewhere elſe, to rea- 
fon upon the effects and cauſes, He walked over 
heaps of the dead and dying: he came at firſt to 
a neighbouring village belonging to the Abares, 
but found it in aſhes; for it had been burnt by 
the Bulgarians, according to the law of nations. 
Here were to be ſeen old men full of wounds, 
caſting. their eye on their murdered wives, who 
were holding their infants to their bloody breaſts 
Lou might ſee in another place, virgins having 
their bellies ripped vp, after they had fatisfied the 


natural 


Chap. 3. ALL rox THE BEsr. 9 


natural deſires of ſome of thoſe heroes, breath- 
ing out their laſt ſighs, Others half burnt pray- 
ed ear neſily for inſtant death. The whole field 
was covered with brains, and with legs and arms 
lopped off. 

Candidus betook himſelf with full ſpeed to an- 
other village. It belonged to the Bulgarians, and 
had met with the ſame treatment from the Aba- 
rian heroes, Candidus, walking ſtill forward 
over quivering limbs, or through rubbiſh of 
houſes, got at laſt out of the theatre of war, hav- 
ing ſome ſmall quantity of proviſions in his knap- 
ſack, and never forgetting Miſs Cunegonda, His 
provifions failed kim when he arrived in Holland; 
but having heard that every one was rich in that 
country, and that they were Chriſtians, he did 
not doubt but he ſhould be as well treated there 
as he had been in my Lord the Baron's caſtle, 
before he had been expelled thence on account 
of Miſs Cunegonda's ſparkling eyes. 

He aſked alms from ſeveral grave looking per- 
ſons; who all replied, that if he continued that 
trade, they would confine him in a houſe of cor- 
rection, where he ſhould learn to get his bread, 

He“ applied himſelf afterwards to a man, who 
for a whole hour had been diſcourſing on the 
ſubject of charity, before a large aſſembly. This 
orator looking on him aſkance, ſaid ko him, 
% What are you doing here? are you for the 
good cauſe ?” © There is no effect without a 
cauſe,” replied Candidus modeſtly; “ all is ne- 
ceflarily linked, and ordered for the beſt, A ne- 


ceſſity baniſhed me from Cunegonda; a neceflity 


| forced 


wag 


K 


23 


— ͤ — — ane RR: — 
L = * 
- 
C 


— — % 
L . = 


3 


PP 


10 C. AN DID US; or, Chap. 3. 


forced me to . gauntlet; and another ne- 
ceſlity makes me beg for my bread, till 1 can fall 
on a buſinels to earn it. All this could not be 
otherwiſe.” My friend,” ſaid the orator to 
him, “do you believe that che Pope is Anti- 


Chriſt ?”” © I never have heard whether he is or 


not,“ replied Candidus; “ but whether he is, or 
is not, I want bread.” © You do not deſerve to 
eat any,” ſaid the other; © get you gone, you 
rogue, get you gone, you wretch ; never in thy 
life come near me again,” The orator's wife, 
having popped her head out of the window, and 
ſeeing a man who doubted whether the Pope 
was Antichriſt, poured on his head a full —— 
O heavens! to what exceſs does religious zgal 
tranſport the fair ſex ! 

A man who had not been baptized, a good 
Anabaptiſt, named James, ſaw the barbarous 
and ignominious - manner with which they 
treated one of his brethren, a being with two 
feet, unfeathered, and endowed with a rational 
foul. He took him home With him, cleancd 
him, gave him bread and beer, made him a pre- 
ſent of two florins, and offered to teach him the 
method of working in his manufactories of Per- 
ſian ſtuffs, which ace fabricated in Holland. Can- 
didus proſtrating himſelf almoſt at his knees, 
cried out, © Mr. Pangloſs argued well when he 
ſaid, that every thing is for the beſt in this world; 
for I am iofinitely more affected with your very 
great generoſity, than by the hard-heartedneſs of 
that gentleman with the black cloak, and the 
lady his wife,” 

162th. * | Next 


Chap. 4. ALL ron THE Ber, tf 

Next day, as he was taking a walk, he met a 
beggar all covered over with fores, his eyes dead, 
the tip of his noſe ate off, his mouth turned to 
one fide of his face, his teeth black, ſpeaking 
through his throat, tormented with a violent 
congh, and ſpitting a tooth at every attempt to 
draw his breath. 


S HA F. Iv; 


How Candidus met his old maſter of philaſany, Dr. 
Panghſs and what happened to them. 


Andidus, moved more with compaſſion 

than horror, gave this frightful mendicant 

the two florins which he had received of his ho- 

neſt Anabaptiſt-James. The ſpectre fixed his 

eyes attentively upon him, dropt ſome tears, and 

was going to fall upon his neck. Candidus af- 

frighted, drew back. Alas!” ſaid the one 

wretch to the other,“ don't you avy longer know 

your dear Pangloſs?“ „What do Ihear! Is it 

you, my dear maſter ! you in this dreadful con- 

dition ! What misfortune has befallen you ? Why 
, are you no longer in the moſt magnificent of 
caſtles ? What is become of Miſs Cunegonda, 


Ws 6 
2 8 


, 
> the nonpareil of the fair ſex, the maſterpiece of 1 
nature? I have no more ſtrength,” ſaid Pan- Y 
7 \* gloſs. Candidus immediately carried him to the ; 
[7 Anabaptiſt's ſtable, where he gave him a little 8 
e bread to eat. When Pangloſs was refreſhed a , 
little, Well,” ſaid Candidus, * what is become 
it of Cunegonda * She is dead,” replied the { 
other, if 
q 
1 


12 CANDIDUS; or, Chap. 4. 


other. Candidus fainted away at this word : but 
his friend recovered his ſenſes, with a little bad 
vinegar which he found by chance in the ſtable. 
Candidus opening his eyes, cried out, ** Cune- 
gonda is dead ! Ah, beſt of worlds, where art 
thou? But of what diſtemper did the dic? Was 
not this the cauſe, her ſeeing me driven out of 
the caſtle by my Lord, her father, with great 
kicks on the breech?” “ No,” ſaid Pangloſs, 
** ſhe was gutted by ſome Bulgarian foldiers, 
after having been barbarouſly raviſhed: they 
knocked my Lord the Baron on the head, for 
attempting to protect her; my Lady the Baron- 
eſs was cut in pieces; my poor pupil was treated 
preciſely like his ſiſter; and as for the caſtle, 
there is not one ſtone left upon another, nor a 
barn, nor a ſheep, nor a duck, nor a tree, But 
we have been ſufficiently revenged ; for the As» 
barians have done the very ſame thing to a neigh- 
bouring barony, which belonged to a Bulgarian 
Lord.” 

At this diſcourſe Candidus fainted away a ſe- 
cond time: but coming to himſelf, and having 
ſaid all that he ought to ſay, he inquired into the 
cauſe and the effect, and into the ſufficient reaſon 
that had reduced Pangloſs to ſo deplorable a 
condition. Alas,” ſaid the other, it was love; 
love, the comforter of the human race, the pre- 
ſerver of the univerſe, the ſoul of all ſenſible be- 
ings, tender love,” © Alas!” ſaid Candidus, 
e I know this love; the ſovereign of hearts, the 
ſoul of our ſoul; yet it never coſt me more than 


a kiſs, and twenty kicks on the bregch, But how 
could 


Chap. 4. ALL rox Tne Best. 13 


could this charming cauſe produce in you ſo a- 
bominable an effect?“ 

Panglofs made anſwer as follows. O my dear 
Candidus, you knew Paquetta, that pretty atten- 
dant on our Noble Baroneſs : I taſted in her 
arms the delights of paradiſe, which produced 
thoſe torments of hell with/which you ſee me de- 
voured. She was infected, and perhaps ſhe is 
dead. Paquetta received this preſent from a 
learned cordelier, who had traced it to the 
ſource: for he had it from an old counteſs, who 
had received it from a captain of horſe, who was 
indebted for it to a marchioneſs, who got it from 
a page, who had received it from a Jeſuit, who 
in his noviciate had it in a direct line fram one 
of the companions of Chriſtopher Columbus. 
For my part, I will give it to nobody, for I am 
dying.” 

*« O Panglofs!” cried Candidus, what a 
ſtrange genealogy ! Has not the devil given riſe 
to it? “ Not at all,” replied this great man; 
it was a thing indiſpenſable, a neceſſary ingre= 
dient, in the beſt of worlds : for if Columbus 
had not catched, in an ifland of America, this 
diſtemper, which poiſons the ſource of genera- 
rion, frequently hinders generation, and is evi- 
dently oppoſite to the great defign of nature, we 
ſhould have had neither chocolate nor cochineal. 
It may alſo be obſerved, hat to this day, upon 
our continent, this malady, like a point of con- 
troverſy, is peculiar to us. The Turks, the In- 
dians, the Perſians, the Chineſe, the Siameſe, 
and the Japaneſe, know nothing of it yet. But 

B there 


14 CANDID US; or, Chap. 4. 


there is a ſufficient reaſon why they, in their 
turn, ſhould become acqufinted with it, a few 
centuries hence. In the mean time, it has made 
a marvellous progreſs among us, and eſpecially 
in thoſe great armies compoſed of honeſt hire- 


lings well diſciplined, who decide the fate of ſtates; 


for one may be aſſured, that when thirty thou- 
ſand men in a pitched battle fight againſt troops 
equal to them in number, there are about twen- 
ty thouſand of them poxed on each fide.” 
That is ſurpriſing,” ſaid Candidus ; but you 
muſt be cured,” “ Ah! how can 1?“ ſaid Pan- 
gloſs; „1 have not a penny, my friend; and, 
throughout the whole extent of this globe, one 
cannot be let blood, nor get a gliſter, without 
payIng for it, or ſome other perſon doing that 
office for us.” 

This laſt ſpeech determined Candidus, He 
went to throw himſelf at the feet of his charitable 
'Anabaptiſt James; and gave him ſo ſtriking a 
deſcription of the ſtate his friend was reduced to, 
that the good man did not heſitate to entertain 
Dr. Pangloſs; and he had him cured at his own 
expenſe. During the cure, Pangloſs loſt only an 
eye and an ear. As he wrote well, and under- 
ſtood arithmetic perfectly, the Anabaptiſt James 
made him his book-keeper. At the end of two 
months, being obliged to go to Liſbon about the 
affairs of his trade, he took the two philoſophers 
with him in his ſhip, Pangloſs explained to him 
how every thing was ſuch as it could not be bet- 
ter. James was not of this ſentiment, ** Man- 
kind, fſaid he, muſt have a * corrupted 


their 


% ᷣͤ CHAR oy 


Chap. 5. ALL rox THE BEsr. 15 


their nature; for they were not born wolves, 
and yet they are become wolves: God has gi- 
ven them neither cannon of twenty four pounds, 
nor bayonets; and yet they have made cannoa 
and bayonets to deſtroy one another. I might 
throw into the account bankrupts ; and the law, 
which ſeizes on the effects of bankrupts, only to 
bilk the creditors.” All this was indiſpenſable,“ 'I 
replied the one-eyed doctor, and private miſ- 
fortunes conſtitute the general good; ſo that the, 
more private misfortunes there are, the whole is 
the better.” While he was reaſoning, the air, 
grew dark, the winds blew from the four quar- 
ters of the world, and the ſhip was attacked by 

moſt dreadful ſtorm, within fight of the harbour 
of Liſbon, | 


» 2 9 


Tempeſt, ſbiptreck, earthquake, and what became 
of Dr. Pangleſs, Candidus, and Ju the Ana- 


bapti/0. 


O half of the paſſengers being weakened, 
and ready to breathe their laſt, with the in- 
conceivable anguiſh which the rolling of the ſhip- 
conveyed through the nerves and all the hu- 
mours of the body, which were quite diſordered, 
were not capable of being alarmed at the danger 
they were in, The other half uttered cries and 
made prayers : the fails were rent, the maſts 
brokga, and the ſhip became leaky, Every one 
worked. that was able; no body regarded any 

B 2 thing, 


16 AN DID Us; or, Chap. 5. 


thing, and no order was kept. The Anabapiiſt 
contributed his aſſiſtance to work the ſhip. As 
he was upon deck, a furious ſailor rudely ſtruck 
him, and laid him ſprawling on the planks : but 
with the blow he gave him, he himſelf was ſo vi- 
olently jolted, that he tumbled overboard with 
his head foremoſt, and remained fuſpended by a 
piece of a broken maſt, Honeſt James runs to 
his aſſiſtance, and helps him to get up again; but 
in the attempt is thrown into the ſea in the fight 
of the ſailor, who ſuſa red him to periſh without 
deigning to look upon him. Candidus draws 
near, and fees his benefactor one moment emer- 
ging, and the next ſwallowed up for ever. He 
was juſt going to throw himſelf into the ſea after 
bim, when the philoſopher Pangloſs hindered 
bim, by demonſtrating to him, that the road of 
Liſbon had been made on purpole for this Ana- 
bapriſt to be drowned there. While he was prov- 


log this @ priori, the veſſel foundered, and all pe- 


riſhed except Pangloſs, Candidus, and this brute 
of a ſailor, who drowned the virtuous Anabap- 
tiſt. The villain luckily ſwam aſhore, whither 
Pangloſs and Candidus were carried on. a plank, 

When they had recovered themſelves a little, 
they walked towards Liſboa, They had ſome mo- 
ney left, with which they hoped to ſave them- 
ſelves from bugger, after having eſcaped from 
the ſtorm. 

- Scarce had they ſet foot in the city, bewailing 
the death of their bene factor, when they perceiv- 
ed the earth to tremble under their feet, and faw 
the ſea ſwell and foam in the harbour, and daſh 

| to 


Chap. 5. Ax ron THE Brsr. 17 


to pieces the ſhips that were at anchor. The 
whirling flames and aſhes covered the ſtreets and 
public places, the houſes tottered, and their roofs: 
fell under the foundations, and the foundations: 


were ſcattered ; thirty thouſand inhabitants of all 


ages and ſexes were cruſhed to death in the ruins, 
The ſailor whiſtling and ſwearing, ſaid, There 


is ſome booty to be got here.” © What can be 


the ſufficient reaſon of this phænomenon?“ ſaid: 
Pangloſs. This is certainly the laſt day of the 
world,” cried Candidus. The ſailor ran imme- 
diately into the midſt of the ruins, encountered 
death to find money, found it, laid hold of. it, 
got drunk, and having ſlept himſelf ſober, pur- 
chaſed the favours of the firſt: good - natured gilt 


lze met with, upon the ruins of the demoliſhed: 
houſes, and in the midſt of the dying and the 


dead; In the mean time, Pangloſs pulled him 


by the fleeve : & My friend,” ſaid he, this is 


not right ; you treſpaſs againſt- univerſal reaſon,, 
you improve your time badly.“ Brains and 
blood!“ anſwered: the other; I am a ſailor, 
and was born at Batavia; four times I have tram- 
pled upon the crucifix in four voyages to Japan; 
thou muſt go ſeek for thy. man with thy univer- 
ſal reaſon.“ 

Some pieces of ſtone having wounded Candi-- 
dus, he lay ſtretched in the ſtreet, and covered 
with rubbiſh, © Alas!“ ſaid he to Papglols,, 


get me a little wine and oil, I am a-dying.“ 


** This trembling of the earth is no new thing,“ 
anſwered Pangloſs. The city of Lima; in Ame- 


en experienced the ſame concuſſions laſt year; 
B 3. the- 


18 CANDID US; or, Chap. 5. 


the fame cauſe has the fame effects; there is cer- 
rainly a train of ſulphur under the earth from 
Lima to Lifbon.” © Nothing is more probable,” 
ſaid Candidus ; but, for God's ſake, a little oil 
and wine.“ How probable !” replied the phi · 
loſopher ; I maintain that the point is demonſtra- 
ble.” Candidus loſt all ſenfe ; and Pangloſs 
brought him a little water from a neighbouring 
fountain. 

The day following, having found ſome provi- 
ſions in rummaging through the rubbiſh, they 
recruited their ſtrength a little. Afterwards they 
employed themſelves like others in adminiſtcring 
relief to the inhabitants that had eſcaped from 
death. Some citizens that had been relieved by 
them, gave them as good a dinner as could be 
expected amidſt ſuch a diſaſter. It is true that 
the repaſt was mournfuf, and the gueſts watered 
their bread with their tears. But Pangloſs con- 
ſoled them, by affirming that things could not be 
otherwiſe : For,“ faid he, if an univerſe ex- 
iſt, that univerſe muſt neceſſarily be the beſt. 
Now in the beſt of worlds, all is good, all is well, 
all is for the beſt : comfort yourſelves, be merry, 
and let us take a glaſs.“ A litile man clad in 
black, who belonged to the inquiſition, and ſat 
at his fide, took him up very politely, and ſaid, 
In all appearance, the gentleman does not be- 
lieve original ſin; for if all is for the beſt, then 
there has been neither fall nor puniſhment,” 

_« I moſt humbly af& your Excellency's pardon,” 
anſwered Pungloſs ſtill more pelitely ; for the 
— man and the curſe neceſſarily entered into 
the 


Chap. 6: Ar rox TRE Ber, 13 


the beſt of worlds poflible.” <© Then the gentle- 
man does not believe there is liberty,“ ſaid the 
inquiſitor. Your Excellency will excuſe me, 
ſaid Pangloſs ; liberty can conſiſt with-abſolute- 
neceſſity; for it was neceflary we ſhould be free; 
becauſe, in ſhort, the determinate will ——” 

Pangloſs was in the middle of his propoſition, 
when the inquiſitor made a ſignal with the head 
to his footman who waited upon him, to bring 
him a glaſs of port wine: | 


E H A F. VI 


How a fine auto-da-fi was celebrated, to pre vent 
earthquakes ; and how Candidus was whipped. 


Frer the earthquake, which had deſtroyed 

three fourths of Liſbon, the ſages of the 
country could not find any means more effectual. 
to prevent a total deſtruction, than to give the 
people a ſplendid auto-da-fe, It had been decid- 
ed by the univerſity of Coimbra, that the ſpectagle 
of ſome perſons burnt by a flow fire, with great 
ceremony, was an infaliible noſtrum to hinder 
the carth from quaking. 

In conſequence of this refolution, they had 
ſeiæ d a Biſcayner, convicted of having married 
his god-mother, and two Portugueſe, who, in 
eating a pullet, had ſtripped off the lard. After 
dinner they came and ſecured Dr. Pangloſs, and 
his diſciple Candidus, the one for having ſpoke 

too freely, and the other for having heard wich 
an air of approbation. Tbey were both sondu c- 

8 ed 


w CANDIDUS; or, Chap. 6. 


ed to ſeparate apartments, extremely freſh, and: 
never incommoded with the ſun. Eight days 
after they were both clothed with a /anbenito,. 
and had their heads adorned with paper mitres. 
Candidus's mitre and ſanbenito were painted with 
inverted flames, and with devils that had neither 
tails nor claws :. but Pangloſs's devils had claws 
and tails, and the flames were pointed upwards. Be- 
ing thus dreſſed, they marched in proceſſion, and 
heard a very pathetic ſermon, followed. with fine 
muſic on a ſqueaking organ, Candidus was 
whipped in cadence, while they were ſinging ; 
the Biſcayner, and the two men who would not 
eat lard, were burat ; and Pangloſs, though it 
was contrary to cuſtom, was hanged. The ſame 
day the earth ſhook ancw with a moſt dreadful 
noiſe. | 

Candidus, affrighted, interdicted, aſtoniſhed, 
all bloody, all panting, ſaid to himſelf, “ If this. 
is the beſt of poſſible worlds, what then are the. 
reſt? Suppoſing I had not been whipped, I have. 
been among the Bulgarians :- but, O my dear 
Pangloſs ! thou greateſt of philoſophers, that it. 
ſhould be my fate to ſee you hanged without. 
knowing for what! O my dear Anabaptiſt ! thou. 
beſt of men, that it ſhould be thy fate to be 
drowned in the harbour! O Miſs Cunegonda! 
the jewel of ladies, that it ſhould be thy fate to- 
have thy belly ript up?“ 
He returned, with difficulty ſupporting himſelf 
after being lectured, whipped, abſolved, and 
bleſſed, when an old woman accoſted him, and 


ſaid, „ Child, take courage, and follow me.“ 
16 CHAP- 


Chap. 7. ALL ror THE BesrT, 21 


c H AP. vn. 


How an oll woman took care of Candidus, and hau 
he found the object he loved, 


Andidus did not take courage, but followed 

the old woman into a ruiaated houſe. She 

gave him a pot of pomatum to anoint himſelf, 
left him ſomething to eat and drink, and ſhewed 
him a very neat little bed, near which was a com- 
plete ſuit of cloaths, © Eat, drink, and fleep,” 
ſaid the to him, and may our Lady of Mocha, 
our Lord St. Antony of Padua, and our Lord 
St. James of Compoſtella, take care of you. I 
will be back to morrow.” Candidus aſtoniſhed 
at all he had ſeen, at all he had ſuffered, and till 
more at the charity of the old woman, offered to 
kiſs her hand. You muſt not kiſs my hand,” 
ſaid the old woman; I will be back to-morrow. 
Rub yourſelf with the pomatum, eat and take 
reſt,” P % 
Candidus, notwuhſtanding ſo many mis for- 
tunes, ate, and went to flzep. Next morning the 
old woman brought bim his breakfaſt, looked at 
his back, and rubbed it herſelf with another oint- 
ment: ſhe afterwards brought him his dinner; 
and ſhe returned at night, and brought him his 
ſupper, The day following ſhe performed the 
ſame ceremonies. ©* Who are you?” would Can- 
didus always fay to her: Wha has inſpired 
you with ſo much goodneſs ? What thanks can 
I render you?“ The good woman made him no 
anſwer ; 


22 CAN DID Us; or, Chap. 7. 


anſwer; ſhe returned in the evening, but brought 
him no ſupper. ** Come along with me,” ſaid 
ſhe, © and ſay not a word.“ She took him by 
the arm, and walked with him into the country 
about a quarter of a mile: they arrived at a 
houſe that ſtood by itſelf, ſurrounded with gar- 
dens and canals, The old woman knocked at a 
little door; which being opened, ſhe conducted 
Candidus by a private ſt4ir-caſe into a gilded clo - 
ſet, and leaving him on a brocade couch, ſhut 
the door, and went her way, Candidus thought 
he was in a revery, and looked upon all his life 
as an unlucky dream, but on the preſent moment 
as an agreeable dream, 

| The old woman returned very ſoon, Aber 
ing with difficulty a woman trembling, of a ma- 
jeſtic port, glittering with jewels, and covered 
with a veil. Take off chat veil,” ſaid the old 
woman to Candidus. The young man approaches, 
and takes off the veil with a trembiing hand. 
What joy! what ſurpriſe! he thought he ſaw 
Miſs Cunegonda ; he ſaw her indeed, it was ſhe 
herſelf. His ſtrength fails him, he cannot utter 
a word, but falls down at her feet. Cunegonda 
falls upon the carpet, The old woman applics 
aromatic waters ; they recover their ſenſes, and 
ſpeak to one another. At firſt their words were. 
imperfect, their queſtions and anſwers were car- 
ried on croſs wife, with fighs, tears, and cries. 
The old woman recommended to them to make 
leſs noiſe, and then left them to themſelves, 
. © How ! is it you!“ ſaid Candidus to her: Are 
vou ſtill alive ? do I find you again in Portugal ? 
Was 


Chap. 7. ALL x0R THE BesrT, 23 


was you not raviſhed then ? was not your belly 
ripped up, as the philoſopher Pangloſs aſſured 
me?” © Yes, the caſe. was ſo,” ſaid the lovely 
Cunegonda; ** but death does not always follow 
from theſe two accidents.” *© But your father 
and mother! were not they killed?“ “It is but 
too true,” anſwered Cunegonda, weeping. © And 
your brother?“ “My brother was killed too.“ 
« And why are you in Portgual ? and how did 
you know that I was here? and by what ſtrange 
adventure did you contrive to bring ne to this 
houſes” © I will tell you all that,” replied the 
lady : ** but firſt you muſt inform me of all that 
has happened to you ſince the harmleſs kiſs you 
gave me, and the rude kicking which you receiy- 
ed.“ ; | 

Candidus obeyed her with the moſt profound 
reſpect; and though he was forbidden to ſpeak, 
though his voice was weak and faltering, and 


though his back ſtill pained hi.a, yet he related * 


to her, in the moſt genuine manner, every thing 


that had befallen him fince the moment of their 


ſeparation. Cunegond#lifted up her eyes to hea- 
ven; ſhe ſhed tears at the death of the good A- 
nabaptiſt, and of Pangloſs; after which ſhe ſpoke 
in the following terms to Candidus, who loſt not 
a word, but dwelt upon her eyes as if he would 
devour them, * 


I 
1 
F 
. 
5 
4 
N 
| 
- = 
Ly 


\ © ebvany 2,0 
— 9 PEE 


24 CAN DID Vs; or, Chap. 8. 


. 


The hiſtory of Cunegonda. 


« T Was in my bed and faſt aſleep, when it 

pleaſed heaven to ſend the Bulgarians to 
our fine caſtle of Thunder-ten-tronckh: they 
murdered my father and my brother, and cut my 
mother in pieces. A huge Bulgarian, fix feet 
high, perceiving the fight had deprived me of 
my ſenſes, ſet himſelf to raviſh me. This abuſe 
made me come to myſelf; I recovered my ſenſes, 
I cried, I ftruggled, I bit, I feratched, I wanted 
to tear out the huge Bulgarian's eyes, not conſi · 
dering that what had happened in my father's 
caſtle was a common thing in war. The brute 
gave me a cut with his hanger in the left flank, 
the mark of which I ſtill bear about me. Ah 
I hope I ſhall ſee it,” ſaid the ſimple Candidus. 
« You hall,” anſwered Cunegonda; but let 
us continue. Do ſo,” replied Candidus. 

She then reſumed the thread of her ſtory in 
this manner. A Bulgarian captain came in, and 
faw me bleeding; but the ſoldier was not at all 
diſconcerted, 'The captain flew into a paſſion at 
the little reſpect the brute ſhewed kim, and kill- 
ed him upon my body. He then cauſed me to 
be dreſſed, and carried me as a priſoner of war 
to his own quarters, I waſhed the little linen he 
had, and dreſſed his viftuals. He found me ve- 


ry pretty, I muſt ſay it; and I cannot deny but 
he 


Chap. 8. 


he was well ſhaped, and that he had a white, ſoft 
ſKin; but otherwiſe he had litile ſenſe or philo- 
ſophy ; one might evidently fee that he was not 
bred under Dr. Pangloſs. At the end of three 
months having loſt all his money, and being 
grown out of conceit with me, he fold me to a 
Jew, named Don [fachar, who traded to Holland 
and Portugal, and who had a moſt violent paſſion 
for women. This Jew laid cloſe fiege to my per- 
ſon, but could not triumph over me: I have re- 
ſiſted him better than I did the Bulgarian ſoldier. 
A woman of honour may be raviſhed once, but 
her virtue gathers ſtrength from ſuch rudeneſs, 
The Jew, in order to render me more tractable, 
brought me to this country-houſe that you ſee, 
I always imagined hitherto, that no place on earth 
was ſo fine as the caſtle of Thunder-ten-tronckh; 
but I am now undeceived, 

The grand inquiſitor obſerving me one day at 
maſs, ogled me pretty much, and got notice ſent 
me that he wanted ro ſpeak with me upon pri- 
vate buſineſs. Being conducted to his place, I 
informed him of my birth; upon which he re- 
preſented to me, how much it was below my fa. 
mily to belong to an Iiraelite. A propoſal was 
then made by him to Don Iffachar, to yield me 
up to my Lord. But Don Iflachar, wha is the 
court-banker, and a man of credit, would not 
come into his meaſures, The inquiſitor threat- 
ened him with an auto-da-fe. At laſt my Jew, 
being affrighted, concluded a bargain, by which 
the houſe and myſelf ſhould belong to them both 
in common ; that the Jew ſhould haye Monday, 

of See: Friday, 


ALL FOR THE Bs r. 25 


26 SAN DID Us; or, Chap. 8. 


Friday, and Saturday, and the inquiſitor the o- 
ther days of the weck. This agreement has now 
ſubliſted fix months. It has not however been 
without quarrels; for it has been often diſputed 
whether vatnrday night or Sunday belonged to 
the old, or to the new law, For my part, I have 
hitherto reſiſted them both; and I believe that 
this is the reaſon I am ſtill beloved by them. 

At length, to avert the ſcourge of earthquakes, 
and to intimidate Don Iflachar, it pleaſed his 
Lordſhip the Inquiſitor tocclebrate an auto-da-fe. 
He did me the honour to invite me to it. I got 
a very fine ſeat; and the ladies were ſerved with 
refreſhments between the maſs aad the execution. 
J was really ſeized with horror at ſeeing them 
bura the two Jews, and the honeſt Biſcayner who 


married his godmother : but how great was my | 


ſurpriſe, my conſternation, my anguiſh, when I 
ſaw in a ſanbenito and mitre a perſon that ſome- 
what reſembled Pangloſs l I rubbed my eyes, I 
looked upon him very attentively, and I faw him 
hanged : I fell into a ſwoon; and ſcarce had I 
recovered my ſenſes, when I ſaw you ſtripped 
ſtark naked; this was the. height of horror, 
conſternation, grief, and deſpair, I will fraokly 


own to you, that your ſkin is ſtill whiter, and of 


of a better complexion than that of my Bulgari- 
an captain. This fight increaſed all the ſenſa- 
tions that oppreſied and diſtracted my ſoul. I 
cried out, I was going to ſay, Stop, barbarians ; 
but my voice failed me, and my cries would have 
been to no purpoſe, When you had been ſevere- 
| | y 


— 


Chap. 8. ALL For THz Besr, 27 


ly whipped, How is it poſſible, faid I, that the 
charming Candidus, and the ſage Pangloſs, ſhould 
both be at Lisbon, the one to receive a hundred 


| lathes, and the other to be hanged by order of 


my Lord the Inquiſitor, by whom I am greatly 
beloved ? Pangloſs certainly deccived me moſt 
cruelly, when he told, that every thing is for the 
beſt in the world, 

Being agitated, aſtoniſhed, ſometimes beſide 
myſelf, and ſometimes ready to die with weak- 
neſs, I had my head filled with the maſſacre of 
my father, my mother, and my brother; the in- 
ſolence of the vile Bulgarian ſoldier, the ſtab he 
gave me with his hanger ; my abject ſervitude, 
and acting as cook to the Bulgarian captain; the 


raſcal Don Iflachar, my abominable inquiſitor, 


the execution of Dr. Pangloſs, the grand Miſerere 
on the organ while you was whipped, and eſpe- 


- Cially the kiſs I gave you behind the ſcreen, the 


laſt day I ſaw you. I praiſed the Lord for hav- 
ing reſtored you to me after ſo many trials, 1 
charged my old woman to take care of you, and 
to bring you hither as ſoon as ſhe could. She 
has executed her commiſſion very well; I have 
taſted the inexpreſſible pleaſure of ſeeing you, 
hearing you, and ſpeaking to you. - You muſt 
have a ravenous appetite by this time; I am hun- 
ory myſelf too; let us therefore fit down to ſup · 


r. 

On this they both ſat down to table; and af- 
ter ſupper they ſeated themſelves on the fine 
couch which was mentioned before. They were 
there when Signor Don Iſſachar, one of the ma- 

C 2 ſters. 


28 CAN DID US; or, Cbap. 9. 


ſters of the hapſe, came thither. It was his ſab- 
bath-day; and he came to enjoy his right, and 
to expreſs his tender love. 


C H A P. IX. 


I hat happened to Cunegonda, Candidus, the grand 
inquiſitor, and the Jew, 


HIS Iſſachar was the moſt choleric Hebrew 

that had been ſeen in Iſrael fince the cap - 
tivity in Babylon. © What,” ſays he, you bitch 
of a Galilean, is it not enough to take in Maſter 
inquiſitor? but muſt this varlet alſo ſhare with 
me ?” When he had thus ſpoke, he drew out a 
long poinard, which he always carried about him, 
and not ſuſpecting that his antagoniſt had any 
arms, fell upon Candidus; but our honeſt Weſt- 
phalian had received a fine fword from the old 
woman, along with his full ſuit, He drew his 
rapier, and though he had the moſt agreeable 
temper, he laid the Iſraelite dead upon the ſpot, 
at the feet of Cunegonda. 

„Holy Virgin!” cried the ; “ what will be- 
come of us? a man murdered in my apartment ! 
Tf the peace-officer come, we are ruined,” “ If 
Pangloſs had not been hanged,” ſaid Candidus, 
« he would have given us excellent advice in this 
emergenty ; for he was a great philoſopher. In 
this extremity let us conſult rhe old woman,” — 
She was a very prudent woman, and began to give 
her advice, when another little door opened. It 


was 


Chap. 9. ALL rox THE BesT. 29 


was now about one o' clock in the morning, and 
conſequenily the beginning of Sunday. This day 
was allotted to my Lord the Inquititor, Entering, 
he ſaw the whipped Candidus with a ſword in his 


band, a dead body ſtretched out on the floor, 


Cunegonda i in a mighty fright, and the old wo- 
man giving advice. 

See now what paſſed in Candidus's mind at this 
inſtant, and how he reaſoned. ** If this holy man 
calls in aſſiſtance, he will infallibly have me burnt; 
he may treat Cunigonda in the fame manner; he 
has cauſed me be whipped without mercy ; he is 
my rival; I am in the way of killing, there is no 
time to heſitate.” This reaſoning was clear and 
precipitate ; and, without giving time to the in- 


quiſitor to recover from his ſurpriſe, he run him 


through the body, and laid him by the fide of the 
Jew. *. Bchold, here is a ſecond killed,” ſail \ 
Cunegonda; © there is no pardon for us; we 
are excommunicated, our laſt hour is come. 
How could you, that was born ſo gentle, kill in 
two minutes time a Jew and a prelate?“ % My 
fair Lady,” anſwered Candidns, * when one is 
in love, jealous, and whipped by the inquiſition, 
one does not know what one docs.” 

The old woman then put in her word, and ſaid; 
There are three Andalufian horſes in the ſtable,, 
with their ſaddles and bridles, which the gallant 
Candidus may get ready; Madam has ſome moi> 


dores and jewels ;. let us get on horſeback with- 


out delay, though I cannot fir but on one but- 
tock ; and let us go to Cadiz : it is the fineſt time 
3 in 


30 CANDID US; or, Chap. 10. 


in che world, and very pleaſant it is to traveb in 
the cool of the night,” 

Candidus immediately ſaddled the three horſes, 
Cunegonda, the old woman, and he, travelled 
thirty miles on a ſtretch. While they were ma» 
king the beſt of their way, the holy Hermandad 
came to the houſe ; they buried my Lord in a 
magnificent church, and' threw Idachar upon a 
lay- ſtall. 

Candidus, Cunegonda, and the old woman, had 
nov got to the little town of Avacena, in the mid - 
dle of the mountains of Sierra Morena; - and 
ſpoke as follows in an inn. 


Col AP . 


In what diſtreſs Candidus, Cunegonda, and the old 
woman, arrived at Cadiz, and of their imbark- 
ation. | 5 


10 HO could have robbed me of my piſ- 

toles and my jewels ?” ſaid Cunegon- 
da, with tears in ber eyes: “ what ſhall we live 
on? what ſhall we do? where ſhall I 6nd inquiſi- 
tors and Jews to give me more?” Alas,“ ſaid 
the old woman, I ſtrongly ſuſpect a reverend 
Father Cordelier, who lay yeſterday in the ſame 
ina with us at Badajos. God preſerve me from 
judging raſhly, but he came twice into our cham- 
ber, and went away a long time before us.” 
« Ah!” ſaid Candidus, the good Pangloſs has 
often demonſtrated to me, that the goods of the 
earth 


Chap. 16, ALL ror THE Brsr. 2 


earth are common to all men, and that every one 
has an equal right to them. According to theſe 
principles, the Cordelier ought to have left ug 
enough to carry us to our journey's end. Have 
you nothing at all left then, my pretty. Cunegon- 
da?“ Not a farthing,” ſaid.ſhe. ** What courſe 
ſhall we take?” ſaid Candidus, ** Let us fell one 
of the horſes,” ſaid the old woman; I will 
mount behind Miſs, though LI can hold myſelf ons 
ly on one buttock, and we ſhall reach Cadiz.” 

In the ſame inn. was a Benedictine prior, who 
bought the horſe very cheap. Candidus, Cune- 
gonda, and the old woman, paſſed through Lu · 
cena, Chillas, and Lebrixa, and arrived at length 
at Cadiz, They were fitting out a fleet, and aſ- 
ſembling troops, for bringing to reaſon the reve- 
rend fathers the Jeſuits of Paraguay, who were 
accuſed of having: excited one. of their hordes, 
near the. city of St. Sacrement, to. revolt from 
their allegiance to the Kings of Spain and Portu- 
gal. Candidus having. ſerved. among the. Bulga- 
rians, performed the exerciſe. of that nation be- 
ſore the commander of this little army, with ſo 
much grace, celerity, addreſs, dexterity, and. agi- 
lity,. that he gave him the command of a compa- 
ny of infantry. Being now made a captain, he 


imbarked with Miſs Cunegonda, the old woman, 


two valets, and the two Andalufian hof ſes, which 
had belonged to his Lordſhip the grand Inquiſi- 
tor of Portugal. 

During the whole voyage, they. _ a great 


deal on the philoſopy of poor Pangloſs. We 


are going to another world,“ faid Candidus; it 
bs | is 


22 CANDID Us; or, Chap. 10. 


is there without doubt that every thing is beſt, 
For it muſt be confeſſed, that one has reaſon to 
be a little uneaſy at what paſſeth in our world, 
with re ſpect both to phyſics and ethics.” © I love 
you with all my heart,” faid Cunegonda ; ** but 
my mind is ſtill terrified at what I have ſeen and 
experienced.“ All will be well,” replied Can- 
didus; “the ſea of the new world is already pre- 
ferable to thoſe of our Europe; it is more calm, 
and the winds are more conſtant, Certainly the 
new world is the beſt of all poſſible worlds.“ 
„God grant it,” ſaid Cunegonda ; © but I have 
deen fo terribly unfcetunare in mine, that my 
heart is almoſt ſhut againſt hope.“ You com- 
plain indeed,” faid the old woman to them ; 
& alas! you have not met with ſuch misfortunes 
as I have.” 

Cunegonda was almoſt ready to fall a wb 
and thought the old woman very comical, for 
pretending to be more unfortunate than herſelf. 
„ Alas! my good dame,” ſaid Cunegonda, un- 
leſs you had been raviſhed by two Bulgarians, 
had received two cuts with a hanger in your bel- 
Iy, had had two caſtles demoliſhed, had had two 
fathers and two mothers murdered, and had ſeen 
two lovers whipped at an auto-da-fe, I cannot 
fee how you could have the advantage of me. 
Add to this, that I was born a baroneſs, with 
feventy-two armorial quarterings, and that I have 
deen a cook-maid.“ My Lady,” anſwered the 
old woman, you know nothing of my extraction; 

and were I to ſhew you my backſide, you would 


not talk as 2 do, but would fuſpend your qudg- 
ment.“ 


Chap. 11. ALL rox THE Bst. 33 


ment,” This diſcourſe having raiſcd an inſatiable 
curioſity in the minds of Cunegonda and Candi- 
dus, the old woman related her ſtory in the fol- 
lowing terms, 


COR IE 
The hi//ory of the old woman. 


Had not always eyes bleared, and bordered 
with red; my noſe has not always touched 
my chin; nor have I been always a ſervant, 'I 
am the daughter of Pope Urban X. and of the 
Princeſs of Paleſtrina. I was brought up till I 
was fourteen, in à palace to which all the caſtles 


of your German barons would not have ferved 


for ſtables ; and one of my robes coſt more than 
all the magnificence in Weſtphalia, I increaſed 
in beauty, in charms, and in fine accompliſh- 


meats, in the very centre of pleaſures, of homa- 


ges, and of high expectations. I now began to 
captivate every heart. My neck was ſo formed, 
and what a neck ! white, firm, and ſhaped like 
that of the Venus of Medicis. And what eyes | 
what eyelids! what fine Black eyebrows ! what 
flames ſparkled from my eyeballs, and, as the 
poets of our country told me, eclipſed the twibk- 
ling of the ſtars | The n aids who dreſſed and un · 
dreſſed me, fell into an ecſtaſy when they viewed. 
me before and behind, and all the men would 
have been glad to have been in their places. 

I was betrothed to a prince, the ſovereign of 
Maſſa Carara, What a prince | as handſome as 
| my ſelf, 


34 CAN DID us; or, Chap./11, 


myſelf, made up of ſweetneſs and charms, of a 
witty mind, and burning with love. I loved him, 
as one uſes to do for the firſt time, with idolatry, 
with tranſport, Preparations were made for our 
nuptials. The pomp and magnificence were in- 
conceivable; nothing but continual feaſts, carou- 
fals, and operas; and all Italy made ſonnets upon 
me, of which there was ſcarce one tolerable. I 
was juſt on the point of reaching the ſummit of 
happineſs, when an old marchioneſs, who had 
been miſtreſs to my prince, invited bim to drink 
chocolate at her houſe. He died there in leſs 
than two hours time in terrible convulſions, But 
this is only a mere trifle. My mother in deſpair, 
and yet leſs afflicted than I, refolved to retreat 
for ſome time from ſo mournful a place, She 
had a very fine ſeat near Gaietta, We imbarked 
on board a-galley of the country, gilt like the 
altar of Sr. Peter at Rome, We were ſcarce out 
at ſea, when a corſair of Sallee fell upon us, and 
boarded us. Our ſoldiers defended themſelves 
like thoſe of the Pope; they all fell down upon 
their knees, after throwing away their arms, and 
aſked abſolution in articuls mortis of the corſair, 
They inſtantly ſtripped us as naked as mon- 
keys; my mother, our maids of honour, and 
myſelf” too, meeting with no better uſage. It is 
a very ſurpriſing thing with what expedition theſe 
gentry undreſs people. But what ſurpriſed me 
moſt was, that they ſhould put their fingers into 
a place, into which we women feldom ſuffer any 
thing to enter but pipes. This ceremony appear- 
ed very ſtrange to me; but ſo we judge of every 
| thing 


__ ns "AO ... ⁵· SA. 


Clap, tt. ALL ron THE Brsr. 35 


thing that is not produced n Gi/r own country. 
I ſoon learned, however, thai ii was to ſearch 
whether we had not conccaled ſome of our jewels 
there. It is a cuſtom eſtabliſhed time out of mind 
among civilized nations that ſcour the fea, I 
know that the gentlemen the religious knights of 
Malta never omit to practiſe it, when they take 
Turks of either ſex. It is one of the laws of na- 
tions, from which they never deviate. 

I need not tell you how great a hardſhip it is 
for a young princeſs and her mother to be car- 
ried ſlaves to Morocco. You may eaſily form a 
notion of all that we muſt ſuffer on board the 
veſſel of the corſair. My mother was ſtill very 
handſome ; our maids of honour, nay our plain 
chambermaids, had more charms than are to be 
found throughout all Africa. As for myſelf, I 
was all attraction, I was all beauty, and all charms, 
nay more, I was a virgin. However, I was not 
one long : this flower, which had been reſerved 
for the accompliſhed Prince of Maſſa Carara, was 
taken from me by the captain of the corſair. He 
was an ugly negro, but fancied he did me a great 
deal of honour. Indeed her Highneſs the Prin- 
ceſs of Paleſtrina and myſelf muſt have been very 
ſtrong to reſiſt all the violence we met with till 
our arrival at Morocco. But let me paſs over 
that : theſe are ſuch common things, that they 
are ſcarce worth the mentioning. 

Morocco was overflowed with blood when we 
arrived there, Fifty ſons of the Emperor Muley 
I\mac} had each their adherents : this produced 
in effect fifty civil wars, of blacks againſt blacks, 

of 


36 CANDID US; or, Chap. it. 


of blacks againſt tawnies, of tawnics againſt 
tawnics, and of mulattoes againſt mulattoes, In 
a word, there was one continued carnage all over 
che empire. 

No ſooner were we landed, than the blacks of 
a party adverſaries to that of my corſair made an 
attempt to rob him of his booty. Next to the 
jewels and the gold, we were the moſt valuable 
things he had. I was here witneſs to ſuch a bat - 
tle as you never ſaw in your European climates. 
The people of the north have not ſo much fire in 
their blood; nor have they that raging paſſion” 
for women that is ſo common in Africa, One 
would think that you Europeans had nothing but 
milk in your veins; but it is vitriol and fire that 
runs in thoſe of the inhabitants of Mount Atlas, 
and the neighbouring countries. They fought 
with the fury of lions, tygers, and ſerpents of 
the country, to know who ſhould have us. A 
moor ſeized my mother by the right arm, N80 
my captain's lieutenant held her by the left; 
mooriſh ſoldier then took hold of her by one 4 
and our pirates held her by the other. All our 
women found themſelves almoſt in a moment ſei · 
zed thus by four ſoldiers. My captain kept me 
concealed at his back. He bad a ſcimitar in his 
band, and killed every one that oppoſed his fury. 
In ſhort, I ſaw all our Italian women, and my 
mother, torn in pieces, hacked and mangled by 
the brutes that fought for. them. My fellow- 
priſoners, thoſe who had taken them, ſoldiers, 
failors, -blacks, : whites, mula:toes, and laſtly my 
captain himſelf, were all killed ; and I rgmained 
157 | 3 expiring 


e lee, oo 


Chap. 11. ALL rox THE BesT, 37 


expiring upon a heap of dead bodies. Theſe bar- 
barous ſcenes extended, as every one knows, over 
more than three hundred leagues, without ever 
omitting the five e a- day ordained by Ma · 
homet. 

I diſengaged myſelf whh great difficulty from 
the weight of ſo many bloody carcaſes heaped up · 
on me, and made a ſhift to crawl to a large 
orange-tree on the bank of a neighbouring rivu · 
let; where I fell down oppreſſed with fear, fa- 
tigue, horror, deſpair, and hunger. Soon after 
my ſenſes, being overpowered, were locked up 
in a fleep, which reſembled a fit rather than 
ſleep. I was in this ſtate of weakneſs and inſenſi- 
bility, between death and life, when I felt myſelf 
preſſed by ſomething that moved upon my body. 
I opened mine eyes, .and ſaw a white, man of. a 
very good aſpect, who ſighed, and muttered theſe 


words between his teeth, O che ſciagura.' d'eſſere 


ſenza coglioni ! i. e. ** O this misfortune of * 
Wan of teſticles * * 


* 8 6 59 TY 


1 4306: 3d £2. ls 
The ſequel of the old woman's adventures. 


3 and wrpnfpones to hear ay ban 


country language, and not leis ſurprited at 
the words uttered by the man, I made anſwer, 


that there might be far greater misfortunes than 
thoſe he complained of. I then gave him a ſhort 
hint of the horrid ſcenes, I had undergone, and 
relapſed again into a ſwoon. He carried me to 

vt BH 174 D | a 


1 - CANDIDVUS; or Chap. 12. 


neighbouring houſe, cauſed me be put to bed, 
we me ſomething to cat, waited upon me, com- 
rted and flattered me, and ſaid, that he had 
ver ſcen any one ſo handfome as I, and that 
> never regretted ſo much the loſs of what no 
ie could reſtore to him. I was born at 
_ ſaid he, where they caſtrate two or 
ree thouſand children every year; ſome die of 
e operation, others acquire a finer voice than 
at of any woman, and others become ſovereigns 
* ſtates. This operation was performed on me 
ith great ſucceſs, and I became a finger in the 
ape)'of her Highneſs the Prince's of Paleftri- 
.“ % Of my mother!“ cried J. Of your 
other!“ cried he again, ſhedding tears. What! 
e yon that young princeſs, whom 1 had the 
re of bringing up till ſhe was fix years old, and 
xo promifed even then to be as handſome as 
u are now? lt is I myſelf: my mother 
s about four hundred paces from hence, cut 
o four quarters, under a heap of dead bodies.” 
I related to him all that had befallen me ; he 
-ewiſe told me his adventures; and informed 
e, that he was Tent to the King of Morocco, by 
chriſtian power, to conclude a treaty with that 
onarch, by which he was to furniſh bim with 
„nns artillery, and-ſhips, to enable him 
No Ger gr, the commerce of other Chriſ- 
y commiſſion is fulfilled,”” faid the 
Mey durch to me, I am going to embark 
Ceuta, and will carry you to Italy, But O my 
is fortune in wanting teſticles |? 4 
F thanke@ him wich the tears n bot 
ſtead of conducting me to Italy, he carried me 
to 


Chap. 12. ALL rox THE Besr. 39 


to Algiers, and fold me to the Dey of that pro- 
vince. Scarce was I fold, when the plague, which 
had made the tour of Africa, Afia, and Eu- 
rope, broke out at Algiers with great fury, You 
have ſeen. carthquakes ; but pray Miſs, have 
you ever had the plague | ** Never,” rope the 
Baroneſs, . 

If you had had it, replied the old woman, you 
would confeſs that it is far more terrible than an 
earthquake. It is very common in Africa; I was 
ſeized with ir. Figure to yourſelf the ſituation 
of a Pope's daughter, about fifteen years of age, 
who, in the ſpace of three months, had under- 
gone poverty and flavery, had been raviſhed al- 
moſt every day, bad ſeen her mother cut into 
four quargers, had experienced both famine and 
war, and was dying of the plague at Algiers. I 
did not die for all hat. But my eunuch, and 
the Dey, and almoſt all the ſeraglio at Algiers, 


Wheo the firſt ravages of this dreadful peſti- 
lence were over, they ſold the ſlaves belonging to 


the Dey. A merchant purchaſed me, and car - 


ried me to Tunis. There be ſold me to another 
merchant, who ſold me again at Tripoli ; from 
Tripoli I was fold again at Alexandria; from 
Alexandria I was ſold again at Smyrna; and from 


Smyrna at Conſtantinople. At laſt I became the 
property of an aga of the Janifſaries 3 who'was 
ſoon after ordered to go to the defence of Azoph, 


thea beſieged by the Ruſſians, - - 

The aga, who was a man of great g 

$4 * with him, and 
2 


— 


” | 


—- 


40 CAN DID Us; er, Chap. 12. 


us in a ſmall fort on the Palus Mæotis, under 
the guard of two black eunuchs and twenty fol. 
diers. We killed a great number of the Ruſſians, 
who returned the compliment with intereſt; Aſoph 
was put to fire and ſword, and no regard was 
paid to age or ſex. There remained only our 
little fort; which the enemy reſolved to reduce 
by famine. The twenty Janiflaries had ſworn 
hat they would never ſurrender. The extremi- 
ties of ſamine to which they were reduced, obli- 
ged them to eat our two eunuchs, for fear of 
violating their oath; and a few days 2 _y 
8 to devour the women. 

- We had an Iman, a very religious and n 
n fle preached an excellent ſermon to them, 
in which he diſſuaded them from killing us all 
at once. Cut off only one of the buttoc ks of 
theſe ladies,“ ſaid he, and you will fare ex- 
tremely well: if you muſt come to it again, 
you will have the ſame entertainment a few days 
hence: Heaven will bleſs you for ſo charitable 
an action, and you will find relief.“ F000 

As he had an eloquent tongue, he eaſily per- 
ſanded them, 'This horrible operation was per- 
formed upon us; and the Iman applied the fame 
balſam to us that is applied to children after they 
are circumciſed, We vere all ready to die. 
The Janiſſaries had ſcarce finiſhed the repaſt 
with which we had fupplied them, when the Ruſ- 
fans came in flat bottomed boats; and not a 
ſingle Janiflary eſcaped. The Ruſſians ſhewed 
no concern about the condition we were in. As 


there are French ſurgeons in every country,” one 
4 | — — N of 


G 


1 


Chap. 12. ALL FOR THE Bes. 48 


of them who was a perſon of very great ſkill, 
took us under his care and cured us; and I will 
remember it all my life, that when my wounds 
were: pretty well healed, he: made me amorous 
propoſals, To be ſhort, he bid us all comfort 
ourſelves; and aſſured us that the like misfortune 
had happened in ſeveral fieges ; and that it was 
the law of waer. ; Wr 
S to walk, 
they were obliged to go to Moſcow. I fell to the 
lot of a Boyard, who made me his gardener, and 
gave me twenty laſhes with his whip every day. 
But my Lord having been broke on the wheel, 
within two years after, along with thirty more 
Boyards, on account of ſome buſtle at court, I 
availed myſelf of this-event, and made my cſcape; 
After traverſing all Ruffia, I was à long time 
ſervant to an innkeeper at Riga, afterwards at 
Roſtock, Wiſmar, Leipfic, Caſſel, Utrecht, Ley · 
den, the Hague, and Rotterdam. I-grew-old in 
miſery and diſgrace, having only one half of my 
poſteriots, but ſtill remembering that I was a 
Pope's daughter. A hundred times have d had 
thoughts of killing myſelf; but ſtill I was fond 
of life. This ridiculous weakneſs is perhaps one 
of our moſt melancholy foibles, * For can any 
thing be more ſtupid, han to be debrops of g- 
tinually carrying a burden, which one has a 
mind to throw down on the ground ? to dread 
* and, and yet preſerve it ? in a word. 
«58 wy the ſerpent that devours us, till he has 
gua\ var very heart? (HD); <2 15-49 34413 £28 
Ts MM; 7; 194 23 1 u on 1 


» * 
4 * PS 


o "> 
| 


42 CANDIDUS; or, Chap, 13. 


In the countries through which it has been my 


fate to travel, and in che inns where I have been 
a ſervant, I have ſeen a prodigious number of 
people who looked upon their own exiſtence as a 
eurſe ; but I never knew of more than eight who 
voluntarily put an end to their miſery, viz. three 
negroes, four Engliſhmen, and a German pro- 
feſſor, named Rabeck. My laſt ſervice was with 
Don Iſſachar the Jew, who placed me near your 
perſon, my fair Lady. I am reſolved to ſhare 
your. fate; and I have been more affected with 
your misfortunes than my own. I ſhould never 
have ſpoke of my ſufferings, if you had not vex · 
ed mea liule, and if it had not been cuſtomary 
on 8 a ſuhip to tell ſtories, by way of amuſe- 

In ſhort, Miſs, I have a good deal of ex- 
pit and I have known the world, Divert 
yourſelf, and prevail upon each paſſenger to tell 
you his ſtory 3 and if chere is one found who 
has not frequently curſed his life, and has not 
as often ſaid to himſelf; that he was the unhap» 
pieſt of mortals, I will give you leave to — 
me into * 57 wich my * tacemoſt.. . 


$337 £37 1 5 


2 


es: bet 0 „ Nr n — 


+ ; Tat 


J a. ne was obliged to part from the « fair 
| Canegonda 1 the 4 woman. TY 


beautiful corona having We 

old woman's ſtory, paid her all the civili- 

= that were due to a perſon of her rank and 
merit. She approved of her propoſal and en · 

* gaged 


asd cy 


+ 4 


£2 Y, BY © oO YON TORT 


r 


8 17 5 


— 


Chap, 13. ALL rox THE BEST. 43 


gaged-all the paſſengers, one after another, to re- 
late their adventures: and then both Candidus 
and ſhe confeſſed, that the old woman was in the 
right. It is a great pity,” ſaid Candidus, “ that 
the ſage Pangloſs was hanged, contrary to cu- 
ſtom, at the auto-da-fe-; for he would tell vs 
moſt ſurprifing things concerning the phyſical 
and moral evil which cover both laad and ſea 
and I ſhould be bold enough, with due en 
to propoſe ſome objections. 

While each paſſenger was * bis . 
— ſhip advanced in her voyage. They landed 
at * ns Cunegonda, Capt. Candidus, 
and the old woman, | waited on the governor, 
Don Fernandes d'Ibaraa, y Figueora, y Maſca- 
renes, y Lampourdos, y Souza. This nobleman 
was poſſeſſed of pride ſuitable to a perſon digni- 
fied with ſo many titles, He ſpoke to other peo- 
ple with ſo noble a diſdain, carried his noſe fo 
high, raiſed his voice ſo intolerably, aſſumed ſo 
imperious an air, and affected ſo lofty a gait, 
that all thoſe who ſaluted him were tempted to 
beat him. He was an exceflive lover of the fais- 
ſex. + Cunegonda appeared to him the / prettieſt 
woman he had ever ſeen, The firſt thing he did, 


was to aſk whether ſhe was not the Captain's 


wife ? The manner in which he propoſed.the 
queſtion alarmed Candidus. He durſt not ſay 
that ſhe was his wife, becauſe in reality ſhe was 
t; he durſt not tell him that ſhe was his fiſter, 
.b&cauſe ſhe was not that neither: and though 


this officious lie might base been of ſervice to 


him, yet his ſoul was too refined to betray the 


truth. 


e T«äʃỹ—'2 r «K —õ . —öPͤ—— — — —— —— — 


1 CANDIDUS; of, Chap, 14 


truth, © Miſs Cunegonda,” ſaid be, © intends 
me the honour of marrying me, and we beſcech 
| your Excellency to y”= our nuptials with your 
"i x wenn TY 
| Pos Fernandes d lber, y Figueora, y Maſes- 
renes, y Lampourdos, y Souza, turning up his 
muſtaches, forced a grim ſmile, and ordered Capt. 
Candidus to go and review his company. Cans 
didus obeyed, and the governor remained alone 
with Miſs Cunegonda. He declared his paſſion, 
- proteſted that he would marry her the next day 
in the face of- the church, or otherwiſe, as it 
ſhould be agreeable to a perſon of her charms. 
Cunegonda defired à quarter of an hour to con- 
der of the propoſal, to conſul wich the ** 
ny! and to take her refolution, 
Says the old woman to Cunegonda: Mis, 
you can reckon up ſeventy - two deſcents in your 
family, and not one farthing in your poeket. 
It is now in your power to be wife to the greateſt 
Jord in South America, who has very pretty 
whiſkers; and what occaſion have you to pique 
yourſelf upon inviolable fidelity ? You have been 
raviſhed by the Bulgarians; a Jew and an inqui- 
tor have been in your good graces, is fortunes 
have no law on their fide, I confeſs, were I in f 
your place, I ſhould have no ſcruple to marry 
the governor, and to make my Lord * . f 
didus's fortune. | 
While the old woman was thus ſweating, wich 
all the prudence which age and experience diQta- 
ted, they deſcried a fmall veſſel entering the port, 


| 
-— #3 


— 


4D es ..o- 
2 ——ä—ũ——ͤ—ꝛ———— —— — — —— — — 
— — — — — — — — 


FF 9 
653 4 


D %K; ee 


Chap. 13. ALL rox THE BEsr. 45 


which had on board an alcaid and alguazils. The 
occaſion of ti voyage Was this. 

The old woman had ſhrewdly gueſſed, that it 
was a cordelier with. à great ſleeve that ſtole the 
money and jewels fro Cunegonda in the city of 
Badajox, when the and Candidus were making 
their eſcape. The friat having offered to ſell 
ſome of the diamonds tormjeweller,. he knew them 
to be the-inquiſitor'y;: Ihe cordelier, before he 
was hanged, confeſſed be had ſtole them. He 
deſcribed the perſon he had ſtole them from, and 
told the route they had taken. The flight of Cu- 


negonda aad Candidus being by this means diſ- 


covered, they were traced to Cadiz; where a vef- 
ſel was immediately ſent in purſuit of them; and 
now the veſſcl was in the port of Buenos Ayres. 
A report was ſpread, that an alcaid was going 
to land, and that he was in purſuit of the mur- 
derers of my Lord the grand inquiſitor. © The 
old woman ſaw in a- moment what was to be 
done. Lou cannot run away,“ ſaid ſnhe to 
Cunegonda, and you have nothing to fear; it 
was not you that killed my Lord; and beſides, 
the governor, who is in love with yon, will not 
ſuffer you to be ill treated: therefore ſtay here.“ 
She then ran to Candidus: Fly,” ſaid ſhe, 
or in an hour you will he burnt alive.“ He 
had not a moment to loſe + but how could he 
part from apa and whe n he ”w 


for ſhelter 4 — „ 


ene 


F4.-4 


wt 
* C 5 £ on 1 , . * [ 4 * << 4 i * 99 * 1 
* 3 4 . . - * » 
4 = * 1 
k_ 
* . 


& 


* 


TY aa * 


E 


CHA r. Au, 


iz D457 
How Candidus and Cacamb# wert ?eteived 7 15 
Jeſuits of Paraguay. 


NAndidus had de 0 valet wich him 
from Cadiz, as one often meets with in a- 
bundance on the coaſts of Spain, and in the co- 
jonies. He was a fourth part a Spaniard, born 
of a mongrel in Tucuman; and bad been a fing- 
3ng-boy, a ſexton, a ſailor, a monk, a factor, a 
ſoldier, and a lacquey. His name was Cacambo, 
and he had an entire regard to his maſter, be · 
rauſe his maſter was a very good ſort of man, 


Haviag ſaddled the two Andaluſian horſes with 


all expedition; 4* Let ug go, Maſter, let us fol- 
low the old woman's advice, let us ſet off, and 
run without looking behind us. Candidus drop: 
ped ſome tears: O my dear Cunegonda,” ſays 
he, muſt I leave you juſt at a time when the 
governor is going to fee us married ! Cunegon · 
da, when you are brought ſo far, what will be · 
come of you? She will do as well as ſhe 
can, faid Cacambo; women are never at a 
loſs; God will provide for her; let us run,” 
« Whither art thou carrying me ?“ ſaid Candi- 


dus: where are we going ? what ſhall we do 


without /Cunegonda ? By St. James of Com- 
poſtella,” ſaid Cacambo, you was going to ſight 
againſt the Jeſuits ; now let us go and fight for 
them I know the road perfectly well; I will 


22 you to their kingdom; they will be 
charmed 


- — * 


L 
„ 
'» 
h 
— 
d 
* 
7s 
Ce 


A 


Chap 14. ALL rok THE Ber, 47 


charmed to have a captain that knows the Bulga- 
rian exerciſe ; you will make a prodigious for- 
tune; though one cannot find his account in one 
world, he may in another, It is a great pleaſure 
to ſee variety of objects, and to perform new ex- 
8. ” 

Have you then been at Paraguay 2” ſaid Cari! 
didus. Yes, in truth, I have,” faid Cacambo : 
was uſher to the college of Aﬀumption, and 
am acquainted with the government of the good 
fathers, as well as I am' with the ſtreets of Cadiz, 
It is an admirable ſort of government. The king- 
dom is upwards of three hundred leagues in dia · 
meter, and divided into thirty provinces, The 
farhcrs there are maſters of every thing, and the 
people have nothing. It is the maſterpiece of 
reaſon and juſtice. For my part, I fee nothing 
fo divine as the good fathers, who wage war here 
againſt the Kings of Spain and Portugal, and in 
Europe are their confeſſors; who in this coun- 
try kill Spaniards, and at Madrid ſend them to 
heaven. This tranſports me: let us therefore 
puſh forward; you are going to be the happieſt 
of mortals. What pleafure wilt it be to thoſe 
fathers, when they know that a captain who un · 
derſtands the Bulgarian exerciſe, comes to offer 
them his ſer vice“ 

As ſoon as they reached the firſt paſs, Cacam- 
bo told the advanced guard, that a captain deſired 
w fpeak with my Lord the commandant. | They 
went to inform the main guard of it. A Para- 
guayan officer ran on foot to the commandant, 
to wand the news to him, Candidus and Ca- 

cambo 


— — — we 


43 | CANDIDUS; or, Chap. 14, 


cambo were at firſt diſarmed, and their two An- 
dalufian horſes ſeized. The two ſtrangers were 
iatroduced between two files of muſketeers: the 
commandant was atthe further end, with a three- 
cornered cap on his head, his gown tucked up, 
a ſword by his fide, and a ſpontoor in his hand, 


He made a ſignal, and ſtraightway four and 
tweaty ſoldiers furrounded the new comers. A 


ſerjeant told them they muſt wait; that the com- 
mandant could not ſpeak to them; that the Rev. 


Father Provincial does not permit any Spaniard 


to open his mouth but in his preſence, or to ſtay 


above three hours in the province. And where 


is the Rev, Father Provincial ?” ſaid Cacambo. 
He is upon the parade, after ſaying maſs,” an- 
ſwered the ſerjeant; and you cannot kiſs his 


| ſpurs i in leſs than three hours.“ But,” ſaid Ca- 


cambo, my maſter, the Captain, who is ready 


to die for hunger as well as myſelf, is not a Spa- 


niard, but a German: cannot we have ſomething 
for breakfaſt, while we wait for his Reverence.?” 
The ſerjeant went that inſtant to give an account 
of this diſcourſe to the commandant, * God be 
praiſed,” ſaid the reverend commandant ; ** ſince 
he is a German I may ſpeak with him; bring him 
into my arbour.” Candidus was immediately 
conducted into a green pavilion, decorated with 


a very handſome balluſtrade of green and gold 


marble, with intertextures of vines, containing 
parrots, humming-birds, fly-birds, Guiney-bens, 


and all other forts of rare birds. An excellent 


breakfaſt was provided in veſſels of gold; and 
while the Paraguayans were eating Indian corn 
| out 


— MERA ae — 


0 \ 
Chap. 14. ALL FOR TAs Bit. 49 


out of wooden diſhes, in the open fields, expoſed 
to the ſultry heat of the ſun, the reverend father 


_ commandaat retired to his arbour. 


He was a very handſome young man, with a 
full face, tolerably fair, freſh coloured, his eye-. 
brows were arched, his eye full of fire, his ear 
red, his lips like vermilion ; his air was ſome · 
what fierce, but of a e which differcd both 
from that of a Spaniard and a Jeſuit, They now 
returned Candidus and Cacambo their arms which 
had been taken from them, together with the two 
Andaluſian horſes ; which Cacambo took the li · 
berty to feed near the arbour, keeping his eye 
upon them, for fear of a ſurpriſe. 

Candidus immediately kiſſed the hem of the 
commandani's garment; after which they both, 
by his order, fat down to table. You are a 
German then ?“ ſaid. the Jeſuit to him, in that 
language. Tes, my reverend father, ſaid. 
Candidus, In pronouncing theſe words, they 
looked on each other with an extreme ſurpriſe, 
which they were not able to account for. And. 
what part of Germany do you belong to?“ ſaid. 
the Jeſuit, 4 To the lower part of Weſtphalia,” 
ſaid Candidus: I was born in the caſtle. of 
Thunder-ten-tronkh.” © Heavens ! is it pofli- 
ble!” cried the commandant. * What a miracle 
is this !” cried Candidus. Is it you ?“ ſaid the 
commandant, ** Tis impoſſible !”' ſaid Candidus. 
On this they both fell backwards; but getting up 
again, embraced each other, and ſhed tears. 
© What! is it you, my revercnd father ! yon! 


the brother of the fair Cunegonda | you, chat 
* E TY was 


3% CAR DID us; or, Cbap. 19. 


was ſlain by the Bulgarians ! you, the Baron's 
fon! are you a Jeſuit at Paraguay] I'muſt cou - 
feſs, that this is a ſtrange world indeed! Ah, 
. Paogloſs.! Pangloſs! how glad would you have 
been, if you had no: been hanged !“ 

Ihe commandant ordered the negro ſlaves, and 
the Paraguayans, that poured out their liquor in 
cups of rock cryſtal, to retire. He thanked God, 
and St. Ignatius, a thouſand times; folded Can - 
didus in his arms; their faces being all the while 
bathed in tears. Vou will be more aſtoniſhed, 
more affected, more out of your wits,” ſaid Can- 
didus; ** when I tell you that Miſs Cunegonda, 
your ſiſter, who you thought was ripped up, is as 


well as Lam.“ „Where!“ « In your neigh- 


bourhood, at the houſe of the governor of Bue- 
nos- Ayres; and was coming io fight- againſt- 
vou.“ Every word'they-ſpoke in this long eon · 
verſation, heaped ſurpriſe upon ſurpriſe. Their 
ſouls dwelt upon their tongues, liſtened in their 


cars, and ſparkled in their eyes. As they were 


Germans, they made a-long meal, (according to 
cuſtom), waiting for the reverend facher · the pro- 
vineial; when the commandant thus addreſſed- 
His dear Candidus. 


FA F. XN. 


Bin Candidur killed the drother 'of bis dier Cune- 
Biull, bis i? 


Shall ever have preſent to my memory that 


b korzible-diy,. wherein I ſaw wy father and 
mother 


= r ad ie EE 


d. 


f- 


at 
1d 
cr 


SS non 


o 15” ALL ron THE BEsr. | 51 


mother killed, and my ſiſter raviſhed. When the 
Bulgarians were gone, my ſweet ſiſter waz no 
where to be found; and I, together with my fa» 
ther and mother, two maids, and three litile lads 
that were murdered, were flung into a cart, in 
order to be buried in a chapel, which belonged 
to the Jcſuits, about two leagues diſtant from our 
family-caſtle. A Jeſuit ſprinkled us with holy 
water, which being very falt, and ſome drops 
falling into my eyes, the father could perceive 
my eye-balls move; on which he put his hand 
upon tay fide, and felt my heart beat: I was taken 
care of; and, in about three weeks time, no one 
would have thought that any ching had ailed me. 
You know very well, my dear Candidus, I was 
very handſome, but I grew more ſo: on which 
account the reverend father Didrius, ſuperior of 
the hovfe, conceived a very great affection for 
me z gave me the habit of a novice; and ſome 
time after ſent me to Rome. The ſuperior was 
then looking out for a recruit of young Jeſuits 
from Germany. For the rulers of Paraguay take 
as few Spaniſh Jeſuits as they can; but chuſe fo- 
reigners, becauſe they think they can tyrannize 
over them as they pleaſe, I was therefore made 
choice of by the reverend father-general, as a 
proper perſon to go to work ia chis vineyard. I 
fet ſail in company with a Polander and a I irole- 
fian, On my arrival I was honoured with a ſub- 
deaconry and a licutenancy, At preſent I am a 
colonel and a prieſt, We ſhall give the King of 
Spain's army a warm reception; Lcan aſſure you 
that they will be excommunicated, and beaten.. 

| E 2 P:ovidence 


52 CANDIDUS; or, @Ehap: 15. 


Providence has ſent you hither to aſſiſt us. But 
is it true, that my dear ſiſter Cunegonda is in 
our neighbourhood, at the governor of Buenos- 
Ayres's bouſe ?” Candidus ſwore that it was as 
true-as the goſpel, On this their tears guſhed 
out afrefh, 

The Baron could not refrain embracing Can- 
didus, whom he called his brother and his pro- 
tector. Ah, perhaps,” ſaid he,.“ we two may 
enter the city in triumph, and recover my fiſter 
Cunegonda.“ There is nothing I could wiſh 
for more,” ſaid Candidus; for I expected to be 
married to her before to-morrow, and I have 
ſome hopes I ſhall yet.“ The inſolence of the 
fellow!“ replied the Baron; “would you have 
the impudence to marry my ſiſter, who can ſhew 
ſeventy-two quarterings in her coat of arms ?” 
Candidus being quite thunderſtruck at this, made 
him the following reply: © My reverend father, 
all the quarterings in the world do not ſignify a 
farthing, I have delivered your ſiſter from the 
hands of a Jew, and an inquilitor ; ſhe lies under 
a great many obligations to me, and is willing to 
marry me. Maſter Pangloſs always told me that 
all men are equal. I am ſure I ſhall have her.” 
% We will ſee whether you ſhall or no, you vil- 
lain!“ ſaid the Jeſuit Baron of Thunder-ten- 
tronckh; and at the ſame time gave him a blow 
on the face with the flat part of his ſword. Can - 
didus drew his immediately, and plunged it tp 
to the hilt in the Baron's body; but drawing it 
Out again, and-looking upon it as it reeked, he 
cried out, O God I have killed my old ma- 

; F035 4 12 „ 


. A I I. PN 


Chap. 16. ALL rox Taz BrsT; FJ 
ſer, my friend, my brother-in-law, I am one 
of the beſt-natured men in the world, yet I have 
killed three men, and of the three there were two- 
of them prieſts, 

Cacambo, who ſtood ſentry at the door of the 
arbour, and who heard the noiſe, ran in. We 
have nothing now to do but to fell our lives as 
dear as we can,” faid his maſter to him; © and 
if they ſhould force their way into the arbour, 
let us at leaſt die with our arms in our hands.“ 

Cacambo, who had been in circumſtances of a 
ſimilar nature, did not ſtand to rack his brains for 
an expedient z. but took the Jeſuit's dreſs, which 
the Baron wore, put it upon, Candidus, gave him 
the dead man's cap, and made him mount his 
horſe, AU this was done in the twinkling of an 
eye. Let us gallop away, Maſter;“ ſays he; 
« every body will take you for ſome Jeſuit that 
is going expreſs, and we ſhall get ro the Tory 
before they can overtake us. 

He fled like lightning, before theſe words were 
quite out of his mouth, crying out in Spaniſh, 
Make way, make way for the reverend father, 
the colonel,” 


e H AP xXvl. 


What paſſed between our two travellers, and tu 


girls, two monkeys, and the ſavages called Oreils 
3 


Andidus and his valet had got beyond the 
11 before any perſon in che camp knew a 
bail E 3 ſyllable 


54 CAN DID US; or, Chap. 16. 


ſyllable of the death of the German Jeſuit, The 
provident Cacambo had taken care to fill his wal - 
tet with bread, chocotate, hams, and ſome bottles 
of wine. They puſhed with their Andalufian 
horſes into a ſtrange country, where they could 
not diſcover any path or road, At laſt a plea- 
fant meadow, which was divided by a river, pre- 
fented itſelf to their eyes. Our two travellers 
turned their horſes a-grazing. And Cacambo 
made a propoſal to his maſter to eat a bit, and at 
the ſame time ſet him the example. Do you 
think,“ ſaĩd Candidus, ** that I can feaſt upon 
ham, when I have killed the Baron's ſon, and 
find myſelf under a neceffity never to ſee Cune- 
gonda again, as long as I live? What fignifies it 
to prolong my days in miſery, ſince I muſt drag 
them far from her, a prey to remorſe and de- 
ſpair ? and what will the Journal of Trevoux ſay 
of me?” 

Having thus ſpoke, he refuſed to eat a morſe], 
The ſun was now ſet ; 'when our two wanderers, 
to their very great ſurpriſe, heard a faint cry, 
which ſeemed to come from ſome women. It 
was not eaſy to determine whether it was occa- 
ſioned by diſtreſs or mirth; they roſe immed-ate- 
ly with all the anxiety and apprebenſion to which 
people are ſubject in a ſtrange place. The noiſe 
was made by two girls that ran ſtark naked on 
the banks of the meadow, purſued by two large 
monkeys that bit their backſides. Candidus was 
moved with pity; and as be had learned to ſhoot 
among the Bulgarians, and was ſo good a markſ- 
_ that he would hit a nut in a buſh without 

| touching 


„ %% P ˙ ˙wuJJ2J—ĩ ͤÜdoNͥñ, es 


there may be many an inſtance of this kind, and 


Chap, 16. ALL rox THz BEsr. 53 


touching the leaves, he took up his Spaniſh fuzee; 
which was double-charged, and killed the two 
monkeys. ** God be praiſed, my dear Cacambo,” 
ſaid he, ** I have delivered the two poor girls 
from this great danger; however, if I have been 
guilty of a fin in killing the inquiſitor, I have 
now ma de ample amends for it by ſaving the lives 
ef the two gir's. They may chance to prove a 
couple of ladies of rank; and who knows but 
this adventure may do us ſome fervice in this 
country? 

He was going on at this rate, thinking that he 


bad done a great feat; but how great was his ſur+ 


priſe, when, inſtead of rejoicing, he ſaw the two 
girls embracing the monkeys with all the marks 
of the moſt tender affeCtion ! they bathed their 
bodies with tears, and filled the air with ſhrieks 
that teſtified the deepeſt diſtreſs. ** I could ne. 
ver have expected to haye ſeen ſo much as this,” 
ſaid he to Ca ambo ; who replied, * You have 
done a fine piece of work indeed, Sir, you have 
killed the la lies two ſweethcarts.” Their ſweet- 
hearts! is it poſſible ! you are in jeſt ſure, Ca- 
cambo: who the deuce could believe you to be 
in carneſt ?” My dear Sir,” replied Cacambo, 


* you are always for making mounta'ns of mole-. 


hills; why ſhould you think it incredible, that 
there are ſome countries where monkeys enjoy 
the favours of the ladies ? why, they are got by 
human creatures, in the ſame manner as I was 


got by 2 Spaniar me he Ay,.“ replied Candidus, 


% now I recollect, Mr. Pangloſs has told me, that 


tha 


56 CANDIDUS; or, Chap. 16, 


that theſe mixtures gave birth to the Egipans, 
Fauns, and Satyrs ; that a great many of the an- 
cieats had ſeen them with their own eyes: but 
I always looked upon it as a mere romance,” 
© You oughn, at preſent, to ſee your miſtake,” 
faid Cacambo, ** and own that the doctor was in 
the right, And you may ſee what influence the 
prejudice of education has upon the underſtand- 
ing. All I am afraid of is, that theſe ladies will 
play us ſome unlucky trick.” 

Theſe wiſe reflections induced Candidus to quit 
the meadow, and take to a wood; where he and 
Cacambo ſupped together: and, after heartily 
_ curſing the Portugueſe inquiſitor, the governor 

of Bucnos- Ayres, and the Baron, they fell a- 
Keep. 


On their waking, they found that they could 


not ſtir : for the Oreillons, the inhabitants of the 
country, whom the two laſſes had informed of 
their adventure, had bound them in the night 
time, with. cords made of the bark of a tree. 
They were ſurrounded by a body of fifty Oreil+ 
lons, ſtark naked, armed with arrows, clubs, and 
hatchets made of flint : ſome of them were ma- 
king a great cauldron boil,-others preparing ſpits; 
and all of them erying out, He's a Ieſuit, he's 
0 Jeſuit ; we will make him pay ſauce for it, we 
will pick his bones for him; lex us cat the Jeſuit, 
let us eat the Jeſuit,” : 

*« You may remember I told you, my dear ma- 
ter,” cried Cacambo in a lamentable tone that 
thoſe two laſſes would play us ſome ugly trick. 

Candidus 


Chap. 16. ALL rox THE Brsr. 57 


Candidus perceiving the cauldon and the ſpits, 
cried out, O Lord! we are certainly going to 
be roaſted or boiled. Ah! would Mr. Pangleſs 
now ſay, on ſeeing nature without diſguiſe, that 
whatever is, is right?. It may be ſo: but I muſt 
confeſs it is a fad thing to have loſt Miſs Cune- 
gonda, and to be ſpitted by the Oreillons.“ 

Cacambo, who was never at a loſs for an in- 
vention: Never deſpair,” ſaid he to the diſ- 
conſolate Candidus. I underſtand the jargon 
of theſe people a little, and am going to ſpeak to 
them.“ Don't fail,“ ſaid Candidus, to re- 
preſent to them the inhumanity of dreſſing men 
for meat, hoes ſet forth what an unchriſtian Pracs 
tice it is.” 

6 — ſays Cacambo, you fancy 
that you ſhall feaſt on a Jeſuit to-day; a very 
good diſh, I make no doubt, nor is there any 
thing more juſt than to ſerve one's enemies ſo, 
In effect, the law of nature teaches us to kill our 
neighbour, and it is a principle which is put in 
practice all over the globe, If we do not make 
uſe of the right of eating him, it is becauſe we 
have plenty of victuals without it; but as you 
have not that advantage, it muſt certainly be bet- 
ter for you to eat your enemies, than fling away 
the fruit of your victories as a feaſt to crows and 
ravens. But, Gentlemen, 1 ſuppoſe you would 
not be for eating your friends. You fancy you 
are going to ſpit a Jeſuit.; but, believe me, I aſ- 
ſure you it is your defender, it is the enemy of 
your enemies that you are going to roaſt, ; As 
for my part, I was born among you. The gen- 

tleman, 


58 CANDIDUS;. or, Chap. 16. 


tleman you ſee here is my maſter, and ſo far 
from-being a Jeſuit, he bas juſt now killed a Je- 
ſuit, and he is only dreſſed in his ſpoils ; which 
is the cauſe of your miſtake. In order to con- 
firm my aſſertion, let one of you take his gown 
off, carry it to the firſt; pals of the government of 
the fathers, and inform himſelf whether my ma- 
ſter has not killed a Jeſuit- officer. It is an affair 
chat won't take up much time ; and you may al · 
ways have it in your power to eat us, if you catch 
me in 2 lie, But if I have told you the truth, 
and nothing but the truth, you are too well ac- 
guainted wih the principles of natural right, 
morality, and law, not to ſhew us ſome favour.” 

The Oreillons were ſo fully convinced of the 
reaſonablenefs of this propoſal, that they deputed 
two of their chiefs to go and inform themſelves 
of the truth of hat he had told them. The two 
deputics acquitted themſelves of their charge like 
men of ſenſe, and returned {ſoon with a favoura - 
ble account. The Oreillons then unbound their 
priſoners, ſhewed them a thouſand civilities, of- 
fered them women, gave them ſomething to re- 
freſh them, and conducted them back again to 
the confines of their ſtate, crying all the while, 
like madmen, He is no Jeſuit, he is no Jcſuit.” 

Candidus could not help admiring the ſubject 


of his deliverance. ** What a people“ ſail he; 


« what men! what manners? If 1 had not had 
the good luck to whip Miſs Cunegonda's brother 
through the lungs, I ſhould inevitably have been 
eaten up. Bur, after all, the dictates of pure na- 
tare are * beſt, ſince this people, inſtead of 

eating 


Chap. 17. 


eating me, ſhewed me a thouſand civilities as ſoon 
as they knew that I was not a Jeſuit.“ , ; 


ALL rox THE BesrT, 5% 


G H A P. XVIL 


The arrival of Cundidus and his man at the country 
of Eldorado, and what they ſaw there, 


Hen they had reached the frontiers of the 

Oreillons, ** You ſee now,” ſaid Cacambo 
to Candidus, that this part of the world is nor 
one pin better than the other. Take a fool's ad- 
vice for once, and let us return to Europe as faſt 
as ever we can.” Ho is that poſſible?” ſaid 
Candidus: And pray what part of it would you 
liave us go to? Shall J go into my own country? 
the Bulgarians and Abarians kill all they meet 
with there; if I return to Portugal, Lam fore T 
ſhall be burnt alive ; if we ſtay in this country; 
we run the hazard of being roaſted” every mo- 
ment, And again, how can I think of leaving 


that part of the globe where — 4a 708 
lives ?“ 


„Why then, let us take our courſe: towards 
Cayenne,“ ſaid Cacambo; we ſhall meet with 
ſome Frenchmen there, for you know they are 
io be met with all over the globe; perhaps they- 
will give us ſome relief, and God NTT piry 
upon us.“ 

It was no eaſy matter for them to go to Cayenne, 
as they did not know whereabouts it lay; befides, 
mountains, rivers, precipices, banditti, and ſava - 
bes, were difficulties they were ſure to encounter 

with 


| 


60 CANDIDUS; or, Chap, 17, 


with in their journey. Their horſes died with fa- 
tigue, and their provifions were ſoon conſumed, 
After having lived a whole month on. the wild 
fruits, they found themſelves on the banks of a 
ſmall river, which was bordered by cocao trees, 
which at once preſerved their lives, and kept up 
their hopes. 

Cacambo, who was on all occaſions as good a 
counſellor as the old woman, ſaid to Candidus, 
We can hold out no longer; we have walked 
enough already, and here's an empty canoe upon 
the ſhore, let's fill it with cocao, then get on 
board, and let it drive with the ſtream: a river 
always carries one to ſome inhabited place. If 
we don't meet with what we like, we are ſure to 
meet with ſomething new... Why, what you 
ſay is very right, e'en let us go,” ſaid Candidus, 
& and recommend ourſelves to the care of Pro- 
vidence.“ | 
They rowed ſome leagues between the two 
banks, which were enamelled with flowers in 
ſome. places, in others barren, in ſome parts le- 
yel, and in others very ſteep. The river grew 
broader as they proceeded, and, at laſt, loſt itſelf 
in a ſpacious horizon, that was bounded by ſome 
frightful rocks, which reached as high as the 
clouds. Our two travellers had the courage to 
truſt themſelves to the ſtream. The river being 
very narrow in this place, drove them along with 
ſuch a rapidity noiſe as filled them with the 
utmoſt horror, /In about four and twenty hours 
they got fight of day-light again, but their canoc 
was caſhed in pieces againſt the breakers, - They 


were 


ALL rok TAE BEST. 61 


Chap. 17. 


were obliged to crawl from one rock to another 
for a whole league; after which they got fight 
of a ſpacious plain, bounded with inacceſſible 
mountains, The country was cultiva:ed both for 
pleaſure and profit; which latter was always 
mixed with the agreeable, The roads were co- 
vered, or, more properly ſpeaking, were adorn- 
ed with carriages, whoſe figure and materials were 
very brilliant ; they were full of men and women, 
of an extraordinary beauty, and drawn with great 
ſwiftneſs, by large red ſheep, which for fleetneſs 
ſurpaſſed the fineſt horſes of Andaluſia, Tetuan, 
or Mequines. 

This certainly,” faid Candidus, is a better 
country than Weſtphalia.” He and Cacambo 
got on ſhore near the firſt village they came to. 
The very children of the village were drefled in 
gold brocades, all tattered, playing at quoits at 
the entrance of the town, Our two travellers 
from the other world amuſed themſelves with 
looking at them. The quoits were made of large 
round pieces, yellow, red, and green, and caſt a 


ſurpriſing light. Our travellers hands itched 


prodigiouſly to be fingering ſome of them: for 
they were almoſt certain, that they were cither 
gold, emralds, or rubies, the leaſt of which would 
have been no ſmall ornament to the throne of 
the Great Mogul. To be ſure,” ſaid Cacam- 
bo, theſe muſt be the children of the king of 


the country, diverting themſelves at quoits.” The 


maſter of the village coming at'that inſtaat to call 


them to ſchool : ** That's the preceptor to the 


Royal Family,” cried Candidus. 
F The 


Bb! 
I 4 
OO 
tt 
33 
i 
i 
1 
ä 
5 
i 
: 
$ 
1 


4 
* Lakin > 4 : = 2 4 
— na row wwe. — ——» - pv 


33 


62 CAN DID Us; or, Chap. 17. 


The little brats immediately quitted their play, 


leaving their quoits and other playthings behind 


them. Caadidus picked them up, run to the 
ſchoolmaſter, and preſented them to him with a 


great deal of humility, acquainting him, by ſigns, 


that their Royal Highneffes had forgot their gold 


and jewels, The maſter of the village ſmiled, 


and flung them upon the ground; and having 
fared at Candidus with ſome degree of ſurpriſe, 
walked off. 

_ Our. travellers did not fail immediacy to pick 
up the gold, rubies, and emeralds. Where 
are we got to now?“ cried Candidus. The 
princes of the blood muſt certainly be well edu- 


cated here, ſince they are taught to make ſo light 


of gold and jewels,” Cacambo was as much ſur- 
priſed as Candidus. At length they drew near 
to the firſt houſe in the village, which was built 
like one of our European palaces. There was a 
vaſt croud of people at the door, and ſtill a great- 
er within. They heard very good muſic, and 
their noſtrils were ſaluted by a moſt refreſhing 
ſmell from the kitchen, 

Cacambo went up to the door, and heard they 
were ſpeaking the Peruvian language, which was 
his mother- tongue; for every one knows that 


Cacambo was born at Tucuman, in a village 


where they make uſe of no other language. Ill 
be your interpreter, maſter, maſter,” cries Ca- 


- cambo, in the greateſt raptures, ** this is an inn; 


in with you, in with you.” 
lamediately two waiters and two. maids that 


belonged to the houſe, drelled i in cloths of gold 
tiſſue, 


2 . — Col mw wa A — — aa rao AE 1 1 


Chap. 17. ALL For TRE BesrT. 63 


tiſſue, and having their hair tied back with rib · 
bands, invited them to fit down to table with the 
landlord; They ſerved up four ſoups, each gar» 
niſhed with two parroquets, a large diſh of bou- 
ille, that weighed about two hundred weight ; 
two apes roaſted, of an excellent taſte, three hun- 
dred humming-birds, in one plate, and fix hun- 
dred fly-birds in another; together with exqui- 
ſite ragouts, and the moſt delicious tarts, all up- 
on plates of a ſpecies of rock - cryſtal. After 
which the lads and maids ſerved them with a 
great variety of liquors made from the ſugar- 
canes, | p 

The gueſts were moſtly tradeſmen and carri- 
ers, all extremely polite ; who aſked ſome que- 
ſtians of Cacambo with the greateſt diſcretion 
and circumſpection, and received as ſausfattory 
anſwers. 

When the repaſt was ended, Cacambo thought 
as well as Candidus, to diſcharge their reckon- 
ing, by putting down two of the large pieces of 
gold which they had picked up. But the land- 
lord and landlady burſt out into a prodigious fit 
of laughing, and could not reſtrain it for ſome 
time. Recovering themſelves at laſt : ** Gentlc- 
men,” ſays the landlord, ** we can ſee pretty well 
that you are ſtrangersz we are not much uſed to 
ſuch gueſts here. Pardon us, if we fell a laugh- 
ing, when you offered us the ſtones of our high - 
ways in diſcharge of your reckoning. It is plain 
you have got none of the money of this king- 
dom; but there is no occaſion for it, in order to 
dine here. All the inos, which are eſtabliſhed: 

117 F 2 tor 


„ CAN DID us; or, Chap. 18. 


for the conveniency of trade, are maintained by 
the government. You have had but ſorry en- 


tertainment here, becauſe this is but a poor vil- 
lage; but any where elſe you will be ſure to be 
received in a manner ſuitable to your merit.“ 

Cacambo explained the hoſt's ſpeech to Can- 
didus, who heard it with as much aſtoniſhment 
and wonder as his friend Cacambo interpreted it. 
„What country can this be, ſaid they to each 
other, which is unknown to the reſt of the 
earth, and of ſo different a nature from ours? 
it is probably that country where every thing is 
right ; for it is neceſſary that there ſhould be one 
of that ſort. And for all Doctor Pangloſs has 
ſaid, I could not help taking notice many a time 
that things were very bad in Weſtphalia,” 


e xv... 
n dat they ſaw in the country of Eldorado. 


NAcambo could not conceal his curiofity from 
his landlord. © For my part,” ſaid the 
1:ndlord to him, © I am very ignorant, but not 
the worſe on that account: but we have an old 
man here, who has retired from court, and is 
reckoned both the wiſeſt and the moſt commu- 
nieative perſon in the kingdom.“ And ſaying 
rhis, without any more ado, he conducted Ca- 
cambo to the old man's houſe. Candidus acted 
now only a fecond character in the play, and fol - 
lowed his ſervant. They entered into a very plain 
pa. for the door Wa — but ſilver, and 
| the 


Sas dr 2 1 9 — " 


Chap. 18. AIL rox THt BEsr. 65 


the ceilings nothing but gold, but finiſhed with 
ſo much taſte, that the richeſt ccilings of Europe. 
could not ſurpaſs them. The antichamber was 
indeed only covered with rubies and emeralds, 
but the order in which every thing was arranged, 
made amends for this great fimplicity., . , 

The old gentleman received the two ſtrangers 
on a ſopha ſtuffed with the feathers of hum 
ming birds, and ordered them to be ſerved with 
liquors in veſſels of diamond; after which he ſa» 
tisfied their curioſity in the following manner. 
I am ow in my hundredth and ſeventy ſe · 
cond year; and I have heard my deceaſed father, 
who was groom to his Majeſty, mention the ſur- 
priſing revolutions of Peru, of which he was an 
eye · witneſs. The kingdom we are in at preſent, 
is the ancient country of the Incas, who left it 
very indiſcreetly in order to conquer one part of 
the world; inſtead of which, they — 
were all deſtroyed by the Spaniards. ._ 

. The princes of their family who remained in 
their native country, were more wile ; they made 
a law, by the unanimous conſent. of the whole 

nation, that none of our inhabitants ſhould ever 

go out of our little kingdom; and. it is owing to 

this, that we have preſerved. both our innocence 

and our , happineſs. ' The Spaniards have had 

ſome confuſed idea of this country, and have 

called it E Dorade; and an. Engliſhman, named 

Sir Walter Raleigh, has like wiſe been on our coaſts 

above a hundred years ago: but as we are ſur- 

rounded by inacceſſible rocks and precipices, we 

have always been hitherto ſhekergd from che ra- 


Wb F 3 pacity 


* 


6 CAN DID US; or, Chap. 18. 


pacity of the European nations, who are infpir- 
ed with an mconceivable rage for the ſtones and 
dirt of our land, and who, to pofiths themſelves 
of them, would unn ver. to che very laſt 
man. 22 * 

Their conference was pretty long, and turned 
upon the form of their government, their man · 
ners, their women, their public ſhews, and their 
arts. At laſt Candidus, who had always a taſte 
for metaphyſics, bid Cacambo afk, if chere was 
any religion in that country ? 

The old gentleman reddening a line, *« How 
is it poſſible,” ſaid he, that you ſhould queſti- 
on it? Do you take us for ungratefub wretches ?“ 
Cacambo then humbly aſked him, what the re- 
religion of "Eldorado was ? This made the old 
gentleman redden again. Can there be more 
religions than one? ſaid he; We profeſs, I 
believe, the religion of the whole world; we 
worſhip the deity from evening to morning.” 
* Do you worſhip but one God ?” ſaid Cacambo, 
who ſtill acted as interpreter in repreſenting Can- 
Aidus's doubts. © You may be fore we do,” 
faid the old man; ** fince it'is evident there can be 
neither two, nor three, nor four. I muſt con- 
ſeſs, that che people of your world propoſe very 
odd queſtions.” Candidus was not yet wearicd 
in interrogating the good old man; he wanted 
tw now ho they prayed to God in Eldorado. 
„We never pray at all,“ faid the good reſpect- 
able ſage; we have nothing to aſk of him; he 
Has given us all we nerd, WAVE inceſſantly ve 
turn him thanks.” 

1 |  Candidus 


of.” 
Bs 


Chap. 18. Arr ror Twi Biscr, 6 


Candidus had a curioſity to ſee their prieſts, 
and bid Cacambo aſk, where they were. This 
made the old gentleman ſmile. My friends,” 
faid he, „we are all of us prieſts; the king, and 


the heads of every family, fing their ſolemn ſongs. 


of thankſgiving every morning, accompanied by 
five or fix thouſand muſicians. What!“ ſaid 
Cacambo, have you no monks to preach, to 
diſpute, to tyranniſe, to ſet people together by 
the ears, and get thoſe burnt who are not of the 
ſame ſentiments as themſelves ?”*- We muſt be 


very fools indeed if we had,” faid the old gentle - 
man; * we are all of us of the fame opinion 


here, and we don't underſtand what w_ mean 
by. your monks.” 

Candidus was in an ecftaſy: during all this if 
courſe, and ſaid to himfelf, ** This place is vaſt- 
ly different from Weſtphalia, aud my Lord the 


Baron's caſtle. If our friend Panglo(s had fech- 
Eldorado, he would never have maintaiced; that. 
nothing. upon earth could ſurpaſs the caſtle of. 


Thundereten- tronckh. It is youn _ _ 
mould travel.“ 7 


After this 1 Baltbed, = 
good old man ordered a conch and frat ſheep to 


de got ready, and twelve of his domeſtics to con- 
duct the travellers to the court. Excuſe me 
ſays he to them, if my age deprives me of the 
honour of attending you. The king will receive 


you in a manner that you will not be diſpleaſed 


with; and you will, 1 doubt nor, make allow- 


ance for the cuſtoms of the country, if you 


ſhould meer with any thing that you diſapprove 
Candidus 


* 
1 „  — — _ 
8 . * o . 
ww T7 +> * A - 


a —_— —— 
* 4 


66 c AN DID Us; on Chap. 18. 


Candidus and Cacambo got into the coach; the 
fix ſheep flew, and in leſs than four hours they 
reached the King's palace, which was ſituated at 
one end of the metropolis. The gate was two 
hundred and twenty feet high, and one hundred 
broad; it is impoſſible to deſcribe the materials 
it was compoſed of. But one may eaſily gueſs, 
that it muſt have prodigiouſly ſurpaſſed thoſe 
ſtones and the ſand which we call gold and 
jewels. 

Candidus and Cacambo, on their alighting 
from the coach, were received by twenty maids 
of honour, of an exquiſite beauty, who conduct- 
ed them to the baths, and preſented them with 
robes made of the down of the humming birds; 

after which the great officers and their ladies in- 
troduced them into his Majeſty's apartment, be- 


tween two rows of muſicians, conſiſting of a thou · 


ſand in each, according to, the cuſtom of the 
country. — 

When they approached the foot of the throne, 
Cacambo aſked one of the great officers, in what 
manner they were to behave when they went to 
pay their reſpects to his Majeſty, whether they 
were to fall down on their knees, or their bellies; 
whether they were to put their hands upon their 
deads or upon their backſides; whether they 
were to lick up the duſt of the room; and, in a 
word, what the ceremony was ? The cuſtom 
is, ſaid the great officer, to embrace the king, 
and kiſs him oa both fides.” Candidus and Ca- 
cambo accordingly claſped his Majeſty round the 
neck, who received them ia the moſt polite man- 


* * 
"- YO 


Chap. 18. ALL rox THE BesrT. 69 


ner imaginable, and very genteely invited them 

to ſup with him. 
In the interim, they ſhewed them the city, the 
public edifices, chat reach almoſt as high as the 
clouds, the market-places, embelliſhed with a 
thouſand columns ; fountains of pure water, 
belides others of roſe-water, and the liquors that 
are extracted from the ſugar canes, which play- 
ed inceſſantly in the ſquares, which were paved 
with a kind of precious ſtones, that diffuſed a 
fragrance like that of cloves or cinnamon. Can- 
didus aſking them ro ſhew them one of their 
courts of juſtice, and their parliament houſe ; 
they told him they had none, and that they were 
ſtrangers to law-ſuits. He then inquired if they 
a had any priſons, and was told they had not. 
What ſurpriſed him moſt, and gave him the 
greateſt pleaſure, was the palace of ſciences, in 


* which he ſaw a gallery of two thouſand paces, 
: full of inſtruments for making experimeats in 
A philoſopby. 

«1 After having gone over about a thouſandth 


part of the city in the afternoon, they were re- 

7 conducted to the palace. Candidus feated him · 
5 ſelf at table with his Majeſty, his valet Cacam- 
bo, and a great many ladies. Never was there 
24 a better entertainment ſeen ; and never was more 
wit ſhewn at table, than what his Majeſty diſ- 
played. Cacambo interpreted the King's repar- 
8˙* tees to Candidus; and though they were tranſlat- 
+4 ed, they appeared repartees ſtill : . A thing which 
ſurpriſed Candidus more than any thing elſe. 


70 CANDIDUS; or, Chap. 18, 


. They ſpent a whole month in this hoſpitable 
manner. Candidus was continually ſaying to Ca · 
cambo, I muſt ſay it again and again, my friend, 
that the caſtle where I was born was nothing in 
compariſon of this country where we are now; 
but yet Miſs Cunegonda is not here; and wich - 
out doubt, you have left a ſweetheart behind 
you in Europe. If we ſtay where we are, we 
ſhall be looked upon only like other folks ; where - 
as if we return to our own world only with twelve 
ſheep loaded with the peebles of Eldorado, we 
ſhall be richer than all che kings put together; 
we ſhall have no need to be afraid of the inquiſi · 
tors; and we may _ recover * Cunegon- 
Gai?) it”! 
'This propoſal was extremely agreeable to Ca- 
cambo ; ſo fond are we of running about, of 
making a figure among our countrymen, and of 
making orations on what we have ſeen in our 
travels,. that theſe two really happy men reſolv- 
ed to be no longer ſo, and accordingly aſked his 
Majeſty's leave to depart. 

Lou are guilty of a very great weakneſs,” 
ſaid his Majeſty to them: I am not ignorant 
that my country is a trifling place; but provid- 
ing it be but paſſable, you had better Ray in it. 
1 muſt indeed confeſs that I have no right to de- 
tain people of another nation; it is a degree of 
tyranny inconſiſtent with our cuſtoms and laws; 
all men are free; you may go when you pleaſe ; 
but you ought firſt to be informed, that you 
cannot leave us without ſome difficulty. Ir is 
impoſſible to go — the current up the rapid 
river 


Chap. 18. 
river which runs under the rocks; your paſſage 


ALL rox THE BEST, 71 


hither was a kind of miracle. The mountains 
which ſurround. my kingdom are a thouſand feet 
high, and as ſteep as a wall; they are at leaſt ten 
leagues over, and their deſcent is nothing but pre- 
cipices. However, fince you ſeem determined to 
leave us, I will give orders immediately to the 
conſtructors of my machines, to contrive one to 
tranſport you with the greateſt eaſe. When they 
have conveyed you to the other fide of the moun- 
tains, no one muſt attend you; becauſe my ſub- 
jets have made a vow never to paſs beyond them, 
and they are too wiſe to break it. There is no- 
thing elſe you can aſk of me which ſhall not be 
granted,” © We aſk your Majeſty,” ſaid Ca- 
cambo very eagerly, „ only a few ſheep loaded 
with proviſions, together with ſome of the com- 
mon ſtanes and dirt of your country.” | 
The King ſmiled heartily : I cannot,” faid 
he, * conceive what pleaſure you Europeans find 


in our yellow clay; but you are welcome to take 


as much of it as you pleaſe, and much good may 
it do you.” 

He gave immediate orders to his eogineers to 
conſtruct a machine to hoiſt up and tranſport 
theſe two extraordinary perſons out of bis king - 
dom. Three thouſand: able mechanics ſet to 
work; and in a fortnight's time the machine was 
completed, which coſt no more than br mil- 
lions ſterling of their currency. 

Candidus and Cacambo were both placed i in the 
machine, together with two large red ſheep bri- 
ted — — for them to ride on, when they 
were 


72 CAN DID US; or, Chap. 19. 


were got clear of che mountains; twemy ſheep 
of burden loaded with proviſions; thirty with the 
greateſt curioſities of the country, by way of pre- 
ſent; and fifty with gold, precious ſtones, and 
diamonds. Tbe King took his leave of our two 
vagabonds, with the greateſt marks of affection. 

It was a very fine fight to ſee them depart, and 
the ingenious manner in which they and the ſheep 
were ſlung over the mountains, The philoſophers 
took their leave of them, after having got them 
ſafe over; and now Candidus had no other de- 
fire, no other aim, than to go to preſent his ſheep 
to Miſs Cunegonda. We have now got e- 
nough, ſaid he, to pay for the ranſom of 
Miſs Cunegonda, if the governor of Budnos- 
Ayres will but part with her. Let us march to- 
wards Cayenne, there take ſhipping, and then 
we will look, out for ſome ſoug en. to 


make a purchaſe of,” 


C HAT. XIX. 


What happened to them at Surinam, and how Candi- 
dau got acquainted with Martin. 


HE firſt day's journey of our two travellers 

was very agreeable, being clated with the 
idea of finding themſelves maſters of more trea- 
ſure than Afia, Europe, or Africa, could ſcrape 
together. Candidus was ſo tranſported, that he 
cut out the name of Cunegonda upon almoſt e- 
very tree that he came to. The ſecond day two 
a their ſheep ſunk in a moraſs, and were loft 
with 


Chap. 19. ALL rox THE Bes r. 6 


wich all that they carried: two others died of 
fatigue a few days after; ſeven or eight died at 
once for want in a deſert; and ſome few days af- 
ter, ſome others fell down a precipice. To be 
ſhort, afier a march of one hundred days, their 
whole ſtock amounted to no more than two 
ſheep, 

Says Candidus then to Cacambo. My friend, 


you ſee how periſhable the riches of this world 


are ; there, is nothing durable, nothing to be de- 
pended on but virtue, and the happineſs of once 
more ſceing Miſs Cunegoada ” I grant it,” 
ſaid Cacambo; but we have (till two ſheep left, 
beſides more mes ure than ever the King of Spain 
was maſter of; and I ſee a town. a good way off 
that I take to be Surinam, belonging to the Dutch. 
We are at the end of our troubles, and at the be- 
ginning of our happineſs.“ 

As they drew nigh to the city, they ſaw a ne- 
gro ſtretched on the ground, with only one half 
of his habit, that is to ſay, having only a pair of 
drawers of blue cloth ; the poor fellow had loſt 
his left leg and his right hand. Good God!“ 
ſaid Candidus to him ia Dutch, “ friend, what 
do you do here, in this terrible condition?“ „1 
am waiting for my maſter Mynheer Vanderden- 
dur, the great merchant,” replied the negro. 
« And was it Myuheer Vanderdendur that uſed 
you ia this manner ?“ ſaid Candidus. © Yes, 
Sir,“ ſaid the negro, “ it is the cuſtom of the 
country, They give us a pair of linen drawers 
for our whole clothing twice a-year. If we ſhould 
chance to have one of our fingers caught in the 

5 G mill, 


\ 


No 


74 CANDIDUS; or, Chap. 19. 


mill, as we are working in the ſugar . houſes, they 
cut off our hand; if we offer to run away, they 
cut off one of our legs; and I have had the mis- 
fortune to be found guilty of both theſe charges. 
Such are the conditions on which you cat ſugar 
in Europe! Yet when my mother ſold me for ten 
crowns of Patagon on the, coaſt of Guinea, ſhe 
ſaid to me, My dear boy, bleſs our benefactors, 
be always very dutiful to them, they will make 
you live happily : you have the honour to be a 
flave to our lords the whites, and will by that 
means be in a way of making the fortunes both 
of your father and mother, Alas! I do not 
know whether I have made their fortunes, but I 
am ſure they have not made mine. The dogs, 
monkeys, and parrots, are a thouſand times leſs 
wretched than we. The Dutch miffionaries who 
converted me, told me every Sunday, that we all 
are ſons of Adam, both blacks and whites. Iam 
not a gencalogiſt myſelf; but if theſe preachers 
ſpeak the truth, we are all coufin-germans ; and 
then you muſt own, that it is a ſhocking thing 
for them to ule their relations in this barbarous 
manner.” 

Ahl Pangloſs,“ cried Candidus, ** you never 
dreamed of fuch an abominable piece of villany | 
there is an end of the matter; I ſce I muſt at laſt 
penounce your optimiſm.” © Whatdo you mean 
by optimiſm ?” ſaid Cacambo. Why,” faid 
Candidus, ** it is the folly of maintaining that e- 
very thing is right, when it is wrong,” He then 
looked upon the negro with tears in his eyes, and 
in that condition entered into Surinam. 

'The 


a, 


Chap. 19. ALL FOR THE BRST. 75 


The firſt thing they did here was, to inquire 
whether there was any veſſel in the harbour that 
might be hired for Buenos- Ayres. The perſon 


they applied themſelves to was no other than a 


dpaniſn commander, who offered to make an 
honourable bargain with them. He appointed 
to meet them at an inn, whither Candidus and 
the faithful Cacambo went to wait for him with 
their two ſheep, 

Candidus, who had his mind in his tongue, 
told the Spaniard all his adventures, and confeſſ- 
ed to him that he was determined to run away 
with Miſs Cunegonda. I ſhall take care how 
I carry you to Buenos. Ayres, if that is the caſe,” 
ſaid the captain; “ for I would be hanged, and 
ſo would you. The fair egg is my Lord's 
favourite miſtreſs,” 

This was a thunder-clap to > Candidus ; ; he wept 
a long time; bur at laſt, drawing Cacambo afide, 
will tell you, my dear friend,” ſays he, what 
I would have you do. We have each of us about 
five or fix millions of diamonds in our pockets ; 
and as you are a much cleverer fellow than I am, 
I would have you go and fetch Miſs Cunegonda 
from Buenos Ayres. If the Governor ſhould 
make any difficulties, give him a million of them; 
if that does not ſucceed, give him two. As you 
did not murder the inquiſitor, they will have no 
ſuſpicion of you : in the mean time, I will fit out 
another veſſel, and go and wait for you at Ve- 
nice ; that is a ſafe place, and I need not be a- 
fraid there of Bulgarians, Abares, Jews, or in- 
\ con Cacambo cried up the wiſdom of this 


G 2 propoſal. 


— * —_— _ 
„ = SY 1 " _ — FY - . . 
M—— 
+ ” 
— 4 . 
ST _ =_S 2 — x I * — — — — =_ . * 
. - 2 > — * n — 


2 
2 3 * 


F og 5. = RR 
* — ® = 8 2 
_ - * 
8 - 


i. - 

2 —— = 
K — — * 
> * 


. 


— 
— * 
— WIRD as. % 
1 


— 


— 


——— _ 


16 CAN DID Us; or, Chap. 19. 


propoſal. He was indeed under great concern to 
leave ſo good a maſter, who uſed him like a fa- 
miliar friend; but the pleaſure of being fervice- 
able to him ſoon got the beiter of the ſorrow he 
felt in parting with him. 

They took leave of cach other with tears; 
Candidus recommending to him at the ſame time 
not to forget their good old woman. The ſame 
day Cacambo ſet fail, This Cacambo was a very 
honeſt fellow, 

Candidus ſtaid fome time at Mrinam; w waiting 
for another veſſel to carry him and the two ſheep 


which remained to Italy, He hired ſervants, and 


purchaſed every thing neceſſary for ſo long a voy- 
age; at laſt Mynheer Vanderdendur, the maſter 
of a large veſſel, came and offered his ſervice, 
„What will. you have, ſaid he to our Dutch- 
wan, for carrying me, my family, goods, and 
theſe two ſheep you ſee here, directly to Venice ?” 
The maſter of the veſſel aſking ten thouſand pi- 
aſtres, Candidus made no words. | 
Oh, oh,” ſaid the crafiy Vanderdendur to 
himſelf, after he had leſt him, if this ſtranger 
can give ten thouſand piaſtres, without making 
any words, he muſt be immenſely rich,” Re- 
turning a few minutes after, he let him know, 
that he could not go for leſs than twenty. thou- 
ſand. Well, you ſhall have them then,“ ſaid 
Candidus. 
„% Odſo !“ ſaid the captain with a low voice, 
*« this man makes no more of twenty thouſand 
piaſtces than he did of ten!” He then returned a 
ſecond time, and ſaid that he could not carry him 
| to 


P 


Chap. 19. ALL FOR THE BesrT. 77 


to Venice for leſs chan thirty thouſand piaſtres. 
© You ſhall have thirty thouſand then,” replied 
Candidus. 

« Oh, oh,“ ſaid the Dutch trader again to him- 
ſelf, “this man makes nothing of thirty thouſand 
piaſtres, no doubt but the two ſheep are loaded 
with immenſe treaſures ; let us ſtand out no long- 
er; let us however finger the thirty thouſand pi 

aſtres firſt, and then we ſhall ſee. 

Candidus ſold two ſmall diamonds, the leaſt of 
which was worth more than what the captain had 
aſked, He advanced him the money. The two 


ſheep were put on board the veſſel, Candidus 


followed in a ſmall wherry, intending to join the 
veſſel in the road, But the captain catched his 
opportunity, unfurled his ſails, unmoored, and 
met with a favourable gale. Candidvs, diſtracted 
and out of his wits, ſoon loſt fight of bim. 
Ah!“ cried he, this is a trick worthy of the 
old world.” He returned on ſhore overwhelmed 
with ſorrow; for he had certainly loſt more than 
would ſet up a ſcore of kings. 
He ran immediately to the Dutch judge; and 
as he was not quite maſter of himſelf, knocked 
very loud at the door; he went in, told his caſe, 
and raiſed his voice a little louder than became 
him. The judge began with making him pay 
ten thouſand piaſtres for the noiſe he had made; 
After which he heard him very patiently, and 
promiſed to examine into the affair as foon as e- 
ver the trader ſhould return, at the ſame time 
making him pay ten thouſand piaſtres as the ex- 
penſe of the hearing. | 

| G 3 This 


78 CANDID US; or, Chap. 19. 


This proceeding made Candidus ſtark mad. 
He had indeed experienced misfortunes a thou- 
ſand times more affecting; but the coolneſs of 
the judge, and the knaviſh trick of the maſter of 
the veſſel who had robbed him, fired his ſpirits, 
and plunged him into. a profound melancholy. 
The villany of mankind preſented itlelf to his 
mind in all its deformity, and he dwelt upon no- 
thing but the moſt diſmal ideas. At laſt, a 
French veſſel being ready to ſail for Bourdeaux, 
as he had no ſheep loaded with diamonds to carry 
with him, he paid the common price as a cabin · 
paſſenger, and ordered the crier to give notice 
all over the city, that he would pay for the paſ- 
ſage and diet of any honeſt man that would go 
the. voyage with him, and he would give him two 
thouſand piaſtres beſides; on condition that be 
would make it appear, that he was the moſt diſ- 
ſatisfied with his circumſtances, and the moſt un- 
fortunate perſon in that province. 

A. vaſt multitude. of candidates preſented 
themſelves, enough to have manned a fleet. Can- 
didus,. deſirous, to pick from among the beſt, 
marked out twenty, who ſeemed to him to have 
the beſt pretenſions, and to be the moſt ſociable. 

But as every one of them thought the prefe- 
rerence due to himſelf, he invited them all to his 
inn, and gave them a ſupper, on condition that 
each of them ſhould take an oath, that he would 
relate, his adventures faithfully, -promifing to 
chuſe that perſon who ſeemed to be the greateſt 
object of pity, and had the greateſt reaſon to be 
diffatified with his lot, and to give a ſmall pre- 

ſent 


” A kw S—_—_ <o. a. . 


P 2 


Chap. 19. ALL rox TE BEsr. 79 


ſent to the reſt, as a gratification for their trou- 
ble 

The aſſembly continued till four the next 
morning, As Candidus was employed in hearing 
their adventures, he could not help recollecting 
what the old woman had told him in their voy- 


age towards Buenos: Ayres, and the bargain ſhe 


had made in caſe he met with a fingle perſon in 
the ſhip, that did not eſteem himſelf moſt miſer- 


able. He thought upon Pangloſs at every inci- 


dent that was related. That Pangloſs,” ſaid he, 
would be hard put to it to defend his ſyſtem. 
I wiſh he was but here, Indeed, if every thing 
is ordered for the beſt, it muſt be at Eldorado, 
but no where elſe on earth.“ At laft, he deter- 
mined in favour of a poor ſcholar, who had wrote 
ten years for the bookſellers at Amſterdam, For 
he thought there could not be a more diſagree- 
able employment on the face of the earth. 
This ſcholar, though in other reſpects a good 
ſort of a man, had been robbed by his wiſe, beat 
by his ſon, abandoned by his daughter, who got 
a Portugueſe to run away with her ; had been 
ſtripped of a ſmall employment, which was all 
he had to ſubſiſt on; and was perſecuted by the 
prieſts at Surinam, becauſe they took hin for a 
Socinian. ; 
It muſt indeed be confeſſed, that ſome of the 
other candicates were at. leaſt as unhappy as he; 
but he met with a preference, becauſe Candidus 
thought that a ſcholar would be the moſt proper 
perſon yo divert him during the voyage, All 
his competitors thought that Candidus did them 
| | & great 


80 CAN DID Us; or, Chap. 20. 


a great piece of injuſtice ; but he ſoon convinced 
them to the contrary, by giving them a hundred 
piaſters apiece. 


100 8: A . 
What happened at ſea to Candidus and Martin, 


HE old fcholar, who was named Martin, 


| 

imbarked for Bourdeaux along with Can- 

didus. They had both of them ſeen and ſuffer- 

ed a great deal; and if the veſſel had been to ſail + 

from Surinam to Japan, by the way of the Cape - 
of Good Hope, they would have found enough 

to have entertained them on the fubje& of phy- * 

fical and moral evil during the whole voyage. Y 

Candidus, however, had one great advantage 8 

over Martin, which was, that he ftill hoped to a 


ſee Miſs Cunegonda again; but as for Martin, 
he had nothing to hope for : to which we may— Q 
add, that Candidus had both gold and diamonds: ky 
and though he had loſt a hundred large red 


meep loaded with the greateſt treaſure that the * 
earth could produce, though the knavery of the 2 
. Dutch captain was always uppermoſt in his kh 
thoughts; yet when he reflected upon what he 2 
had left in his pockets, and when he talked a- p 
bout Cunegonda, eſpecially towards the latter ot, 
end of a hearty meal, he inclined to Panglols's Pers 
- I:C 
bypotheſis. bY. 
« But you, Mr. Martin,” ſaid he to the ſcho- 


lar, what is your opinion? what is your notion 
of moral and phyſical evil?” © Sir,” replied 
8 Martin, 


NN 


Chap. 20. ALL rok THE BesT. | 81 


Martio, ** the prieſts have accuſed me of being 
a Socinian ; but the truth is, I am a Manichean.” 
©« You arc in jeſt fure,” ſaid Candidus; “ there 
is not one Manichean in the world!“ “ I am 
one though,” ſaid Martin; “ 1 cannot well ac- 
count for it, but yet I am not able ro think o- 
therwiſe.“ The devil muſt be in you then,” 
ſaid Candidus, © He concerns himſelf fo much 
in the affairs of this world,” ſaid Martin, © that 


he may poſlibly be in me, as well as any where 


elſe; but I muſt profeſs, that when I caſt my 
eyes upon this globe, or rather upon this globule, 
I canct help thinking, that the Deity has aban- 
doned it to ſome malignant being: I always ex- 
cept Eldorado. I never met with a city that did 
not with the deſtruction of its neighbouk: city, 
nor one family that did not deſire to exterminate 


another family. All over the world the poor 


curſe the rich, to whom they are oblized to 


cringe; and the rich treat them like ſo many 


ſheep, whoſe wool and fleſh is fold to the beſt 
bidder,” A thouſand afſiflins formed into regi- 
ments, running about from one extremity of Eu - 
rope to another, practiſe murder and rapine ac- 
cording to diſcipline for their bread, becauſe ir 
is the moſt honourable profeſſion in the world; 
and in thoſe cities which ſeem to enjoy the ſweers 
of peace, and where the arts are cultivated, man- 
kind are devoured with greater envy, cares, and 
diſquictudes, than a city meets with troubl:s 
when it is beſieged. Private torments are ſtill 


more. inſupportable than public calamities. In 
| \ a word, 


l 


82 CANDID US; or Chap, 20. 


a word, I have ſeen and experienced ſo much, 
that I am become a Manichean,” 

There's ſome good for all that,” replied Can- 
didus. That may be,” ſaid Martin, „but 1 
do not know where to find it.“ 

In the middle of this diſpute, they heard the 
report of cannon, The noiſe jncreaſing every 
moment, each perſon took out 14 
means they eſpied two veſſels engaging each o- 
ther, about three miles diſtant. The wind 
brought the combatanis ſo near the French veſ- 
ſel, that they had the pleaſure of ſeeing the fight 
very eaſily. At length, one of the veſlels gave 
the other a broadſide between wind and water, 
which ſunk it to the bottom. Candidus and 
Martin plainly perccived about a hundred men 
upon the deck of the ſhip which was ſinking, 
lifting vp their bands towards heaven, and mak- 
ing the moſt diſmal lamentations; and in an 
inſtant they were all ſwallowed up by the ſea, 

% Well,” ſaid Martin,  ** ſee how mankind 
treat one another.“ It is true,” ſaid Candidus, 
there's ſomething diabolical in it.“ As he was 
ſaying ſo, hẽ perceived ſomething red and glitter- 
ing ſwimming near his ſhip. 'They immediately 
ſent the longboat to ſee what it could be; when 
it proved to be one of his ſheep. Candidus felt 
more joy at the recovery of this ſheep than he 
had trouble at the loſs of a hundred loaded with 
the large diamonds of Eldorado. 

The French captain ſoon found, that the-cap- 
tain of the conquering veſſel was a Spaniard, and 
that the commander of the veſſel which was ſunk 


* was 


s glaſs, Ey this 


— — — — 
e Tm!!! eee — . — 


Chap 21. ALL rox THE Brsr. 83 


was a Dutch pirate, and the very ſame who had 
robbed Candidus. The immenſe riches which 
the villain had amaſſed, were buried in the ſea a- 
long with him, and there was only a ſingle ſheep 
ſaved, 

© You ſee,” ſaid Candidus to Martin, “ that 
wickedneſs ſometimes meets with condign puniſh- 
meat: that raſcal the Dutch commander, has 
met with the fate he merited.” ** Yes,” ſaid Mar- 
tin; “ but why ſhould the paſſengers on board 
his ſhip alſo periſh together with him? God in- 
deed has puniſhed the villain, but the devil has 
drowned the reſt.” | 

In the mean time, the Frenchman and the 
Spaniard continued their courſe, and Candidus 
his debates with Martin, They diſputed fifteen 
days without intermiſſion; and, at the end of the 
fifteen days, they were no farther advanced than 
when they began. But they chatted, they com- 
municated their ideas to each other, and com- 
forted each other reciprocally. Candidus caref- 
ſing his ſheep, ** Since I have found you,” ſaid 
he, I have ſome hopes of recovering Cuve- 


gonda.“ 


Gr.. :IXE 


'Candidus and Mortis drew near to the coaſt of 


France, and diſpute. 


T length they deſcried the coaſt of France, 

* Have you ever been ia France, Mr. 
Martin?” ſaid Candidus. Yes,” ſaid Martin, 
TE | 61 


84 CAN DID US; or, Chap. 21. 


« I have run over ſeveral cf its provinces, In 
ſome, one half of the inhabitants are mere fools ; 
in others they are too cunning ; in others either 
very good natured or very brutiſh; in others 
they affect to be wits; and in all of them, their 
-Fuling paſſion is love, the next lying, and the 
third to talk nonſenſe,” © Bat, Mr. Martin, have 
you ever been at Paris?” * Yes, I have been at 
Paris: there are all theſe ſorts there; it is a mere 
chaos; a croud in which every one is in ſearch 
after pleaſure, but no one finds it, as far as I 
have been able to diſcover. I ſpent a few days 
re; and, at my arrival, was robbed of all I 
#60 d by ſome ſharpers, at the fair of St. Germain. 
” Nay, I myſelf was taken up for a robber, and was I 


eight days in priſon ; after which I turned cor- ſe 
rector of the preſs, to get a ſmall matter to carry ſe 
me on foot to Holland. I know the whole tribe lo 
- of ſcribblers, with malecontents, and fanatics, be 
They ſay the people are very polite in that city; cu 


I] wiſh I could believe them,” 

« For my part, I have no curioſity to ſee 
France,” ſaid Candidus ; “ you may eafily fancy, 
that when a perſon has once ſpent a month at El- 
dorado, he is very indifferent whether he ſees a · 
ny thing elſe upon earth, except Miſs Cuncgon- 
da, I am going to wait for her at Venice; we 

will go through France in our way towards Italy. 
Won't you bear me company?“ © With all my 
heart,” ſaid Martin: they ſay that Venice is not 
fit for any but the Noble Venetians; but, for all 
that, they receive ſtrangers very well, provided 


they have a good deal of money. I have none; 
| | you 


—y we. * —— 2 


* 


Chap. 21. ALL rox THE BesrT, 8 


you have; therefore I'll follow you all the world 
over.“ Now I think of it,” ſaid Candidus, do 
you imagine that the earth was originally no- 
thing but water, as is aſſerted in the great book 
belonging to the Captain f“ © I don't believe a 
word of it,” ſaid Martin, “ no more than I do 
of all the reveries that have been publiſhed for 
ſome time,” © But for what end was the world 
created then?“ ſaid Candidus. To make one 
mad,” replied Martin. Was not you vaſtly 
ſurprized,” continued Candidus, ** at the paſ- 
fion which the two girls in the country of the 
Orcillons had for thoſe two apes, whoſe ſtory I 


related to you? Not at all,” faid Martin; I 


ſee nothing ſtrange in that paſſion ; for I have 
ſeen ſo many ſtrange things already, that I can 
look upon nothing as extraordinary. Do you 
believe,“ ſaid Candidus, * that mankind always 
cut one another's throats; that they were always 
liars, knaves, treacherous, and ungrateful; al - 
ways thieves, ſharpers, highwaymen, lazy, envi - 
ons, and glattons; always drunkards, miſers, 


ambitious, and blood-thirſty ; always backbiters, 


debauchees, fanatics, hypocrites, and fools ?” 


Po you not believe,“ ſaid Martin, * that hawks 


have always preyed upon pigtons, when they 
could light upon them? Certainly,” ſaid Can- 
didus. Well then,” ſaid Martin, “if the hawks 
have always had the ſame nature, what reaſon 
can you give why mankind ſhould have changed 
theirs 7 Aye, ſaid Candidus, there is a 
great deal of difference, becauſe free-will * * 1 
| H a 


36 CANDIDUS; or, 


In the midſt of this diſpute, they arrived at 
Bourdeaux. 


1 


| Chap. 22. 


S. A XXL, 


hat happened in France to Candidus and Martin. 
\ 


3 ſtaid no longer at Bourdeaux than 
till he could diſpoſe of ſome of the pebbles 
of Eldorado, and furniſh himſelf with a poſt- 
chaiſe large enough to hold two perſons ; for he 
could not part with his philoſopher Martin. He 
was indeed very ſorry to part with his ſheep, 
which he left at the academy of ſciences at Bour- 
deaux ; who propoſed for the ſubje& of this 
year's prize, the reafon why this ſheep's wool was 
red ; and the prize was adjudged to a learned 
man in the North, who demonſtrated, by A plus 
B minus C divided by Z, that the ſheep muſt be 
red, and die of the rot. 

In the mean time, all the travellers whom Can- 
didus met in the inns on the road, telling him 
they were going to Paris, this general eagerneſs 
to ſee the capital, inſpired him at length with the 
ſame deſire, as it was not much out of the way 
in his journey towards Venice. 

He entered Paris by the ſuburb of St. Mar 
ceau, and fancied himſelf to be in the dirtieſt vil - 
lage in Weſtphalia. 

Candidus was ſcarce got to his inn, when he 
was ſeized by a flight indiſpofition, cauſed by his 
fatigues. As he had a very large diamond on 
his finger, and the people had taken notice of a 


pretty 


Chap. 22. ALL rox THE BEsT, 87 


pretty heavy box among his baggage, in a mo- 
ment's time he had no leſs than two phyſicians 
to attend him, who did not ſtay to be ſent for; 
a few intimate friends, that never left him, ſat 
up with him, together with a couple of female 
friends that took care to have his broths warmed. 
Said Martin, I remember that when I was ſick 
at Paris, in my firſt journey, I was very low in 
pocket, and could meet neither with friends, 
nurſes, nor phyſicians; but I recovered.” 

In the mean while, what by medicines and 


bleedings, Candidus's diſorder beginning to grow. 


a ſerious affair, the clerk of the pariſh came, will! 
great modeſty, to aſk a bill for the other world, 
payable to the bearer. Caadidus refuſing to ac- 
cept it, the nurſes aſſured him that it was a new 
falhion. Caadidus replied, that he was reſolved 
not to follow the faſhion. Martin was going to 
throw the prieſt out of the window. The clerk 
ſwore that Candidus ſhould not be buried. Martin 
ſwore that he would bury the clerk, if he conti- 

nued to be troubleſome, The quarrel grew high, 
and Martin took the prieft by the ſhoulders, au. 
puſhed him out of doors. This occatoning 4 


great deal of ſcandal, an action was commenced 


aint him. 


Candidus recovered; and all the while he was 


vpon the mending hand, had the beſt of company 


to ſup with him, They gamed high; and Can» 
didus was very much ſurpriſed that he never 


could throw an ace; but Martin was not ſurpriſ- 
ed at all. 


Among thoſe who did him the honours of. 


IS 3 . oy the 


e A. + A — 
. p 
_— pave > « 
*% . 


* — — — 


— > - 
hn, 3 — * 


— n 
..4 7 . by - _- o > . a . 
rr — — 


> 


88 CANDID US; or, Chap. 22. 


the town, was a little abbe of Perigord, one of 
thoſe people that are always buſy, always alert, 
always ready to do one ſervice, forward, fawning, 
and accommodating themſelves to every one's 
humour; who watch for ſtrangers on their jour- 
' ney, tell them the ſcandatous biſtory of the town, 
and offer them pleaſures at all prices. This man 
carried Candidus and Martin to the playhouſe, 
where a new tragedy was to be ated. Candidus 
found himfelf ſeated near ſome critics; but this 
did not keep bim from crying at ſome ſcenes that 
were well ated. One of theſe critics, who ſtood 
at his elbow, ſaid to him, between one of the acts, 
Vou was in the wrong to ſhed gears; that's a 
ſhocking actreſs, the actor who plays with her is 
worſe than ſhe, and the piece is ſtill worſe than 


the actors. The author does not underſtand a 


Cagle word of Arabic, and yet the ſcene lies in 
Arabia: but beſides, he is a man who does not 
believe that our ideas are innate ; Ill bring you 
twenty pamphlets againſt him by to-morrow 
morning.“ “ Sir,” ſaid the abbe of Perigord, 
did you take notice of that young man with 
the lively countenance and fine ſhape? he will 
not coſt you more than ten thouſand francs er 
month, and fifty thouſand crowns in diamonds,” 
„ have not above a day or two to ſpare,” re- 
plied Candidus, ** becauſe I have one to meet at 
Venice, which hurrics me.” 

In the evening, after ſupper was over, the inſi- 
nuating Perigourdin redoubled his compliments 
of ſervice, and his officiouſneſs, ©* You are then, 
Sir,” ſaid he, under an engagement to go to 

Venice? 


a Ins i 7a = ac oc oc 


Chap. 22. ALL rox THIN BEsr. 89 


Venice?“ © Yes, Mr. Abbe,” ſaid Candidus, 
J am under a neceſſity to go to meet Miits Cu- 
negonda,” . Being then invited with the pleaſure 
of ſpeaking about the object he loved, he related, 
according to cuſtom, a part of his adventures with. 
that illuſtrious Weſtphalian. 

« I fancy,” ſaid the Abbe, © that Miſs Cune- 
gonda is a lady of very great parts, and that ſhe 
writes charming letters ? I never received any 
from her,” ſaid Candidus :. © for figure to your- 
ſelf, that being driven out of the caſtle on account 
of my paſſion for her, I could not write to her; 
that ſoon after I heard ſhe was dead ; that after- 
wards I found her, and loſt her; and that I have 
now ſent an expreſs to her about two thouſand- 
five hundred le- gues from hence, and wait for an 
anſwer,” 

The Abbé heard him with great attention, and 
appeared to be a little thoughitul, He ſoon took 
leave of the two ſtrangers, after a moſt affection- 

ate embrace. The next day, as ſoon as Candidus 

awaked, he received a letter, couched in the fols 

lowing.terms.. 

« Sir, my deareſt love, I have been ill theſe- 
eight days in this town, and have learned that you 
are here, . I would ly to your arms, if I were able 
to ſtir. I, knew of your paſſage to Bourdeaùx, 
where I-have left the faithful -Cacambo and the 
old woman, who are to follow me very ſoon, 
The governor of Buenos-Ayres has taken all 
from me, but your heart is (till left me. Come 
and ſee me; for your preſence will either reſtore. 
me to life, or kill me with pleaſure,” 


4 FO 


do c AN DID us; or, Chap. 22. 


This charming, this unexpected letter, tranſ- 


ported Candidus with an inexpreſſible joy; and 


the indiſpoſition of his dear Cunegonda over- 
whelmed him with forrow. Diſtracted betweeg 


theſe two paſſions, he took his gold and diamonds, 


and got ſomebody to conduct him and Martin to 
the houſe where Miſs Cunegonda was lodged. 
On his entrance he trembled in every limb, his 
heart beat quick, and his voice was choked up 
with ſighs; he was going to, open the curtains of 
the bed, and bid them bring him a light. Take 


care, Sir,” ſaid the nurſe, * the can't bear light 


for the world, it would overpower her;“ and im- 
mediately ſhe drew the curtains cloſe again. My 
dear Cunegonda,” ſaid Candidus, diſſolved in 
rears, * how do you find yourſelf ? though you 
can't ſee me, you may ſpeak to me at leaſt.” 
« She can't ſpeak,” ſaid the maid. The lady then 
put a plump hand out of the bed, which Candi- 
dus for ſome time bathed with his tears, and af- 
terwards filled with diamonds, RO a bag full 
of gold upon the eaſy chair, 

In the middle of his tranſports, eame in a life- 
guardman, followed by the Abbe Perigourdin and 
a file of ſoldiers. ** There,” ſaid he, are the 
two ſuſpected foreigners.” He cauſed them be 
immediately ſeized, and ordered his men to drag 
them to priſon. ** It is not thus they treat tra- 
vellers at Eldorado,” ſaid Candidus, ** I am more 
a Manichean than ever,” ſaid Martin. bur, 
pray, Sir, where arc you going to carry us,” ſaid 
Candidus. To a hole in the dungeon,” ſaid 
the lifeguardman. | 

; Martin 


err. @ © = 9 


Chap. 22. ALL rox THE Best. ot 


Martin now finding his blood grow ſomewhat 
cool, fancied that the laſs who pretended to 
Cunegonda was a cheat; that the Abbe Pe: 

ourdin was a ſharper, who had taken advantage 
of Candidus's ſimplicity z and that the liteguard- 
man was another ſharper, whom they might ea- 
fily get clear of. 

Rather than expoſe. himſelf before a court of 
juſtice, Candidus, ſwayed by his advice, and be- 
ſides very impatient to fee the real Cunegonda, 
offered the lifeguardman three ſmall diamonds, 
worth about 3000 piftoles each. Ah, Sir,” 
faid the man with the ivory baton, © though you 


had committed all the crimes that can be imagin- 


ed, this would make me think you are the ho- 
neſteſt gentleman in the world! Three diamonds ! 
worth ze oo piſtoles apiece ! Sir, inſtead of put- 
ting you in a dungeon, I would loſe my life for 
you : all ſtrangers are arreſted here, but let me 
alone for that; I have a brother at Dieppe in 
Normandy ; I'll conduct you thither; and if you 
have any diamond to give him, he will take as 
much care of you as I myſelf.” 

And why do they put all ſtrangers under ar- 
reſt ?” ſaid Candidus. The Abbe Perigourdin 
then put in his word: “ Becauſe,” faid he, a 
beggar of Atrebatia liſtened to ſome fooliſh ſto- 
rics, which made him guilty of a parricide, not 


like that in May 1610, but like that in December. 


1594 ; and juſt like thoſe that a great many other 
beggars have been guilty of, in other months and 


other years, after liſtening ro fooliſh ſtories,” 


The 


— SR 
= . —— ere nn 

' | 
- Wr . — 


92 CAN DID US; or; Chap: 22; 


The lifeguardman thefi gave him a more parti- 
cular account of their crimes. Oh the mon- 
ſters !” cried Candidus ; are there then ſuch ter- 
rible crimes among people that can dance and 
ſing ? Can I not immediately get out of this coun- 
try, where monkeys provoke tygers ? I have ſeen 
bears in my own country, but I never met with 


men except at Eldorado, In the name of God, 


Mr, Officer, conduct me to Venice, where I am 
to wait for Miſs Cunegonda.“ I can conduct 
you no where except to Lower Normandy,” ſaid 
our mock officer. Immediately he ordered his 
irons to be ſtruck of, {aid he was undef a miſtake, 
diſcharged his men, conducted Candidus and 
Martin to Dieppe, and left them in the hands of 
his brother, 

here was then a ſmall. Holland, trader in the 
harbour. The Norman, by means of three more 
diamonds, became the moſt ſerviceable man in the 
world, put Candidus and his attendants ſafe on 
board the veſſel, which was ready to ſail for Ports 
mouth in England. 

This was not indeed the way to Venice; but 
Candidus thought he had eſcaped from hell, and 
reſolved to reſume his voyage towards Venice ths 
firſt opportunity that offered. 


CHAP: 


0 
l 
7 
t 
f 
N 
kc 


Chap. 23. ALL rox THE Brsr. 93 


. 


candidus and Martin go to the Engliſh caafl, and 
| what they ſaw there. 


H! Pangloſs! Pangloſs| ah! Martin! 
Martin! al | my dear Cunegonda! what 
a world is this!“ ſaid Candidus on board the 
Dutch ſhip. ** A very fooliſh and abominable 
one indeed,” replied Martin. You are ac- 
quainted with England,” faid Candidus to him ; 
© are they as great fools as the French ? «'T hey 
have a different kind of folly,” ſaid Martia; 
«you know that theſe two nations are at war a- 
bout a few acres of ſnow towards Canada, and 
that they hare ſpent a great deal more upon this 
fine war than all Canada is worth. To tell you 
with precifion whether there are more people fit 
to ſend to a madhouſe in one country than in the 
other, is more than my weak capacity is able to 
perform. I only know in general, that the peo- 
ple we are going to ſee are very melancholic.” 

As they were talking in this manner, they arri- 


ved at Portſmouth. The thore was covered with 


a multitude of people, who were looking very at- 
tentively at a pretty luſty man who was kneeling, 
with ſomething tied before his eyes, on the deck 
of one of the men of war; four ſoldiers, that 
were placed oppoſite to him, lodged three balls a- 
piece in his head, with the greateſt coolneſs ima- 
ginable, and the whole aſſembly went away very 


well ſatisfied, ** What is the meaning of this?“ 
ſaid 


94 CAN DID US; or, Chap. 23. 


ſaid Candidus; © and what demon is it that ex- 
erciſes his dominion all over the globe ?” 

He inquired who the luſty gentleman was that 
was killed with ſo much ceremony. © He is an 
admiral “,“ replied ſome of them. And why 
was this admiral killed?“ “ Becauſe,” ſaid they, 
he did not kill men enough himſelf, He en- 
gaged the French admiral, and was found guilty 
of not being near enough to him.“ “But then,” 
ſaid Candidus, was not the French admiral as 
far off from the Engliſh admiral, as he was from 
him?” That is what cannot be doubted,” re- 
plied they. But in this country it is of very 
great ſervice to execute an admiral now-and then 
in order to make the reſt fight the better.” 

Candidus was ſo aſtoniſhed and ſhocked at 
what he had ſeen and heard, that he would not 
ſet foot on ſhore, but, agreed with the maſter of 
the Dutch veflcl (though he was ſure to be rob- 
bed by him, as well as by his countryman at Su- 
rinam) to carry him directly to Venice, 

The maſter was ready in two days. They 
coaſted it all along France. Paſſing within ſight 
of Liſbon, Candidus gave a very deep groan. 

They paſſed the Streights, made the Mediter- 
ranean, and at laſt arrive i at Venice. 

„ The Lord be praiſed,” ſaid Candidus, em- 
bracing Martin, “ It is here that I ſhall ſee the 
fair CunegonUa again! I have as good an opi- 


nion of Cacambo, as of myſelf, Every thing is. 


The author alludes to the caſe of Admiral Byng, who was 


ſhot on board the Monarque man of war at Portſmouth, March 
, 175 


right, 


e 
Chap. 24. ALL rox THE Bzsr. 95 
right, every thing goes well; every thing is the 
beſt that it can poſſibly be.“ 


. 
Concerning Paguetia and Father Girofflte, 


S ſoon as they arrived at Venice, he cauſed 
ſearch for Cacambo in all the inns, in all 

the coffechouſes, and among all the ladies of 
pleaſure, but could not find him. He ſent every 
day to all the ſhips and barks that arrived; but 
no news of Cacambo. © Well!” ſaid he to 
Martin, “ I have had time enough to go from 
Surinam to Bourdeaux, from Bourdeaux to Pa- 
ris, from Paris to Dieppe, from Dieppe to Portſ- 
mouth ; after that I have coaſted along Portugal 
and Spain, and traverſed the Mediterranean, and 
have now been ſome months at Venice, and yet, 


for all that, the lovely Cunegonda is not come. 


Inſtead of her, I have only met with a bite, and 
an abbe of Perigord. Cunegonda is certainly 
dead, and I have no more to do but to die too. 
Ah ! it would have been far better for me to 
have ſtaid in that paradiſe, Dorado, than to have 
returned again to this curſed Europe. You are 
certainly right, my dear Martin ; all is illuſion 
and miſery here.” 

He fell into a deep melancholy ; and never fre- 
quented the opera, or the other diverſions of the 
carnival ; nay he was proof againſt all the charms 
of the fair ſex. Martin ſaid to him, © You are 


very {imple indeed, to fancy that a mongrel va- 


let, 


gs CAN Dip us; or, 


let, with five or ſix millions in his pocket, would 
go to the end of the world in queſt of your miſ- 
treſs, and bring her to Venice. If he meets with 
her, he'll keep her for himſelf : if he cannot find 
her, he'll get ſomebody elſe. Let me adviſe you 
to forget both your valet Cacambo, and your miſ- 
treſs Cuncgonda.,” Martin was a moſt wretched 
comforter. 'The melancholy of Candidus increa- 
ſed; and Martin never ceaſed preaching that 
there was but very little virtue and as little hap- 
pineſs to be found on earth, excepting, perhaps, 


at Eldorado, where it was almoſt inpoſiible for 


any one to go. 

As they were diſputing on this important ſub- 
Je, and waiting for Cunegonda, Candidus per- 
ceived, a young Theatin “ in the place + of St. 
Mark, holding a girl under his arm. 'The The- 
atin friar looked freſh, plump, and full of vi- 


gour ; his eyes were ſparkling, his air bold, his 


mien lofty, and his gait firm, This girl was to- 
lerably handſome, and was ſinging a ſong : ſhe 
ogled her T heatin friar with a great c deal of paſ- 
Bon, and now and then would give his fat checks 


Apiach. 


& Atleaft you will grant me,” ſaid Candidus 
to Martin, ** that theſe folks are happy. I have 
never found any but unhappy wretches till now 
all over this babitable globe, excepting at Eldo- 
rado; but as for the girl and the Theatin, I will 
lay any wager that they are as happy as happy 
can be.” * 1 will lay they are not,” ſaid Martin. 


An order of religious. 


+ Place is the ſame as our ſquares. 
| «* Only 


Chap. 24. 


{ 
c 
f 
8 
N 
C 
A 
ec 
Cy 


Chap. 24. ALL rox THE Besr, 


Only let us invite them to dinner,” ſaid Can- 
didus, „and then you ſhall fee if I am miſtaken 
or not,” 

He ;nandadictely accoſted them, macs them a 
bow, and invited them to his inn to eat macaroni, 
partridges of Lombardy, and caviare, and to 
drink - montepulciano, lachryma Chriſti, Cyprus 
and Samos wine. The girl bluſhed ; the Thea- 
tin accepted of the invitation, and the girl follow - 
ed him, looking at Candidus with eyes of ſur- 
prife and confuſion, from which the tears trickled, 
Scarce was ſhe entered into Candidus's room, 
when ſhe ſaid to him, * What! does not Mr. 
Candidus know his old friend Paquetta again? 
At theſe words, Candidus, who had not yet look · 
ed at her with any degree of attention, becauſe 
Cunegonda engroſſed all his thoughts, ſaid to 
her, Ahl my poor girl, is it you who redu- 
ced Dr. Pangloſs to the fine plight in which I ſaw 
him?“ * 

„Ah, Sir l tis I myſelf,” ſaid Paquetta ; ** I 
and you know the whole ſtory; and I have been 
informed of all the terrible ditaſters which have 
happened to the family of my Lady the Baroneſs, 
and the fair Cunegonda. My fate, I aſſure you, 
has not been leſs melancholy. 1 was very inno- 
cent when you knew me. A cordelier, who was 
my confeſſor, eaſily ſeduced me. The effects of 
it were terrible: Las obliged to leave the caſtle 
ſome time after the Baron kicked your backſide 
out of che door If a celebrated quack had not 
taken pity on me, I ſhould have periſhed. I was 
the-quack's miſtreſs for ſome time by way of re- 

| I compence, 


98 CAN DID Us; or, Chaps 24. 


compence. His wife, who was as jealous as the 
devil, Weat me every day moſt unmercifully; ſhe 
was a very fiend of hell, The doctor was one of 
the uglieſt fellows I ever ſaw in my life, and I 


one of the moſt wretched creatures that ever ex · 


iſted, to be beat every day for the ſake of a man 
whom I hated. Lou know how dangerous it is 
for a ſcolding woman to be married to a doctor. 
Being quite exaſperated with his wife's behaviour, 
he gave her one day fo efficacious a remedy to 
cure her of a ſlight cold ſhe had, that ſhe died 
two hours after in the moſt horrid convulſions, 
My miftreſs's relations entered a criminal action 
againſt my maker ; he took to his heels, and I 
was carried to jail. My innocence would never 
have ſaved me, if I had not been pretty hand- 
ſome. The judge acquitted me, on condition of 
his ſucceeding the doctor. I was ſoon afterwards 
ſupplanted by a rival, driven out of doors without 
any recompenſe, and obliged to continue this 
abominable occupation, which appears. ſo plea- 
ſant to you men, while it is to us women the ve- 
ry abyſs of miſery. I am come to practiſe my 
profeſſion at Venice, Ab, Sir, if you could ima- 
gine what it is to be abliged to careſs indifferent- 

ly an old merchant, a counſelor, a monk, a gon- 
dolier, or an abbe ; to be Expoſed to all ſorts of 
inſults and outrages; to be oſten reduced to bor- 
row a petticoat, to have it lifted up by a diſagree · 
able raſcal; to be robbed by one gallant of what 
one bas got by another; to be ranſomed by the 
peace-officer, and to have nothing elſe in pro- 


__ _ a nn. age, an hoſpital, or a 
dung- 


Chap. 24+ ALL ron THE BusT, 99 


dunghill; you would confeſs that I am one of 
the moſt unfortunate creatures in the world.” 

- -Paquetta opened her mind in this manner to 
the good Candidus, in his cloſet, in the preſence 
of Martin; who ſaid to Candidus, ** You ſee I 
have won one half of the wager already.” 

Brother GiroMee waited in the dining-room, 
and drank a glaſs or two while he was waiting 
for dinner. But,” ſaid Candidus to Paquetta, 
you had an air fo gay, ſo content, when I firſt 
met you, you ſung, and careſſed the 'Theatin 
with ſo much warmth, that you ſeemed to be as 
happy then as you pretend to be miſerable now.” 
* Ah, Sir,” replied Paquetta, © this is one of 
the miſeries of the trade. Yeſterday I was rob- 
bed and beaten by an officer, and to day I am 
obliged to appear in good humour to pleaſe a 
monk.” Candidus wanted no more, to be ſatis - 
fied, and owned that Martin was in the right. 
They ſat down to table with Paquetta and the 
Theatin ; the. repaſt was very entertaining, and, 
towards the end, they began to ſpeak to each 
other with ſome degree of confidence. My 
father,” ſaid Candidus to the monk, you ſeem 
to enjoy a ſlate that all the world might look on 
with covy. The flower of health bloſſoms on 
your countenance, and your phyſiognomy ſpeaks 
nothing but happineſs; you have a very pretty 
girl to divert you, and you ſeem to be well ſa- 
tisfied with your ſtation as a Theatin monk.” 

„ Faith, Sir,“ ſaid Brother Girofflee, I with 
that all the Theatins were at the bottom of the 
ſea. I have been tempted an hundred times to 

| I 2 ſer 


* 


1c CANDID US; or, Chap. 24. 


ſet fire to the convent, and to go and turn Turk. 
My parents forced me, at the age of fifteen, to 
put on this curſed habit, to increaſe the fortune 
of an elder brother of mine, whom God con- 
found. Jealouſy, diſcord, and fury, reſide in the 
convent, It is true, indeed, I have preached a 
few paltry ſermons, which brought me in a little 
money; one part of which the prior robs me of, 
the remainder ſerves me to ſpend upon the la- 
dies; but every evening, when I enter the mona- 
ſtery, I am ready to daſh out my brains againſt 
the wall of the'dormitory ; and all the brother- 
hood are in the ſame caſe. 

Martin turning towards Candidus, with his u- 
ſual coolneſs, Well,“ ſaid he to him, “ have 
not I won the whole wager now?” Candidus 
gave two thouſand piaſtres to Paquetta, and one 
thouſand to brother Girofflee,  ** I'll anſwer for 
it,” ſaid he, this will make them happy.“ 1 
don't believe a word of it,” ſaid Martin; “ you 
may perhaps make them a great deal more miſe- 
rable by your piaſtres.” Be that as it may,” 
ſaid Candidus: “ but one thing comforts me, I 
ſee that one often finds thoſe perſons whom one 
never expected to find any more ; and as 1 have 
found my red ſheep and Paquetta again, it may 
be I may find Cunegonda again too.“ „IJ wiſh,” 
faid Martin, „that ſhe may one day make you 
happy; but it is what I very much queſtion.” 
© You are very incredulous,” ſaid Candidus. 
That is what I always was,” ſaid Martin, 

* But only look on thoſe gondoliers,“ faid 


> rant ne wn not perpetually ſingipg ?” 
« You 


| 
| 
1 
{ 
] 
b 
| 


Chap. 25, Art vox TRE Basr. rr 


* Yoh don't ſee them at home with their wives, 
and their monkeys of children,” ſaid Martin. 
« 'The Doge has his inquietudes, and the gondo- 
hers have theirs. Indeed, generally ſpeaking, 
the condition of a gondolier is preferable to that 
of a doge ; but I believe that the difference is fo 


- ſmall, that it is not worth the trouble of examin- 


ing into,” 

People ſpeak,” faid Candidus, © of Seignior 
Pococurante, who lives in that fine palace upon 
the Brenta ; and who entertains ſtrangers in the 
moſt polite manner. 'They pretend that this man 
never felt any uneaſineſs,” *© I ſhould be glad 
to ſee ſo extraordinary a phenomenon,” ſaid 
Martin. On which Candidus inſtantly ſent to 
8eignior Pococurante, to get permiſſion to pay 
him a viſt the next day. 


0 . 599 TY A» 4 


The viſit ta Seignior Pococurante, the Noble Vene» 
netian. 


Andidus and Martin went in a gondola on 

the Brenta, and arrived at the palace of the 
noble Pococurante. His gardens were very ſpa- 
cious, and ornamented with fine ſtatues of mar- 
ble, and the palace itſelf was a piece of excellent 
architecture. The maſter of the houſe, a very 
rich man, about threeſcore, received our two in- 


quiſitives very politely, but with very little hear- 


tineſs ; which, though it confuſed Candidus, did 
not t give the leaſt uneaſineſs to Martin, 
: TY At 


| | } 
102 CANDIDUS; or, Chap. 25. 


At firſt two young girls, handſome, and very 
neatly dreſſed, ſerved them with chocolate, which 
was frothed extremely well. Candidus could not 
help dropping them a compliment on their beau- 
ty, their politeneſs, and their addreſs. * The 
creatures are well enough, ſaid the ſenator Pro- 
cocurante : * I ſometimes make them lie in my 
bed, for I am quite tired of the girls of the town, 
of their coquetry, their jealouſies, quarrels, hu- 
mours, monkey-tricks, pride, follies, and the 
ſonnets one is obliged to make, or hire others to 
make for them ; but, after all, theſe two girls be- 
gin to grow tireſome to e., 

After breakfaſt, Candidus taking a walk in his 
long gallery, was charmed with the beauty of the 
pictures. He aſked by what maſter were the two 
firſt.“ They are by Raphael,” ſaid the ſenator; 
« I bought them at a very high price, merely out 
of vanity, ſome years ago. They are ſaid to be 
the fineſt paintings in Italy : - but-they do. not 
pleaſe me at all ; the colours are dead, the figures 
notfiniſhed, and do not appear with relief enough; 
the drapery is very bad. Ia ſhort, let people ſay 
what they will, 1 do not find there t true imita- 
tion of nature. I do not like a picce unleſs it 
makes me think I ſce nature itſelf ; but there are 
no ſuch pieces to be met with. I have, indeed, 


a great many pictures, but 1 do not value them 


at all.” 


rante entertained them with a concert ; Candi- 
dus was quite charmed with the muſic. This 
noiſe,” ſaid Pococurante, might divert one for 

| | | half 


While they were waiting for dinner, Pococu- 


Chap. 25. ALL; rox THE BesT, 10} 


half an hour, or ſo ; but if it were to laſt any 
longer, it would grow tireſome to every body, 
though no ſoul durſt own it. Muſic is, now-a- 
days, nothing elſe but the art of executing diffi- 
culties; and what has nothing but difficulty to 
recommend it; does not pleaſe at the longrun, 

I might perhaps take more pleaſure in the ope- 
ra, if they had not found out the ſecret to make 
ſuch a monſter of it as ſhocks me. Let thoſe go 
that will to fee wretched tragedies ſet to muſic, 
where the ſcenes are compoſed for no other end 
than to lug in by the head and cars two or three 
ridiculous ſongs, in order to ſet off the pipe of 
an actreſs. Let who will, or who can, die away 
with pleaſure, at bearing an eunuch trilling out 
the part of Cæſar and Cato, and ſtrutting upon 
the ſtage with a ridiculous and affected air. For 
my part, I have long ago bid adieu to thoſe pal- 
try entertainments, which conſtitute the glory of 
Italy, and are purchaſed by crowned heads fo ex- 
travagantly dear. Candidus diſputed: the point 
a litile, but with great diſcretion. Martin was 
entirely of the ſame ſentiments with the ſenator, 
They ſat down to table, and, after an excellent 
dianer, went into the library. Candidus caſting 
his eyes upon a Homer very handſomely bound, 
praiſed his High Mightineſs for the goodneſs of 
his taſte... There, ſaid he, is a bock that 
was the favourite of the great Pangloſs, the-beft 
philſopher in Germany.“ It is none of mine,“ 
ſaid Pococurante, witch great indifference; I 
was made to believe formerly, that I took a plea- 
ſure in reading him But that continued repeti- 

Lion 


104 CANDID US; or, Chap, 25. 


tion of battles that reſemble each other; bis gods, 
who are always very buſy without bringing any 
thing to a decifion ; his Helen, who is the ſub- 
je& ofs the war, and has ſcarce any thing to do 
in the whole piece; that Troy, which is befieged, 
but never taken; I ſay, all theſe defects give me 
the greateſt diſguſt. I have aſked ſome learned 
men, if they peruſed him with as little pleaſure 
as I did? Thoſe who were ingenious profeſſed to 
me, that they could not keep the book in their 
hands; but that they were obliged to give it a 


place in their libraries, as a monument of anti- 


quity, and as they do ons oP * which are 
of no uſe in commerce.” 

Tour Excellence does not entertain the ſame 
opinion of Virgil?“ faid Candidus. I confeſs,” 
replied Pococurante, © that the ſecond, the fourth, 
and the fixth book of his Aneid are excellent; 
but as for his pious Aneas, his brave Cloenttine, 
His friend Achates, the little Aſcanius, the infirn 
King Latinus, the burgeſs Amata, and the infipid 
Lavinia, J do not think any thing cag be more 
frigid, or more diſagreeable. I prefer Taſſo, and 
 Arioſto's ſoporiferous tales far before him.“ 

4 Shall Epreſume to aſk you, Sir,“ ſaid Can- 
'didus, © whether you do not enjoy a great deal 
of pleaſure in peruſing Horace? There arc 
ſome maxims,” ſaid Pococurante, which may 
be of ſome ſervice to a man who knows the world, 
and being delivered in expreſſive numbers are im- 
printed more eaſily on the memory. But I have 


little value for his voyage to Brundufium, his de - 
9 of his bad dinner, and the Billingſgate 


ſ quabvlc 


Chap. 25. ALE rox THE Bes r. 105 | 


ſquabble between one Pupillus, whoſe ſpeech he 
ſaid was full of filthy ſtuff, and another whoſe 
words were as ſharp as vinegar. I never could 
read without great diſguſt his indelicate lines a- 
gainſt the old woman and witches; and J cannot 
ſee any merit in his telling his friend Mecenas, 
that if he ſhould be ranked by him amongſt the 
lyric poets, he would knock the ſtars with his 
lofty brow. Some fools admire every ching in 


as author of reputation; for my part, I read 


only for myſelf; I approve nothing but what, 
ſuits my own taſte.” Candidus, having been 
taught to judge of nothing for himſelf, was very 
much ſurpriſed at what he heard ; but Martin 
looked upon the ſentiment of Pococurante as ve- 
ry rational. | 

«© Oh, here's a Cicers,” ſaid Candidus, _ ware 
is the great man whom I fancy you are never 
tired of reading,” I never read him at all,” 
replied the Venetian. What is it to me, whether 
he pleads for Rabirins or Cluentius ? I have trials 
enow of my own. I might indeed have been 3 
greater friend to his philoſophical works, but 
when I found he doubted of every thing, I con: 
cluded I knew as much as he, and that I bad no 
need of a tutor to learn ignorance. 

% Well! here are four and wenty volumes of 
the academy of ſciences,” cried Martin; “ it is 
poſſible there may be ſomething valuable in 
them, There might,” ſaid Pococurante, © if 
but one of the authors of this hodge-podge had 
been only the inventor of the art of making pins; 
but chere is nothing in all thoſe volumes but chi- 

* | merical 


1 CAN DID Us; or, Chap. 25. 
merical ſyſtems, and ſcarce nme 


an 
e prodigious ** of. thea: rical 
pieces you. have got here, ſaid Candidus, in 
Italian, Spaniſh, and French!“ “ Yes,” ſaid the 
Senator, ** there are about three thouſand, and 
not three dozen good ones among them all, As 
for that collection of ſermons, which all together 
are not worth one page of Seneca, and all thoſe 
huge volumes of divinity, you muſt think that 
they are never opened either by me or any body 
elſe.” 

. Martia perceiving ſome of * Ne filled 
wich Engliſh books; I fancy,” ſaid he, ** 2 re- 
publican, as you are, muſt generally be pleaſed 
with compoſitions that are writ with ſo great a 
degree of freedom. Yes,” faid Pococurante, 
it is commendable to write what one thinks; 
it is the privilege of man. But all over our lialy 
they write nothing but what they don't think. 
Thoſe who now inhabit the country of the Cz ars 
and Antovines, dare not have a ſingle idea, 
without taking out a licence from a Jacobin. 
I ſhould be very well ſatisfied with the freedom 
that breathes in the Engliſh writers, if ' paſſion 
and the ſpirit of party did not ne all _ 
was valuable in it.“ 

Candidus diſcovering a Milton, aſked bin, if 
he did not look upon that author as a great ge- 
nius? What!” ſaid Pococurante, that block - 
head, tbat has made a long commentary in ten 
books of rough verſe, on the firſt chapter of Ge- 
neſis; that groſs imitator of the Greeks, who 
ten has 


Chap. 25. ALL FOR THE Beer. 107 


has disfigured the creation, and who, when Mo- 
ſes has repreſented the Eternal producing the 
world by a word, makes the Meſſiah take a large 


pair of compaſſes from the armory of God, to 


mark out his work. How can I have any eſteem 
for one who has ſpoiled' the hell and devils of 
Taffo ; who turns Lucifer ſometimes into a toad, 
and ſometimes into a pigmy; makes him deliver 
the ſame ſpeech a hundred times over; repreſents 


kim diſputing in divinity ; and who, by a ſerious 


imitation of Arioſto's comic invention of fire- 


arms, repreſents the devils letting off their can- 


non in heaven ? Neither I, nor any one elſe in 


haly, has it in his power to be pleaſed at thefe 


outrages againſt commonſenſe : but the marriage 
of Sin and Death; and the fnakes that proceed 
from her womb, are enough to make every per- 
ſon of the leaſt delicacy of taſte vomit. This 
obſcure, fantaſtical, and difÞuſting poem was de- 
ſpiſec ar its firſt publication: and I only treat 
the author now in the fame manner as he was 
weate@ in his own country by his contempora- 
ries: By the by, I fpeak what I think; and 1 
give myſelf no uneaſineſs, whether or not othe 
people think as I do.” 0 
Candidus was vexed at this diſcourſe; for he 
h ſaid he, whifperiag to Martin, “ am 
very much afraid, that this man here has a ſo- 
vercign contempt for our German poets.“ 


& There would be no great harm in that, faid 


Martin. Oh what an extraordinary man!“ 
faid Candidus, muttering to himſelf: what a 
1 great 


keſpetted Homer, and was fond of Milton. 


108 CAN DID US; or, Chap. 25. 


great genuis is this 2 2 mA can 
pleaſe him- 

After . 4 whos a view of all the 
books, they went down into the garden. Can - 
didus expatiated upon all its beauties. L never 
knew any thing laid out in ſo bad a taſte,” ſaid 
the maſter ; ** we have nothing; but trifles here: 

but, a day or two hence, I ſhall have one _ 
out upon a more noble plan. 

When our two inquifſitives had diam their 
leave of his Excellency, © Now, ſure,” ſaid Can- 
didus to Martin, „you will ' confeſs: that he is 
one of the happieſt men upon earth, for he is 
above every ching that he has.“ % DO not you 
ſee,” ſaid Martin, * that he is diſguſted with e- 
very thing that he has? Plato has ſaid a long 
time ago, that the beſt ſtomachs are not thoſe 
which caſt up all ſorts of victuals.. But,“ ſaid 
Candidus, is not there a pleaſure in eriticiſing 
upon every thing? in perceiying defects where 
other people faney they ſee beauties? That 
is as much as to ſay,“ replied Martin, that 
there is a great pleaſure in Having no pleaſure.“ 
1 If that is the caſe,” ſaid Candidus, no per- 
ſon will be ſo happy as myſelf, when 1 ſee Miſs 
Cunegonda again.“ “ We ſhould- N pe 
for the beſt,” ſaid Martin. 1971 

In the mean time days and wks paſſe away; 
but no Cacambo was to be found. And Candi. 
dus was ſo immerſed in grief, that he did not re · 
collect, that Paquetta and brother Girofflée never 
. eee ble Thanſs. 


n Nrn. e 90 199 he 


CHAP. 


ſ 
n 
h 
h 
d 
b 
h 
re 
fr 
0 
1 0 
BE 
C 
NC 
th 
Pe 
m 
an 
80 


Chap. 26. ALL rox THE Bxsr. 109 


C H A P. XXVI. 


Of Candidus and Martin's ſupping with fix fran - 


gers, and whe they were. 


NE night as Candidus, followed by Martin, 

was going to ſeat himſelf at table with 

ſome ſtrangers who lodged in the ſame inn, a 
man of a complexion as black as ſoot, came be- 
hind him, and taking him by the arm, ſays to 
him, Get yourſelf ready to go along with us; 
don't fail!“ He turned his head, and ſaw Cacam- 


bo. Nothing but the fight of Cunegonda could 


have ſurpriſed or pleaſed him more. He was juſt 
ready to run mad for joy. Embracing his dear 
friend, © Cunegonda is here,” faid he, with- 
out doubt; where is ſhe ; Carry me to her, that 
I may die with joy in her company!“ ©« Cune- 
ponda is not here,” ſaid Cacambo, * ſhe is at 
Conſtantinople.” + O Heavens! at Conſtanti- 
nople ? But, if ſhe was at China, I would fly 
thither ; let us begone.“ We will go after ſup- 
per,” replied Cacambo; I can tell you no 
more; I am a flave; my maſter expects me, 
and I'muſt go and wait at table; ſay not a word; 
po to ſupper, and hold yourſelf in readineſs.” 
Candidus, diſtracted between joy and grief, 
charmed at having ſeen his truſty agent, aſtoniſh- 
ed at beholding him a ſlave, full of the idea of 
finding his miſtreſs again, his heart palpitating, 
and his underſtanding confuſed, ſet himſelf down 
at the table with Martin, who ſaw all theſe ſcenes 
without the leaſt emotion, together 'with fix 


- | | 
110 CANDIDUS; or Chap. 26, 


ſtrangers that were come to ſpend the carnival 
at Venice. 2 | 4 
Cacambo, who poured ont wine for one of the 
ſix ſtrangers, drew near to his maſter, , towards 
the end of the repaſt, and whiſpered him in the 
ear, Sire, your Majeſty may ſet out when you 
think proper, the ſhip is ready.” On ſaying theſe 
words, he went out. The gueſts ſurpriſed look- 
ed at each other, without ſpeaking a word; 
when another ſervant approaching his maſter, 
ſaid to him, Sire, your Majeſty's chaiſe is at 
Padua, and the yacht is ready.” The maſter 
gave a nod, and the domeſtic retired, All the 
gueſts ſtared at one another again, and their 
common ſurpriſe was increaſed. A. third ſervant 
approaching likewiſe the third ſtranger, ſaid to 
him, Sire, believe me, your Majeſty muſt not 
ſtay here any longer; I am going to get every 
thing ready; and immediately he diſappeared. 
Candidus and Mariin began by this time to 
make no doubt but that this was a. maſquerade 
of the caraival. A fourth domeſtic ſaid to the 
fourth maſter, ** Your Majeſty may depart when- 
ever you pleaſe ;” and went out as the others 
had done. The fifth ſervant expreſſed himſelf 
in terms to the ſame effect as the fourth: but the 
the ſixth ſervant ſpoke in n different manner to the 
| the fixth ſtranger, who fat near Candidus: ff q.. 
} Faith, Sir,” ſaid he, no one will truſt your goin 
Majeſty any longer, nor myſelf neither; and we 
may both be ſent to jail this very night; I ſhall 
however take care of myſelf, | Adieu.“ "P 
| All the domeſtics having diſappeared, the ſix 
| ſtrangers, with Candidus and Martin, remained 


= ws Dc S 


Zr g. 2 


F 2722372 


1 4 i 


* 


—————— — 


75 if LA LI BEI Bed ables o — m i oi 6. xt. did. m 3 ow nt r dl YA etc v2 44-5 


Chap. 26. ALL rox Tus Bzsr. 111 


ia a profound filence. At laſt Candidus broke 
it: ve ſaid he, this is ſomethiag 
very droll; but why ſhould you be all of you 
Kings ? For my part, I own to you, that ncither 
I nor Martin are. 

Cacambo's maſter then anſwered very gravely 
in Italian, ſaying, * I aſſure you I am not in jeſt; 
I am Achmet III. I was Grand Suhan for ſesa - 
ral years; I dethroned my brother; my vephew 
dethroned me; my viſirs were beheaded : I &- 
niſh my days in the old ſeraglio. My nephew, 
the Grand Sultan Mahmoud, permits me to take 
a voyage ſometimes for the ſake of my health, 
and I am come to paſs the carnival at Venice.“ 

A young man, who fat near Achmer, ſpoke 
next, and ſaid, « My name is Ivan; I was En- 
peror of all the Ruſſias, I was dethroned in my 
cradle, my father and mother were coafined ; IL 
was brought up in priſon, I have ſometimes the 
permiſſion to travel, accompanied with two per - 
ſons as guards, 1 am alſo come to paſs the car. 
nival at Venice“ 

The third ſaid, I am Charles Edward, King 


of England ; my-father has ceded his rights to 


the throne to me. I have fought to ſupport 
them; eight hundred of my adherents have had 
their hearts taken out alive, and tbeir heads 
ſtruck off. I myſelf have been in priſon : I am 
going to Rome, to pay a viſit to my father, who 
has been dethroned as well as myſelf and my 
grandfather; and am come to Venice to _ 
brate the carnival.” / 

bora then aid, „12 King of Poland; 
ul K 2 the- 


112 C ANDID US; or, Chap. 26. 


the fortune of war has deprived me of my here- 
ditary dominions; my father experienced the 
ſame reverſe; I refign myſelf to providence, like 
the Sultan Achmet, the Emperor Ivan, and 
Charles Edward, whom God long preſerve ; and 
1 am come to paſs the carnival at Venice.” | 

The fifth faid, I am likewiſe the King of 
Poland; I loſt niy.kiagdom twice; but Provi- 
dence has given me another government, in 


which: 1 have done more good, than all the kings 


of the Sarmatians, put together, have been able 
to do on the banks of the Viſtula. I refign my- 


ſelf likewiſe to Providence, and am come to paſs 


ihe carnival at Venice.” 


KI now was the ſixth monarch's turn to ſpeak, | 


« Gentlemen,” ſaid he, I am not ſo great a 
prince as any of you : but for all that I have 
been a King as well as the beſt of you. I am 
Theodore; I was elected King of Corlica ; 1 was 
once called Your: Majefly, but at preſent am ſcarce 


allowed the title of Sir, I bave cauſed money 


to be coined, but am not maſter at preſent of a 
farthing. I have had two ſecretaries of ſtate, 
but now have ſcarce a ſingle ſervant. I have ſeen 
myſelf on a throne, and have ſor ſome time lain 
upon ſtraw in 2 common jail in London, I have 
been vaſtly afraid of mectiog with the ſame treat- 
ment here, though 1 am come, like your Ma- 
jeſties, to paſs the carnival at Venice.” 
The five other kings heard this ſpeech with « 
noble compaſſion. Each of them gave King 
Theodore twenty ſequins to buy him ſome cloaths 
and ſhirts, and Candidus made him a preſent 
we wt oi of 


- = 


832 34 8 2 wo 


45; a MR 


Chap. 27. ALL rox THE Besr. 113 


of a diamond worth two thouſand ſequins more. 
„% Who,” ſaid the five kings, can this private 
perſon be, who is both able to give, and really has 
given an hundred times as much as either of us?? 
At the very inftant they roſe from table, came 
into the ſame. inn four Serene Highneſſes, who: 
had likewiſe loſt their dominions by the fortune 
of war, and were come to paſs the carnival at 
Venice: but Candidus took no notice of thoſe 
new comers, his thoughts being taken up with 
nothing but going in fearch of his dear Cune-- 
gonda at Conſtantinople.. 


, 


c WM. A P. XXV un. 
Candidust vayege to Conflantinople. , 


HR faithful Cacambo had already prevailed: 
© on the Turkiſh captain, that was going to 
carry Sultan Achmet back again to Conſtanũ · 
nople, to reteiye Candidus and Martin on board. 
They both of them imbarked, after they had: 
proftrated themſelves before bis miſerable High · 
neſs, As Candidus was on his way, he ſaid to- 
Martin, There were fix dethroned. kings that 
we Topped with ;. and, what is ſtill more, among. 
theſe ſix. kings there was one that I gave alas to. 
Perhaps there may be a great many other princes. 
more unfortunate ſtill. For my part; I have loſt 
only one hundred ſheep, and am going to fly in · 
to the arms of Cunegonda. My dear Martin, I 


muſt yet ſay, Pangloſs was in the right ; All things 
are for the beſt.“ I wiſh they were,” ſaid Mar- 


K 3 tin. 


114 CAN DID Us; or, Chap. 27. 


tin. But,“ ſaid Candidus; „the adventure we 
met with at Venice is ſomething romantic. Such 
a thing was never heard of, that fix dethroned 
kings: ſhould ſup together at a common inn,” 
© This is not more extraordinary,” replied Mar- 
tio,“ than the moſt of the things that have hap- 
peved to us. It is a common thing for kings to 
be dethroned; and with reſpe& to the bonour 
that we had of ſopping with them, it is a trifle 
that does not merit our attention.“ 

Scarce had Candidus got on board, when be 
leaped on the neck of his old ſervant and friend 
Cacambo. Well,” ſaid he, ** what news of 
Cunegonda ? is. the ſtill a miracle of beauty ? 
does ſhe love me till? how does ſhe do? No 
doubt but you have bought a palace for her at 
Conſtantinople 89 ! 

My dear maſter,” replied Cacambo, Cu- 
negonda waſhes diſhes on the. banks of the Pro- 
pontis, in the houſe of a prince who has very few 
to waſh ; the i is a flave in the houſe of an ancient 
ſovercign, named Ragoiſty, to whom the Grand 
Turk allows three crowns a-day to ſupport him 
in his aſylum ; but, what is worſe than all, ſhe 
has loſt her beauty, and is become ſhockiogly 
ugly.” © Well, handſome or ugly,” replied Can 
didus, I am a man of honour, and it is my dy- 
ty to love her ſtill. But hom came ſhe to be re- 
duced to ſo abject a condition, with the five or 
ſix millions that you carried her?” And well,” 
ſaid Cacambo, was not I to give two millions 
to Signior Don Fernandes d'Ibaraa,.y Figueora, 
y Maſcarenes, y Lampourdos, y Souza, the go- 


Chap. 27. ALL rox Tre Bast. 115 


vernor of Buenos · Ayres, for the permiſſion of 
taking Miſs Cunegonda back again? and did not 
a pirate bravely rob us of all the reſt ? Did not 
this pirate carry us to Cape Matapan, to Milo, 
to Nicar ia, to damos, to Dardanelles, to Marmora, 
to Scutari? Cunegonda and the old woman are 
ſervants to the prince I told you of, and I am 2 
flave of the dethroned ſultan.” * What a chain 
of ſhocking calamities l ſaid Candidus. But, 
after all, I have ſome diamonds, I ſhall caſily pur- 
chaſe Cunegonda's liberty. It is pity that the is 
grown ſo ugly“. 

Then turning himſelf to Martin, 10 Who 40 
you think, ſays he, is moſt to be pitied, the 
Sultan Achmet, the Emperor Ivan, King Charles 
Edward, or myſelf ?” „I cannot tell, ſaid Mar- 
tia, I muſt ſee into your hearts to be able to 
tell.” „Ah!“ ſaid Candidus, if Pangloſs were 
here, he would know and tell us.“ I know 
not, replied Martin, in what ſort of ſcales 
your Pangloſs would. weigh the misfortunes of 
mankind, and appraiſe their ſorrows. All that 1 
can venture to ſay is, that there are millions of 
men upon earth a hundred times more to be pi- 
tied than King Charles. Edward,. the Empeyer 


Ivan, or Sultan Achmet.” * That bs poſſible,” 
ſaid Candidus. 


In a few days they reached the Black ſea, Ca- 


didus began wich ranſoming Cacambo at an extra- 
vagant price; and, without loſs of time, he got 
into a galley with his companions, to go to the 


' banks of the Propontis, in ſcarch oF Concynath, 


1 her loſs of beaux. | 
Among 


ars CANDIDUS; or, Chap. 27. 


Among the crew there were two ſlaves that 
rowed very ill, to whoſe bare ſhoulders the Le- 
vant trader would now and then apply a few 


ſtrokes with a bull's pizzle. Candidus, by a na- 


tural ſympathy, looked at them more attentively 


than at the reſt of the galley-flaves, and went up 


to them with an heart full of pity. Some features 
of their faces, though very much disfigured, ſeem- 
ed to bear ſome reſemblance to-thoſe of Pangloſs, 
and the uofortunate Feſuic the Baron, the brother 
of Miſs Cunegonda. This fancy affected him, 


and made him very dull. He looked at chem 


again more attentively. * Really,” ſaid he to 
Cacambo, if I had not ſeen Mr. Pangloſs hang- 
ed, and had not had the misfortune to kill the 
Baron myſelf, I ſhould think it was they that are. 


rowing in this galley.” 


At the names of the Baron and Pangloſs, the 


wo galley- ſlaves gave aloud ſhriek, held fat by 
the ſeat, and let their oars drop- The maſter of 
the Levanter ran up to them, and redoubled the 
laſhes of the bull's pizale upon them. Hold 


bold ''Signior,” cried Candidus, · ( I will give you 


-what- money you pleaſe.” © Lord! jt is Candi 
dus l“ ſaid one of the galley- ſlaves: Oh! it is 
Candidus I” ſaĩd the other. Do I dream?“ 
ſaid Candidus ;: ** am L awake ? am I in this gat: 


-ley? is that Maſter Baron whom 1 killed ? is chat: 


- Matter Pangloſs whom i ſaw hanged ?” 
Ves, it is. wel it is we!” replied- they. 


„ What! is that the great philoſopher )“ ſaid 


Martin- Harkee, Maſter Levant Captain,“ 


2 * „% what will you take-for the ran- 
| ſon 


VT > jw a, trand b. a. om 


* 


6 W *W TFT WT & 


Chap. 279. ALL Fox THE BesT. "117 


ſom of Maſter Thunder-ten-tronckb, one of the 
firſt Barons of the empire, together with Maſter 
Pangloſs, the moſt profound metaphyſician of 
Germany?“ © You Chriſtian dog,“ faid the 

Levant captain, “ ſince theſe two dogs of Chri- 

ſtian ſlaves are barons and metapbyſicians, which, 
without doubt, is a great degree of dignity in 
their own country, you ſhall give me fifty thou- 
ſand ſequins.” * You ſhall have them, Sir; 


carry me back again, like lightning, to Conſtan- 


tinople, and you ſhall be paid directly. But top, 
carry me to Miſs Cunegonda firſt.” The Levant 
captain, on the firſt offer of Candidus, bad turn - 
ed the head of the veſſel towards the city, and 
made the flaves row faſter than a bird cleaves the 
air, has | 
Candidus embraced the Baron and Pangloſs a 
hundred times. How happened it that I did 
not kill you, my dear Baron ? and my dear Pan- 
gloſs, how came, you. to life again, after being. - 
hanged ? and how came you, both of you, tobe 
galley- ſlaves in Turky ?” „ Is it true that. my. 
dear ſiſter is in this country ?” ſaid the Baron. 
« Yes,” -replied Cacambo. Then I ſee my 

dear Candidus once more,” ſaid Pangloſs. 
Candidus preſented Martin and Cacambo to 
them; they embraced each other, and ſpoke all 
at the ſame 1iine,. The galley flew like lightning, 
and they were already in the port. A Jew was. 
ſent for, to whom Candidus ſold a diamond for 
fifty thouſand ſequins, which was worth a hun - 
dred thouſand ; who, notwithſtanding, ſwore by. -- 
Abraham, that he could not give any wore. He, 
* immed ately 


% 


118 CANDIDUS; or, Chap. 28. 


immediately paid the ranſom of the Baron and 
Pangloſs. The latter threw himſelf at the feet of 
bis deliverer, and bathed them with his tears; as 
for the other, he thanked him with a nod, and 
promiſed to repay him the money the firſt oppor- 
tunity. But is it poſſible that my Ger is in 
Turky ?“ ſaid he. Nothing is more poſſible, 
replied Cacambo ; for ſhe ſcours the diſhes in 
the houſe of a prince of Tranſylvania l' Two 
more Jews were inſtantly fetched, to whom Can- 
didus fold ſome more diamonds ; and they ſet out 


again all together in another galley, in order to 


deliver Cunegonda. 


c H A P. XVm. 


What happened to Candilus, 8 Panghſs, 


Martin, &c. 


- I Aſc your pardon once more,” ſaid Candi- 


dus to the Baron. ** I aſk pardon, my re- 
verend father, for having given you a thruſt with 
a ſword through the body.“ Don't let us ſay 
any more about ir,” ſaid the Bron; I was a 
little too haſty, I muſt confeſs. But fince you 
defire . 1 by what fatality I came to be a 
galley-flave, I will inform yon. After I was cu- 


red of my wound by a brother, who was apothe- 
cary to the college, I was at;acked and carried off 
by a party of Spaniards, who confined me in pri- 
ſon at Buenos-Ayres, at the very time my fiſter 
was ſetting out from thence, I demanded leare 


in return to Rome to the Father-general. I was 
nominated 


en 


I 
\ 
e 
e 
1 
b 
b 
0 
* 
re 


\ — m 


, 


Chap. 28. ALL roi THE Brsr. 119 


nominated to go as almoner to Conſtantinople 
with the French ambafizgdor. I had not been 
eight days engaged in this employment, when one 
evening I met with a young well-made Icoglan. 
It was then very hot; the young man went to 
bathe himſelf, and I took this opportunity to 
bathe myſelf too. I did not know that it was a 
capital crime for a Chriſtian to be found naked 
with a young muſſulman. A cadi ordered me to 
receive a hundred ſtrokes of the baſtinado on the 
ſoles of my feet, and condemned me to the gal- 
leys. I do not think there ever was a greater act 
of injuſtice, But I ſhould be glad to know how 
it comes about, that my ſiſter is diſh-waſher in 
the kitchen of a Tranſylvanian prince, who is a 
refugee among the Turks.” 

* But you, my dear Pangloſs, how came I 
ever to ſet eyes on you again! It is true in- 
deed,“ ſaid Pangloſs, ** that you ſaw me hang- 
ed; I ought naturally to have been burnt ; but 
you may remember, that it rained prodigiouſly 
when they were going to roaſt me : the ſtorm 
was ſo violent that they deſpaired of lighting the 
fire. I was therefore hanged, becauſe they could 
do no better. A ſurgeon bought my body, car- 
ried it home with him, and diſſected me. He 
firſt made a crucial incifion on me from the um- 
bilicus to the clavicula. No one could have been 
more flovenly hanged than I was. The execu- 
tioner of the holy inquiſition, who was a ſubdea- 
con befdes, burnt people indeed to & miracle, 
but was not uſed to hanging, The cord being 
wet, did not flip properly, and the nooſe was 

dadly 


120 CAN DID US; or, Chap. 28. 


badly tied: in ſhort I ſtill drew my breath. The 
crucial incifion made me give ſuch a dreadful 
ſhrick, that my ſurgeon fell down backwards, 
and fancying he was diſſecting the devil, he run 
away, ready to die with the fright, and fell down 
a ſecond time on the ſtair-caſe, as he was mak- 
ing off, His wife run out of an adjacent cloſet, 
on hearing the noiſe, ſaw me extended on the ta- 
ble with my crucial inciſion, and being more fright- 
ened than her huſband, fled alſo, and tumbled 
over him. When they were come jo themſelves 
a little, I heard the ſurgeon's wife ſay to him, 
My dear, how come you to be ſo weak as to ven- 
ture to diſſect an heretic? Don't you know that 
the devil always takes poſſeſſion of the bodies of 
thoſe people? I will go immediately and fetch 
- & prieſt to exorciſe him. I ſhuddered at this pro- 
poſal, and muftered up what little ſtrength I had 
left to cry out, Oh! have pity upon me! At 
length the Portugueſe barber took courage, ſew- 
ed up my ſkin, and his wife nurſed me ſo well, 
that I was upon my feet again in about fifteen 
days, The barber got me a place, to be footman 
to a kight of Malta, who was going to Venice ; 
© but my maſter not being able to pay me my wages, 
1 engaged in the ſervice of a Venetian merchant, 
and went along with him to Conſtantinople.“ 

One day the maggot took me to go into 2 
moſque. There was no body there but an old 
zman and a young devotee, very handſome, ſay- 
ing her prayers. Her breaſt was uncovered ; ſhc 
had in her boſom a beautiful noſegay of, tulips, 


roſes, anemonies, ranunculuſes, byacinths, and 
25 auriculas ; 


| 

{ 
b 
Y 
Þ 
'N 
v 
te 
I 
ec 
be 
W. 
ty 
th 
yo 
to 
vel 
ley 


Ohap. 28. ALL rox Tas BEST. 121 


auriculas; ſhe let her noſegay fall; I took it up, 
and preſented it to her with the moſt profound 
reverence, However, I was ſo long in giving it 
to her again, that the iman fell in a paſſion, and 
ſeeing I was a Chriſtian, called out for help, 
They carried me before the cadi, who ordered me 
to receive a hundred baſtinadoes, and to be ſent 
to the galleys, I was chained to the very ſame 
galley and the ſame bench with the Baron, There 
were on board this galley four young men from 
Marſeilles, five Neapolitan prieſts, and two 


- monks of Corfu, who told us, that the like ad- 


ventures happened every day. The Baron pre- 
tended, that he had ſuffered more injuſtice than 
I; and I inſiſted, that it was far more innocent 
to put a noſegay into a woman's boſom, than to 
be found ſtark naked with an Icoglan. We 
were perpetually diſputing, and we received 
twenty laſhes every day with a bull's pizzle, when 
the concatenation of events of this world brought 
you to our galley, and you ranſomed us. 

« Well, my dear Pangloſs,“ ſaid Candidus, 
to him, when you was hanged, diſſected, ſe- 
verely beaten, and tugging at the oar in the gal- 
ley, did you always think, that things in this world 
were forthe beſt?” I am ſtill of my firſt opinion,” 
anſwered Pangloſs ; for as I am a philoſopher, 
it would be inconſiſtent with my character to con» 
tradi&t myfelf ; eſpecially as Leibnitz could not be 
in the wrong; and his pre eſtabliſhed harmony 
is certainly the fineſt ſyſtem in the world, as well 
as his plenum and ſubtle matter,” 

EE CHAP- 


Fl 


© YI#F* 


122 CAN DID US; or, Chap. 29. 


E. H A F. XXIX. 
How Candidus found augen and the old woman 


a gain. 


HILE Candidus, the Bardv, Pangloſs, 
| Martin, and Cacambo, were relating 
their adventures to each other, and diſputing 
about the contingent and non-contingent events 
of this world, and while they were arguing upon 
effects and cauſes, moral and phyſical evil, on li- 
berry and neceſlity, and the comforts a perſon 
may experience in the galleys in 'Turky, they ar- 
rived on the banks of the Propontis, at the houſe 


of the Prince of Tranſylvania. The firſt objects 


which preſented themſelves were Cunegonda and 
the old woman, hanging e out ſome e linen 
on the lines to dry. 

The Baron grew pale at this fight. Even Can · 
didus, the affectionate lover, upon ſeeing his fair 
Cunegonda prodigiouſly tanned, with her eye 
lids reverſed, her neck withered; her cheeks 
wrinkled, ber arms red and full of ſcales, ſeiz- 
ed with horror, jumped near three yards back - 
wards but afterwards advanced to her out of 
good manners. Se embrated Candidus and her 
brother, who, each of them, embraced the old 
woman, and Candidus ranſomed them both. 
Pere was a little farm in the neighbourhood, 
which tlie old wbmin adviſed Candidus to hire, 
till they could meet wich better accommodations 


* tHeit whole company. As Cunegonda did 
not 


t 


the 


Chap. 30. ALIrOR THE Brsr. 123 


know that ſhe was grown ugly, no body having 
told; her of it ; ſhe put Candidus ia mind of his 
promiſe, in ſo peremptory a manner, chat the 
good man durſt not refuſe her. He then inti- 
mated to the Baron that he iatended to marry his 


ſiſter. 1 will never ſuffer, ” ſaid the Baron, 


* ſuch meanneſs on ber fide, nor ſuch inſolence 
on yours, With this, infamy I never will be re- 
proached. The children of my filter can never 


Pe inrolled in the chapters of Germany. No; 


my fiſter ſhall never marry any but a Baron of 
the empire.” Cunegonda threw herſelf at his 
feet, and bathed them with her tears, but he re- 


wained inſenſible. You fooliſh puppy you, 


ſaid Candidus to him, I have delivered you 
from the galleys; I have paid your ranſom; I 
have alſo paid that of your ſiſter; ſhe was a ſcul- 
lion here, and is very ugly; I have the goodneſs 
to make her my wife, and you pretend ſtill to 
appoſe it: I ſhould kill you again, if 1 ſhould 
conſult my paſſion.” *. You may indeed kill me 
again,” ſaid the Baron; but you ſhall never 
marry my fiſter, while I have breath.” 


CC a 4:3 * 
The concluſim. | 


Andidus had no great deſire, at the bottom 

of his heart, to marry Cunegonda. But 

the extreme impertinence of the Baron determi - 
ned him to conclude the match, and Cunegonda 
preſſed it fo earneſtly, that he could not retract. 
__ He 


124 CAN DID Us; or, Chap. 30. 


He adviſed with Pangloſs, Martin, and the truſty 
Cacambo. Pangloſs drew up an excellent me- 
moir, in which he proved, that the Baron had no 
right over his ſiſter, and that ſhe might, accord- 
ing to all the laws of the empire, eſpouſe Candi- 
dus with her left hand. Martin was for throw- 
ing the Baron into the ſea: Cacambo was of opi- 
nion, that it would be beſt to ſend him back again 
to the Levant captain, and make him. work at the 
galleys; after which they might ſend him to Rome 
to the Father-general, by the firſt ſhip. This ad- 
vice was thought good; the old woman approved 
it; and nothing was ſaid to his ſiſter about it. 
The ſcheme was put in execution for a little mo- 
ney; and ſo they had the pleaſurẽ of outwitting 
a Jeſuit, and puniſhing the pride of a German 
Baron. 4 

It is natural to imagine, that, after ſo many 
diſaſters, Candidus married to his ſweetheart, and 
living with the philoſopher Panglofs, the philoſo- 
pher Martin, the diſcreet Cacambo, and the old 
woman, and eſpecially as he had brought ſo many 
diamonds from the country of the ancient Incas, 
muſt live the moſt agreeable life of any man upon 
earth, But he was duped ſo often by the Jews, 
that he had nothing left but the ſmall farm; and 
his wife growing Qiil more ugly, turned peeviſh 
and inſupportable. The old woman was very in- 
frm, and worſe humoured than Cunegonda her- 
ſelf, Cacambo, who worked in the garden, and 
went to Conſtantinople to ſell its productions, 
was worn out with labour, and curſed his fate, 
Pangloſs was ready to deſpair, becauſe he did-not 
8 1 14 ſhine 


Chap. 30. ALL FoR THE BEsr. 125 


ſhine at the head of ſome univerſity in Germany. 
As for = as he was firmly perſuaded that 
all was equally bad throughout, he therefore bore 
things with patience. Candidus, Martin, and 
Pangloſs, diſputed ſometimes about metaphyſics 
and ethics. They often ſaw paſling under the 
windows of the farm-houſe boats full of effendis, 
baſhaws,. and cadis, who were going into baniſh» 
ment to Lemnos, Mitylene, and Erzerum. They 
obſerved, that. other cadis,. other baſhaws, and 
other effendis, ſucceeded in the poſts of thofe 
who were exiled, and that they themſelves were 
baniſhed in their turns. They ſaw heads decent- 
ly impaled, which were to be preſented to the 
Sublime Porte. Theſe ſpectacles increaſed the 

number of their diſputations;. and when they did 
not diſpute, they were ſo prodigiouſly uneaſy and 
unquiet in themſelves, that the old woman took 
the liberty to ſay to them, © I want to know 
which is the worſt, to be raviſhed an hundred 
times by negro pirates, to have a buttock cut of, 
to run the gauntlet among the Bulgarians, to be 
whipped and hanged at an auto-da-fe, to be diſ- 
ſeed, to row in the galleys; in one word, to 
have ſuffered all the miſeries we have undergone, 
or to ſtay here, without doing any thing?“ 
That is a queſtion not eaſily to be determined,” 
ſaid Candidus. 

This dicourſe gave riſe to new reflections, and 
Martin concluded upon the whole, that mankiod 
are born to live either in the diſtractions of in- 
quietude, or in the lethargy of diſguſt. Candi- 
a Ke not agree to that opinion, but remained 

* = 3 in 


— 


— 


— 4 * = 
— w ů —— _ 


—— > 
TY _— 
& a6 


= * 
- 2. War. 0 


{ 
3 
1 
1 


126 CAN DID US; or, Chap. 30. 


in a ſtate of ſuſpenſe. Pangloſs confeſſed, that 
he had undergone terrible trials; but having once 
maintained, that all things went wonderfully well, 
he ſtill kept firm to his hypotheſis, though _ 
oppoſite to his real ſentiments, 

What contributed to confirm Martin in his 
ſhocking principles, to make Candidus ſtagger 
more than ever, and to imbarraſs Pangloſs, was, 
that one day they ſaw Paquetta and Brother Gi- 
roffite, who were in the greateſt diſtreſs, at their 
farm, They ſoon ſquandered away their three 
thouſand piaſtres, had parted, were reconciled, 
quarrelled again, had been confined in priſon, 
had made their eſcape, and Father Girofflee had 
at length turned Turk. Paquetta continued her 
trade where-ever ſhe went, but made nothing by 
it. © I could eaſily foreſee,” ſaid Martin to Can- 
djdus, © that your preſents would ſoon be ſquan- 
dered away, and would render them more miſes- 
able. You and Cacambo have ſwallowed millions 
of piaſtres, and are not a bit happier than brother 
Girofflée and Paquetta.“ Ha! ha!” ſaid Pan- 
gloſs to Paquetta, has Providence then brought 
you amongſt us again, my poor child]! Do you 
know. that you have coſt me the tip of my noſe, 
one eye, and one of my ears, as you may fre you 
bave? What a world is this!” This new ad- 
venture ſet them a- philoſophiſing more than e- 
ver. 

There lived in the neighbourhood a very fa- 
mous derviſe, who paſſed for the greateſt philo- 
ſopher in Turky. They went to conſult him. 
mages way choſen ſpeaker, and ſaid to him, 

Maſter, 


5 G0 


64 


Chap. 30. ALL rox THE Bs. 127 


„% Maſter, we are come to deſire you would teit 
us, why ſo ſtrange an animal as man was crea- 
ted 

„What's that to you?“ ſaid the derviſe; © is 
it any buſineſs of thine ?” * But, my reverend 
father,” ſaid Candidus, * there isa ſhocking ſight 
of evil upon earth,” * What ſignifies,” ſaid the 
derviſe, “ whether there be good or evil? When 


his Sublime Highneſs ſends a veſſel to Egypt, docs 


it trouble him whether the mice on board are at 
their eaſe or not?“ „ What would you have 
one do then?“ ſaid Pangloſs. Hold your 
tongue,” ſaid the derviſe. I promiſed myſcif 
the pleaſure,” ſaid Pangloſs, of reaſoning with 
you upon effects and cauſes, the beſt of poſſible 
worlds, the origin of evil, the nature of the ſoul; 
and the pre- eſtabliſned harmony,” —The derviſe, 
at theſe words, ſhut the door apainſt them. 
During this conference, news was brought that 
two vizirs and a mufti were ſtrangled at Conſtan- 
tinople, and a gteat many of their friends impa- 
led. This cataſtrophe made a great noiſe for 
ſome hours. Pangloſs, Candidus, and Mariio, . 
in their return to the little farm, met a good+ 
looking old man, taking the air at his door, un- 
der an arbour of orange trees. Pangloſs, who 
had as much curiofity as philoſophy, afked him 
the name of the mufti, who was lately ſtrangled, 
„know nothing at all about it,” ſaid the good 
wan; and what's more, I never knew the name 
of a ſingle mufti, or a ſingle vizir, in my life, I 
am an entire ſtranger to the ſtory you mention; 
and preſume, that, generally ſpeaking, they who 
trouble 


4223 CANDIDUS; or, Chap. 30. 


trouble cheix heads with ſtate- affairs, ſometimes 
die ſhocking deaths, not without deſerving it: 
byt I never trouble my head about what is doing 
at Conſtantinople; I content myſelf with ſending 
my fruits thither, the produce of my garden, 
which I cultiyate with my own hands!” Having 
ſaid. theſe words, he introduced. the ſtrangers into. 
his houſe : his two daughters and two fons ſer · 
ved them with ſeveral kinds of ſherbet, which 
they made themſelves, beſides cay mac, enriched 
with the peels of candied citrons, oranges, lemons, 
ananas, piſtachio nuts, and Mocao coffee, una- 
dulterated with the bad coffee of Batavia and the 
ifles, After which, the two daughters of this 
good muſſulman perfumed the beards of Candi- 
dus, Pangloſs, and Martin. 

*« You mult certainly,” ſaid Candidus to the 
Turk, * have a very large and very opulent eſtate!” 
% J have only twenty acres,” ſaid the Turk; 
„ which I, with my children, cultivate, Labour 
keeps us free from three of the greateſt evils, tire- 
ſomeneſs, vice, and want.” 


As Candidus returned towards his farm, he 


made deep refledions on the diſcourſe of the 
Turk. Said he to Pangloſs and Martin, The 
condition of this good old man ſeems to me pre- 
ferable to that of the fit kings with whom we 
had the honour to ſup.” Ihe grandeurs of 
royalty,” ſaid Pangloſs,.** are very. precarious, in 
the opinion of all philoſophers. For, in ſhort, 
Eglon, king of the Moabites, was aſſaſſiuated by 
Ebud ; Abſalom was hung by the hair of his 


os, and pierced through with three darts; King 
Nadab, 


T i rn $4 


Chap. 30. AL rox THE Besr, 129 


Nadab, the ſon of Jeroboam, was killed by Baa- 
ſha ; King Elah by Zimri; Ahaziah by Jebu ; 
Athaliah by Jchoiadah ; the kings Joachim, Je- 
chonias, and Zedekias, were carried into captivi- 
ty. You know the fates of Crœſus, Aſtyages, 
Darius, Dionyſius of Syracuſe, Pyrrhus, Per- 
ſeus Hannibal, Jugurtha, Arioviſtus, Cæſar, 
Pompey, Nero, Otho, Vitellius, Domitian, Ri- 
chard II. Edward II. Henry VI. Richard III. 
Mary Stuart, and Charles I. of England, the 
three Henrys of France, and the Emperor Hen- 
ry IV. You know——” * I know very well,” 
ſaid Candidus, ©* that we ought to look after our 
garden.” * You are in the right,” ſaid Pangloſs: 
© for when man was placed in the garden of E- 


den, he was placed there, ut operaretur eum, to 


cultivate it ; which proves that mankind are not 
created to be idle.“ Let us work,” ſaid Mar- 


tin, without diſputing; „it is the only way to 


render life ſupportable.” 

All their little ſociety entered into this laudable 
deſign, according to their different abilities. Their 
little piece of ground produced a plentiful crop. 
Cunegonda indeed was very ugly, but ſthe turned 
out an excellent paſtry cook. Paquetta worked 
at embroidery, and the old woman took care of 
the linen, 'There was no idle perſon in the com- 
pany, not excepting even brother Girofflze ; he 
made a very good carpenter, and became too 2 
very honeſt man. 

Pangloſs would ſometimes ſay to Candidus : 
& All events are linked together in this beſt of all 
poſſible worlds. For if you had not been driven 

with. 


= <->. _— — — a ** — A 
: * - — 8 
- — * 4 * 4 o 
* = _ N — — — — 
— —— WI 4 K — 
1 * 2 — N 8 8 5 * . 1 
= p - 4 L 3 — . 
— — h 3 = 8 U b 


8 * 3 


| 
1 
* 


i. 
7 7 
8 
: 7 
- 1 
9 
| 

4 a 
» 

: - 


| 
| 


1390 AN DID Vs; &c. Chap. ze. 


with great blows on the backſide out of a very 
fine caſtle, on account of your paſſion for Miſs 

Cunegonda; if you had not been thrown into the 
. Inquiſition; if you had not rambled through A- 

merica on foot; if you had not given the Baron 
a hearty blow with your ſword ; if you had not 
tot all the ſheep that you brought from that good 
country Eldorado; you would not bave cat here 
preſerved citrons and piſtachio nuts,” “ That is 
well faid,” ſaid Candidus; © but let us cultivate 
our garden.“ 


The Exp of the FigsT Pant. 


CAN DID Us; 


ALL FOR THE BEST. 
rn 


Tranſlated from the FaRENCH of 


M. Du VOLTAIRE. 


N — — R 4 
„ — — ——ů 2 — — vg. = 7 * 
8 ” = dd * _ 3 
> SES — Ro . 


E DIN BU R G H: 
Printed by AL IX ANDBER DonalDs0N, 
Sold at his Shop, No. 48. in St. Paul's Church- 


yard, the corner next 3 London; and 


at Edinburgh. 
2 —————̃— 


M. DCC. LXXIII. 


= 


»*F - — 7 F : SEL 5 ps * - 
= 1 1 * — 
— — — —- — 
r h L 


— om— 


. A - * p 

— c — 4144 — ot, pn 
"I j l * * bo 
— * 5 6 — th 


__ l 
- Pe, > 
— - a x 


u. Wo S ere EK. 
N , N BH? EASE Rf 


C NID Us; 
o R, 


ALL FON THE BEST: 


2 3# Ws 
H ow Candidus parted from his company, and what 
reſulted from it, 

AN ſoon grows weary of every thing in 
M life; riches are a burthen to the poſſeſ- 
ſor ; ambition, when ſated, leaves re- 
frets ; the ſweets of love loſe their delight ; and 
Candidus, born to experience all the viciſſitudes 
of fortune, at laſt was tired of cultivating his gar- 
den, Maſter Pangloſs, ſaid he, if we are in the 
beſt of poſſible worlds, you muſt confeſs, at 
leaſt, that I do not enjoy a ſuitable proportion of 


poſſible happineſs, ſince I live unknown in a ſmall 
corner of the Propontis, having no other ſupport 


134 CANDIDUS; or, Chap. 1. 


than chat of my hands, which may ſoon loſe their 
ſtrength; no other pleaſure than that which I 
have from Miſs Cunegonda, who is very vgly, 
and, what is worſt of all, ſhe is my wife ; no other 
company than yours, which often tires me; or 
that of Martin, which makes me dull; or that of 
Girofflee, who lately has turned good; or that 
of Paquetta, which you know is very dangerous; 
or that of the old woman with one buttock, who 
tells me a parcel of An ſtories. 

Then Pangloſs replied: Philoſophy teaches us, 
that the monades, infinitely divifible, arrange 
themſelves with a wonderful intelligence, to form 
the different bodies that we remark in nature. 
The heavenly bodies are what they ought to be; 
they are placed where they ought to be placed; 
they deſcribe the circles that they ought to de- 
ſcribe ; man follows the inclination that he ought 
10 follow, he is what he ought to be, he does 
what he ought to do. You are caſt down and 
complain, O Candidus, becauſe the monade of 
your ſoul is weary ; but this wearineſs is a modi- 
Kcation of the ſoul, and is no argument againft 
every thing being for the beſt with reſpe& to your- 
ſelf and others. When you {aw me overrun with 
ulcers, I ſtood firm to my opinion: for if Miſs 
Paquetta had not given me a reliſh for the plea- 
{ures of love, and its poiſon, I ſhould not have 
met with you in Holland ; I ſhould not have gi- 
ren an occaſion to James the Anabaptiſt to do a 
meritorious action; I ſhould not have been hang- 
ed at Liſbon for the edification of our neighbour; 
ſhould not be here to comfort you with my ad- 
vices, to live and die in the opinion of Leibnitz. 
Les! 


r . OM dg 


© 


oy I ALL FOR THE BEsT. 135 
e 


s! my dear Candidus, the whole is a concate- 
natiqn, every thing is neceſſary in the beſt of 
poſſible worlds. There is an abſolute neceflity 
for the burgeſs of Montauban to inſtru kings, 
and the worm of Quimper-Corentia to criticiſe, 
criticiſe, criticiſe, The impeacher of philoſophers 
is neceſſitated to be crucified in St. Dennis's ſtreet; 
and the ſame neceſſity obliges the flogging pedant 
of the Recollèts and the archdean of St. Malo to 
diſtil gall and calumny from their Chriſtian Jour- 
nals. Philoſophy lies under the neceflity to be 
impeached at the tribunal of Melpomene. Phi- 
loſophers are obliged to continue to enlighten 
mankind, notwithſtanding the ſnarling envious 
brutes that grovel in the mud of literature. And 
were you to be kicked from the fineſt of caſtles, 
and under the neceſſity of learning again the Bul- 
garian exerciſe, run the gauntlet, ſuffer once more 
the effects of a Dutch frow, and be ſent back to 
Liſboa to be cruelly ſcourged by order of the 
holy inquiſition, to undergo the fame dangers a- 
mong the PaDREs, the OREiLLONs, and the 
FrENCH ; if you were, in ſhort, to bear all poſ- 
ſible calamities, and though you did not under- 
ftand Leibnitz better than I do myſelf, you would 
always maintaio that every thing is right, and for 
the beſt ; that the lenum, and the materia ſubtilis, 
the pre- eſtabliſbed harmony, and the monades, are 
the prettieſt things in the world ; and that Leib- 
nitz is a great man, even to thoſe who do not un- 
derſtand him. 

To this fine diſcourſe, Candidus, the mildeſt 
af all the beings of nature, though indeed he bad 
M 2 killed 


136 CANDID USB or, Chap. 1. 


killed three men, two of whom were prieſts, did 
not give an anſwer; but being weary of the Doctor 
and his company, he ſet out the next morning by 
break of day, with a white ſtick in his hand, not 
knowing whither he was going, in ſearch of a place 
devoid of wearineſs, and where men ſhould not 
be men, as in the good country of Eldorado, 

Candidus, leſs unhappy fince he no longer was 
in love with Mifs Cunegonda, got his ſubſiſtence 
from the liberality of different people, who were 
not Chriſtians, but were charitable, arrived 
after a very tedious and painful march, at Tauris, 
a city on the frontiers of Perfia, famous for the 
cruelties exerciſed there alternately by Turks and 
Perſians. 

Candidus being quite ſpent with fatigue, having 
ſcarcely as many cloaths as could cover the diſtin- 
guiſhing mark of man, and what man calls his 
ſhame, was beginning to doubt whether he ſhould 
believe Pangloſs, when a Perſian made up to him 
in a very polite manner, and entrexed him to en- 
noble his houſe by his prefence. You joke, ſure- 
ly, ſaid Candidus ; I am a poor devil, who have 
left a wretched habitation that I had at the Pro- 
pontis, becauſe | married Miſs Cunegonda, who 
is become very ugly, and becauſe I was weary, I 
am not indeed fit to ennoble any one's houſe, I 
am not noble myſelf, thanks be to God; if I had 
the honour to be ſo, the Honourable Baron of 
Thunder-ten-tronckh ſhould have paid very dear- 
ly for the kicks on the breech he thought proper 
to give me, or I ſhould have died for ſhame, 
which would have been too philoſophical, Be- 
| ſides, 


* LES * 99 9 


Chap. 2. ALL rox THE DBzsr. 137 


ſides, I was ſcourged very ignominiouſly by the 
executioners of the holy inquiſition, and by two 
thouſand heroes, whoſe pay is three pence three 
farthings a-day, Give me whatever you pleaſe, 
but do not inſult me in my. diſtreſs by banters 
that would depreciate the merit of your favours. 
My Lord, replied the Perſian, you may be a beg- 
gar, and that is pretty viſible you are ſo ; but my 
religion obliges me to be hoſpitable. You are a 
fellow-creature, and in want, therefore the apple 
of my eye ſhall be your path. Deign to ennoble 
my houſe by your radiant preſence. I ſhall do 
as you pleaſe, replied Candidus. Step in, ſaid 
the Perſian. They walk in; and Candidus, full 
of admiration, was quite aſtonithed at the reſpect 
that his landlord ſhewed him. "he ſlaves anti- 
cipated all his deſires. The whole houſe ſeemed 
intent to procure him full ſatisfaftion. Provided 
this continues, ſaid Candidus, matters are not ſo 
bad in this country. Three days had elapſed, 
and the Perſian generoſity ſtill laſts as uſval, 

Candidus begins to exclaim, O Maſter Pangloſs, 

J ſuſpected always that you was in the right; for 

you are a great philoſopher !_ 


+ of %o# 


What h1ppencd to Candidus in this houſe, and how 
he left it. 


eee well fed, well clothed, and in high 
ſpirits, ſoon became again as ruddy, as 
freſh, and as pretty, as when he was in Weſt- 

M 3 phalia. 


138 C AND ID US; or, Chap. 2. 


phalia. This change gave no ſmall pleaſure to 
Iſhmael Rahab, his landlord. This man, who 
was ſix feet high, had two ſmall red ſparkling 
eyes; and his pimpled noſe, of a pretty large ſize, 
was a ſufficient indication that he infrioged the 
law of Mahomet. His whiſkers were renowned 
in the province, and mothers were earneſtly pray- 
ing that their ſons might have the like muſtaches, 
Rahab had wives, becauſe he was rich; but he 
was of an opinion that prevails but too common- 
ly in the Eaſt, and in ſome colleges of Europe. 
Your Excellence is more beautiful than the ſtars, 
ſaid the artful Perſian, one day, to our unſuſpect- 

ing hero, gently ſtroking him under the chin; 
your charms muſt have captivated many hearts ; 
you were born to give and to enjoy happineſs, 
Alas ? replied Candidus, I was but half happy 
behind the ſcreen, for I was far from being at 
my eaſe. Cunegonda was then handſome —— 
Cunegonda, poor innocent | Follow me, my 
Lord, faid the Perfian; and Candidus followed 
him, 

They came to a moſt inchanting incloſure at 
the bottom of a wood, where filence and volup- 
touſneſs ſeemed to reign, There Iſhmael Rehab 
tenderly, embracing Candidus, in few words de- 
clared a paſhon for him, like that which the 
beautiful Alexis ſo feelingly deſcribes in the Bu- 
colics of Virgil. Candidus was unable to reco- 
ver from his aſtoniſhment, No, cried he, I will 
never ſubmit to ſuch infamy ! What a ſtrange 
cauſe, and what a ſhocking effect! I had rather 
ſuffer death, Thou ſhalt dic then, ſaid the ju- 


rious 


. — * wo ts 


o 


1 


Chap. 2. ALL FOR TRE BEST. 132 


rious Iſhmacl. How ! Chriſtian. dog, becauſe L 
very politely meant to give thee plcaſure !—Re- 
ſolve to fatisfy me, or to endure the moſt cruel 
death. Candidus did not long heſitate, The 
Perſian's powerful arguments were ſufficient to 
make him tremble ; but he feared death like a 
philoſopher. 

Cuſtom ſoon. reconciles us to any thing, Can · 
didus, well fed, well inſtructed, though confined, 
was not abſolutely diſſatisfied with his ſituation. 
Good living, and the various entertainments ex- 
hibited by the ſlaves of Iſhmael, gave ſome inter- 
miſſion to bis griefs ; he was unhappy only when 
he reflected; and. fo are the greateſt part of man» 
kind. 

About this time one of the chief ſupports of 


the church militant of Perſia, the moſt learned 


of all the Mahometan doctors, who underſtood 
Arabic at his fingers ends, and even the Greek 


Which is at this day ſpoken in-the country of De- 


moſthenes and Saphocles, the Rev, Ed-Ivan-Baal- 
D-ok retufned from Conſtaminople,, where he 
had been diſputing with the Rev. Mamoud- A- 


bram, on a very delicate point of doctrine, name» 


ly, Whether the prophet had plucked the quill 
with which he wrote the Koran, out of the 
wing of the angel Gabriel, or whether Gabriel 
had preſemed it to him? They had diſputed, du- 
ring three days and three nights, with a zeal wor- 
thy of the ages moſt renowned for controverſy, 
when the Dector returned perſuaded, like all che 
diſciples of Ali, chat Mahomet had plucked the 
quill; and Mamoul-Abram remained convin- 

ced, 


240 CANDIDUS; or, Chap, 2. 
ced, like the reſt of the ſect of Omar, that the 


prophet was incapable of. ſuch a piece of rude- 


neſs, and that the angel preſented it to him with 
the moſt becoming grace imaginable. 

It was reported, that there had been, at Con - 
ſtantinople, a kind of free thinker, who had in- 
ſinuated, that it was proper to enquire into the 
truth of the Koran's having been actually writ- 
ten with a quill taken from the angel Gabriel; 
but he was ſtoned. 

Candidus's arrival made a great noiſe in Tau- 
ris; ſeveral perſons who had heard of contingent 
effects, and effects not contingent, began to doubt 
of his being a philoſopher. They mentioned it 
to the Rev. Ed- Ivan Baal-Denk ; he was curious 
to ſee him; and Rahab, who could not refuſe a 


perſon of his conſideration, ordered Candidus in- 
to his preſence. He ſeemed entirely ſatisfied with 


Candidus's manner of reaſoning on p 
moral evil, on things active and paſſive, 
derſtand yon are a philoſopher, and that 
ficient, ſaid the Venerable Cenobite : it is vexy 
improper that fo great a man as you are ſhoub 
be treated unworthily, which I am ET, 
the caſe. You are a ſtranger, Iſh Ra 
has no right over you. I will e to court, 
where you will meet with a favourable reception: 
the Sophi is fond of the ſciences. Iſhmael, de- 
mver this young philoſopher into my hands, or 
you will incur the diſpleaſure of your prince, 
and draw upon you the vengeance of heaven, 
but more eſpecially of its miniſters. Theſe laſt 


words terrified the intrepid Perſian ; he conſent- 
b ed 


— * * 


Chap. 3. ALL FOR THE Bsr. 141 


ed to every thing; and Candidus, bleſſing heaven 
and the prieſthood, ſer out from IJauris that ve- 
ry day with the Mahometan doctor. They took 
the road to Iſpahan, where they arrived amidſt 
the bleſſings and acclamations of the people, 


C6 A FF Os 
Candidus's reception at court, and what followed, 


HE Rev. Ed-Ivan-Baal-Denk, made no de- 

lay in preſenting Candidus to the King. 

His Majeſty took a ſingular pleaſure in liſtening 
to his diſcourſe, .and placed him among the learn- 
ed men of his court; but theſe learned men 
treated him as an ignorant fool, and an idiot, 
which very much contributed to perſuade his 
Majeſty that he was a great man, Becauſe, ſaid 
he to them, you cannot comprehend Candidus's 
arguments, you affront him; but, for my part, 
though J underſtand them no beiter than you, [ 
aſſure you that he is a great philoſopher; I ſwear 
it by my whiſkers, Theſe words impoſed ſilence 


- on the learned, 


Candidùs was lodged in the palace, and allow- 
ed {laves for his ſervice; he was clothed in a 


magnificent ſuit, and the Sophi commanded, that, 
Ie hin may what he would, no one ſhould dare 


to prove him in the wrong, His Majeſty did not 
ſtop here, The venerable prieſt ceaſed not to 
importune him in favour of Candidus ; and he 
refolv<1, at laſt, to rank him with his moſt inti- 
mate favourites. 


God 


142 CANDIDUS; or, Chap. 3. 


God be praiſed and our holy prophet, ſaid the 
Iman, addreſſing Candidus, I have brought you 
a moſt agreeable piece of intelligence. How hap- 
py are you, my dear Candidus! How will you be 
envied ! You will ſwim in opulence; you may 
aſpire to the moſt illuſtrious employments of the 
empire. Forget me not, however, my dear 
friend ; remember that you are obliged to me 
for the favours with which you will ſeon be ho- 
noured. The King will beſtow upon you a kind- 
neſs which is greatly eſteemed, and you will 
ſhortly exhibit an entertainment which the court 
has not enjoyed this two years. And pray, what 
are the honours defigned me by the prince? ſaid 
Candidus. 'This very day, replicd the prieſt, quite 
delighted, you will receive fifty ſtrokes upon the 
ſoles of your feet, with a bull's pizzle, in the pre- 
ſence of his Majeſty. The eunuchs, who are to 
perfume you, will be here immediately ; prepare 
to ſupport, with becoming reſolution, this luule 
trial, and make yourſelf worthy of the king of 
kings. Let the king of kings keep his favours, 
cried Candidus, if, to deſerve them, I muſt re- 
ceive fifty ſtrokes with a bull's pizzle. It is his 
cuſtom, replied the Doctor coldly, with thoſe on 
whom he would beſtow his favours, I eſteem you 
too much to report your reluctance, and I will 
make you happy in ſpite of yourſelf. 

They had ſcarce done ſpeaking when the eu- 
nuchs entered, preceded by the executor of his 
Majeſty's minute pleaſures, who was one of the 
talleſt and moſt robuſt lords of the court. Can- 


didus would rather have been excuſed ; but, in 
ſpice 


a u_s ÞvaAa« Aa ca Aw 


= a> ia» es ac roms ( 


t 
C 


Chap. 3- ALL, rox THE Bzsr. 143 


ſpite of all he could ſay or do, they perfumed his 
legs and feet according to cuſtom. Four eunuchs 
conducted him to the place appointed for the ce - 
remony, in the midſt of a double rank of ſoldi- 
ers, to the ſound of muſical inftruments, cannon, 
and the ringing of bells. The Sophi was alrea- 
dy there, attended by his principal officers, and 
the moſt intelligent of his courtiers. Candidus 
was ſtretched in a moment on a gilded bench 
and the executor of the minute pleaſures was pre - 
paring to enter upon his office. O Pangloſs, 
Pangloſs, if you were here !—ſaid Candides, cry- 
ing and weeping with all his might ; which would 
bave been thought very indecent, if the prieſt had 
not aſſorted, that his favourite - behaved in this 
manner only to give his Majeſty more entertain- 
ment. In truth, this great king laughed moſt 
immoderately ; he was ſo pleaſed with the fight, 
that, when the fifty ſtrokes were given, he or- 
dered fifty more. But his prime miniſter having 
repreſented, with uncommon boldneſs, that this 
favour, conferred on a ſtranger, might alienate 
the hearts of his ſubjects, he revoked his order, 
and Candidus was remanded back to his apart- 

ment, | 
They put him to bed, having bathed his feet 
with vinegar, The nobility came, one after an- 
other, to congratulate him; even the Sophi ho- 
noured him with his preſence; he not only ſuf- 
fered him to kiſs his hand, but gave him a de- 
viliſh drive in the chips with his fiſt. The poli- 
ticians thence conjectured that his fortune was 
| made; 


= 


144 CANDIDUS; or, Chap. 4. 


made ; and, what is more extraordinary, though 
politicians, they were not miſtaken. 


oy RY OP. 
Candidus receives new favours, His elevation. 


UR*hero was no ſooner recovered, than he 
was preſented to the King, in order to ex- 
preſs his gratitude for the favours with which he 
had been honoured, The monarch received him 
graciouſly ; moreover, he deigned to give him 
two or three ſlaps in the face during the conver- 
fation ; and when he took his leave, condeſcend- 
ed to kick his a—— as he went along, even as 
far as the guard-room : the courtiers were all 
ready to die with envy. Since the time his Ma- 
jeſty had firſt begun to bruiſe his ſpecial favou- 
rites, no one had ever had the honour to be fo 
thoroughly bruiſed as Candidus. 

Three days after this audience, our philoſo- 
pher, who was ready to go mad at the favours 
he had received, and began to think that things 
went very ill, was named governor of Chuſiſtan, 
with deſpotic power. He was decorated with a 
fur cap, which in Perſia is a mark of high di- 
ſtinction. Having taken leave of the Sophi, who 
honoured him with the repetition of ſome fa- 
vours, he ſet out for Sus, the capital of the pro- 
vince. From the moment Candidus had appear- 
ed at court, the grandees of the empire conſpired 
his deſtruction. The exceſſive favours which the 


Sophi had ſo laviſhly beſtowed on him, ſerved 
| only 


—_ Ty, es a —— __ qe >... PEEK 


NE» n= 2006 


Chap. 4. ALL FOR THE BRS r. 145 


only to increaſe the ſtorm which was ready to 


burſt over his head. Nevertheleſs, he rejoiced 
in his good fortune, and eſpecially in his remote 
ſituation : his ideas anticipated the pleaſures of 
ſupremacy, and he ſaid from the bottom of his 


heart, 


Thrice happy they who from their ſovereign dwell 
Far diftant | ——— 


Scarce had he travelled twenty miles from Iſ- 
pahan, when, on a ſudden, a body of five hun- 
dred cavalry ſaluted him with a furious diſcharge 
of their carbines. Candidus thought at firſt it 
was intended as a compliment; but a ball which 
ſhattered his leg to pieces, ſoon convinced him 
of his miſtake. His people threw down their 
arms, and Candidus, almoſt dead, was carried to 
a deſolate caſtle. His baggage, his camels, his 
ſlaves, his white eunuchs, his black eunuchs, and 
thirty ſix wives which the Sophi had given him 
for his own uſe, all became the ſpoil of the con- 
querors. They cut off the leg of our hero to 
prevent a mortification, and endeavoured to pre- 
ſerve his life to the intent that he might ſuffer a 
more cruel death, ben 

O Pangloſs, Pangloſs ! what would become of 
your. optimiſm, if you now beheld me, with only 
one leg, in the hands of my moſt cruel enemies? 
When I had juſt entered the path of felicity ; 
juſt made governor, or rather king, of one of 
the moſt conſiderable provinces of the empire, of 
ancient Media; when I became poſſeſſed of ca- 
mels, flaves, white cunuchs and black cunuchs, 

N and 


146 CAN DID US; or, Chap. 4. 


and thirty fix wives for my own uſe, and of 
which I had yet made, no uſe— Thus Candidus 
ſpoke when he was able to ſpeak, 

But whilſt he thus bewailed his miſery, fortune 
ſtood his friend. The prime miniſter being in- 
formed of the violence which had been commit- 
ted, had diſpatched a ſufficient-body of veterans 
in purſuit of the rebels; and the prieſt Ed-Ivan- 
Baal-Denk. had publiſhed, by means of other 
prieſts, that Candidus being favoured by the 
prieſts, was conſequently a favourite with God. 
Beſides, thoſe who were acquainted with the con-. 
ſpiracy, were the more impatient to diſcover it, 
fince the miniſters of religion had declared in the 
name of Mahomer, that if any one had eaten 
ſwine's fleſh, drank wine, paſſed ſeveral days 
without bathing, or viſited awoman at an impro- 
per time, contrary, to the expreſs commands of 
the Koran, ſhould upon declaring of what he 
knew of the conſpiracy, be ipſo facto abſolved. 
Candidus's prifon was foon diſcovered; it was 
inſtantly forced open, and, as religion was con- 
cerned, the vanquiſhed were, according to rule, 
exterminated. Candidus, marching over heaps 
of dead bodies, triumphed over the greateſt dan- 
ger he had ever yet experienced, and together 
with his attendants, continued his route towards 
his government, where he was received as a pe- 
culiar favourite who had been honoured with the 
baſtinado in the preſence of the king of kings. 


CHAP. 


\ P, 


= 


Chap. 3, ALL fox THe Best. 147 


r 


As haw Candidus was a great prince, but not 


ſatisfied. 


Hiloſophy inſpires men with the love of their 
fellow-creatures : Paſcal is almoſt the oaly 
philoſopher who ſeems endeavouring to make us 
hate them. Happily Candidus had never read 
Paſcal: he loved poor humanity with all his ſoul; 
Honeſt men perceived his diſpoſition ; they had 
hitherto been kept at a diſtance from the Mif/z 


Dominici of Perſia; but it was not difficult for 


them to aſſemble in the preſence of Candidus, 
and to affit him with their counſel. He made 
many wife regulation for the encouragement of 
agricalture, population, commerce, and the arts. 
He rewarded thoſe who had made uſeful experi- 
ments; and even thoſe who had only written 
books, met with encouragement. When all my 
ſubjects are contented, (ſaid Candidus to himſelf 
with the moſt charming candour imaginable), 
then poſſibly I may be happy. He was but little 
acquainted with human. nature. His reputation 
was attacked in ſeditious libels, and he was ca- 
lamniated in a work called “ ami des hommes. He 
found, that, by endeavouring to make men hap- 
py, be did but excite their ingratitude. O, cried 
Candidus, how difficult it is to govern theſe un- 
fledged animals which vegetate on the face of 
the earth | Why did I not remain on my little 
farm, in the company of Maſter Pangloſs, Cune- 

| N 2 gonda,, 


— — 2 4 2 * — 
— — A — 7 
— 


148 CAN DID U; or, G 6 


gonda, the daughter of Pope Urban X. who has 
- but one buttock, Friar Girofflee, and the luxu- 


rious Paquetia 


C H A N VI. 
Candidus' pleaſures, 


Andidus, in the extremity of his grief, wrote 

&.4 a moſt pathetic letter to the Right Reverend 
Ed-Ivan Baal-Denk; who was ſo exceedingly 
moved with the ſad picture of his miſery, that he 
perſuaded the Sophi to diſmiſs Candidus from his 
employment. His Majeſty, in recompence for 


bis ſervices, granted him a very conſiderable pen- 


ſion. Thus caſed of the weight of grandeur, our 
philoſopher ſought the optimiſm of Pangloſs in 
the pleaſures of private life. Hitherto he ſeemed 
to have hved for others, and to have forgot that 
he had a ſeraglio. He now recollected this cir- 
cumſtance with that emotion which the very idea 
of a ſeraglio inſpires, Let all things be prepared, 
ſaid he to his prime eunuch, for my entrance a- 
mong my wives. My Lord, replied the ſqueak- 
ing gentleman, it is now that your Excellence de- 
ſerves the name of wiſe. Men, for whom you 
have done ſo much, were unworthy your atten- 
tion; but women It may be ſo, ſaid Candidus 
very modeſtly. 

In the centre of a garden, in which nature was 
aſſiſted by art to develope her charms, ſtood a 
ſmall fabric, whoſe ſtructure was ſimple, yet ele- 


gant, and TT quite different from thoſe 
which 


| 
: 
1 
1 
8 
7 


Chap. 6. ALL rox THE PEsr. 149 


which are ſeen in the ſuburbs of the moſt magni- 
ficent cities in Europe, Candidus approached this 
temple, but not without a bluſh, The ſoft air 
ſpread a delicious fragrance round the peaceful 
manſion, The flowers amorouſly entwined, ſeem- 
ed guided by the inſtin& of pleaſure; nor were 
they only the flowers of a day: the roſe never: 
loſt its vermilion. The remote view of a ſhaggy 
rock, whence fell a rapid torrent, ſeemed calcu- 

lated to invite the ſoul to that ſweet melancholy: 
which precedes enjoyment. Candidus trembling, 

entered the ſaloon, where taſte and magnificence 

were elegantly diſplayed ; a ſecret charm thrilledi 
through every ſenſe, He beholds, breathing up- 

on the canvas, the youthful Telemachus in the 
midſt of the nymphs of Calypſo's court. He then 
turns his eyes to a half-naked Diana flying into 
the arms of Endymion, But his agitation in- 
creaſed, when he beheld a Venus faithfully copied 
from that of Medicis, All at once he is ſtruck- 
with the ſound of divine muſic ; a number of 

young Circafſiaa women appear covered with their 
veils ;. they form around him a- dance agreeably 
imagined, and more veritable than thoſe which: 
are exhibited upon the ſtage after the death of- 
your Cæſars and your Pompeys. 

At a certain ſignal their-veils dropt: their ex- 
preſſive features add new life to the entertain 
ment: they practiſe every bewitching attitude, 
but without any apparent deſign: one by her 
leering eyes expreſſed a boundleſs paſſion; ano- 
ther in a foft languor ſeemed to expect pleaſure 
without ſceking it; a third bends forward, but 

N. 3 raiſed. 


150 CAN DID US; or, Chap. 6. 


raiſed herſelf immediately ſo as to afford a tran- 
fient glance at thoſe raviſhing charms, which at 
Paris the fair ſex ſo profuſely diſplay ; a fourth 
careleſsly throws back the ſkirt of her robe, and 
diſcovers a leg, which of itſelf was ſufficient to 
inflame a man of delicacy. 'The dance ceaſes, and 
the beauties ſtand motionleſs, 

The filence that reigned recalls Candidus to 
himſelf ; the fury of love ruſhes into his heart; 
his inſatiable looks wander on all fides; he kifles 
the inflaming lips and moiſtened eyes ; he puts 
his hand on balls whiter than alabaſter ; their 
heaving and elaſtic motion makes the hand rc- 
coil; he admires the due proportions ; he ob- 
ſerves the ruddy tips, like the buds of the new. 
ſpringing roſe, that do not blow till recreated by 
the beneficent rays of the ſun; he kiſſes them with 
ecſtaſy, and his mouth ſticks cloſe to them. 

Our philoſopher contewplates with attention 
one of a more delicate ſhape and majeſtic deport- 
ment than the reſt; but throws his handkerchief 
to a young nymph whoſe languiſhing cyes ſeemed 
peculiarly to court his affection, and whoſe beauty 
was improved by her bluſhes. The eunuch in - 
ſtantly opened the door of an apartment which 
was conſecrated to the myſteries of love. The 
lovers entered, and the cunuch ſaid to his maſtcr, 
You are now going to be happy. Oh, — 
Candidus, I hope I am. 

The cieling and che walls of this delightful 
chamber were covered with mirrors, and in the 
middle ſtood a couch of black ſatin. Here he 
ſeated the fair Circaſſian, and began to undreſs 

her 


Chap. 56. ALL ror TRE BE Tr. rgr 


her with inconceivable alertneſs. The good crea- 
ture did not interrupt him, except to expreſs her 
affection by her kiſſes. O, my Lord, ſaid ſhe, 


like a true Mahometan, how happy have you 


made your flavs How you honour her by your 
tranſports ! Theſe few words charmed our philo- 
ſopher, He was loſt in ecſtaſy, and every thing 
he beheld was entirely new to him. What diffe- 
rence between Cunegonda grown ugly, and vio- 
lated by Bulgarian heroes, and a young Circaſſian 
of cighteen, who was never raviſhed! This was 


the firſt time that poor Candidus had tafted 


pleaſure. The objects which he devoured were 
repeated in the glaſs. Which way ſocver he turn+ 
ed. his eyes, he ſaw the black ſatin eontraſted with 
the whiteſt ſkin in the univerſe. He beheld —— 


but I am obliged to comply with the falſe delicacy 


of our language. Let it ſuffice to ſay, that our 
philoſopher was-completely happy. 


O Maſter, my dear Maſter Pangloſs, cried Can· 
didus quite em apt, all is full as well here as in 


Eldorado ; nothing but a fine woman can fatisfy 
the defires of man. I am as happy as it is poſe 
fible to be. Leibnitz is in the right, and you are 
a great philoſopher : for. inſtance, I make no 
doubt but you, my lovely angel, are inclined to- 
wards optimiſm, as you have always been happy. 
Alas! replied the lovely angel, L know not what 
you mean by optimiſm ; but your ſlave was never 
happy before to-day, If my lord will deign to 
hear me, I will convince him of this by a conciſe 
relation of my adventures. With all my heart, 
faid Candidus; I am ip a proper ſtate of tranquil- 
I lity 


3 


\ 
1 
1 

N 

1 
I 
1 i 
| i 
j 
\ 0 
1 
11 
4 N 
4 4 
: 

7 1 
1 A 
Z 


152 CANDID Us; or, Chap. 7. 


lity to liſtea to a ſtory : and ſo the charming ſlave 
began her tale, as in the following chapter. 


EC a A. Ih 
The Hiſtory of Zirza, 


Y father was a Chriſtian, and I alſo am a 

Chriſtian, as he told me. He lived in a 
little hermitage in the neighbourbood of Cotatis, 
where he attracted the veneration of the faith» 
ful, by his fervent devotion, and an auſterity 
of manners which was ſhocking to human na- 
ture. The women came in-erowds to pay him 


homage, and took. a ſingular pleaſure in kifling. 


his backſide, which was every day gored with 
ſtripes of diſcipline. I. certainly owe my being 
to one of the moſt- devout of them. I was 
brought up in a ſubterraneous cave near my fa- 
ther's cell. I was twelve years old, without hav» 
ing once iſſued from this tomb, as I may call it, 
when the earth trembled, with a terrible noiſe: 


the vault where I lay ſunk down, and I was with: 


ditticulty taken. from under the rubbiſh. I was 
half dead, when, for the firſt time in my life, my 
eyes were ſtruck with the light of day. My ta- 
ther took me into his hermiiage as a predeſtined 


child: the whole affair appeared ſtrange to the pca · 


ple. My father cried out n and the . 
ple joined 1a the cry. 

I was named Zirza, which in the Perſian ht 
guage ſigniſies, child of providence. Ii was not 
long before the Nn of your poor ſlave cxcited 

che 


— — — — — — ws — vnn f A£AAC2A * 


© 


Chap. 7. ALL rox THE BesT. 153 


the curioſity of the public. The women began to 


viſit the hermitage leſs frequently, and the men 
much oftner. One of them ſaid he loved me. 
Wicked wretch, cried my father, art thou qua- 
lified to love her] She is a treaſure which God 
hath committed to my care : he appeared to me 
laſt night in the figure of a venerable hermit, 
and commanded me not to part with-ber for leſs 
than two thouſand crowns, Begone, vile beg- 
gar, leſt thy impure breath ſhould contaminate 
her charms, I confeſs anſwered the youth, that 
I have only a heart to offer her; but monſter, 
art thou not aſhamed to proſtitute the name of 
the Deity to thy avarice ? Wich what face, wreich 
as thou art, doſt thou dare to aſſert that God 
ſpake to thee ? It is degrading the Almighty to 
repreſent him converſing with men like thee. O 
blaſphemy ! cried my father in a violent paſſion 
God himſelf commanded that ltaſphemers ſhould 
be ſtoned. Saying theſe words he murdered my 
unbappy lover, and his blood ſpurted in my face. 
Now, though I was yet unacquainted with love, 
I found myſelf ſo far intereſted in the fate of my 
lover, that the fight of my father became inſup- 
portable to me. I reſolved to leave him : he per- 
ceived my deſign, Ungrateful girl, ſaid be, it 
is to me that thou art indebted for thy being ; 
thou art my daughter, and yet thou hateſt me 
but thou ſhalt no longer hate me without cauſe, 
He kept his word but too religiouſly. During 
five ſad years which I pafſicd in tears and groans, 
neither my youth nor faded beauty had power 


to relax his ſeverity, Sometimes he would thruſt 
2:7 5 A 


154 CANDID US; or, Chap. 7. 


a thouſand pins into cvery part of my body; then 
with his diſcipline he would cover my backſide 
with blood. That gave you leis pain than the 
pins, {aid Candidus, 'True, my Lord, replied 
Zirza. At laſt, however, I found means to eſ- 
cape ; and not daring to confide in any man, I 
hid myſelf in the woods. Three days I ſpent 
without food, and ſhould certainly have died of 
hunger, but for a tyger to whom I had the good 
fortune to be agreeable, and who was kind 
enough to divide his prey with me. But I was 
often dreadfully frightened by this terrible ani- 
mal : the brute had once like to bave raviſhed 
from me the flower, the plucking of which has 
given your Lordſhip ſo much pain and pleaſure. 
My food gave me the ſcurvy, but I was no ſoon- 
er cured than I followed a flave-merchant who 
was travelling to Teflis, where the plague then ra- 
ged, and I ſoon became infected. Iheſe misfor- 
tunes, however, had ſo little affected my charms, 
that the purveyor of the court thought fit to pur- 
chaſe me for your uſe. It is now three months 
that I have languiſhed among the reſt of your 
wives; we all began to imagine ourſelves deſpi- 
fed. O, Sir, if you did but know how diſagree - 
able and improper theſe eunuchs are to conſole 


neglected girls. In ſhort, I have not yet lived 


cighteen years, twelve of which I paſſed in a dun- 
geon ; I have felt an earthquake; I was ſprinkled 
with the blood of the firſt amiable man I had 
ſeen ; during five whole years I endured the moſt 
cruel torture ; I have had the ſcurvy and the 
plague. Pining in the midſt of a company. of 

black. 


RR” ” umn mn i. aa «@ . a a. ah 


Chap. 8. ALL FOR THE BesT, 155 


black and white monſters, ſtill preſerving that 

which I had ſaved from the fury of a tyger, and 

curſing my deſtiny, I ſpent three long months in 

this ſeraglio ; and ſhould moſt certainly have died 

of the green ſicknefs, if your Excellence had not 

honoured me with your embraces, bt 
O heavens ! ſaid Candidus, is it poſſible at your it 

age to have experienced ſuch fad misfortunes ? if 

What would Pangloſs fay if he could hear your | 

ſtory ? but your misfortunes are at an end as well 

as mine. Things are not now ſo bad, do you 

think they are ? Saying theſe words he renewed 

his careſſes, and became more and more confirm- 


ed in the opinions of Pangloſs. 


C H A P. VII. 


Candidus's diſguſt, A meeting which he did not ex- 
pect. 


UR philoſopher, in the midſt of his ſera. 

glio, diſtributed his favours with tolerable | 

impartiality ; he enjoyed the pleafure of variety, i 

and returned with freſh ardour to the child of Pro- 

vidence, But this did not continue long, He i 

now began to feel violent pains in his loins, and v1 
N was alfo frequently afflicted with the cholic. In 5 

deing happy he became emaciated. Zirza's neck | 

appeared neither ſo white, nor fo admirably turn- I 

ed; her ſhape loſt half irs delicacy ; her eyes, in 

: the eyes of Candidus, ſeemed lefs ſparkling ; her 

| complexion appeared leſs beautiful, and the ra- | 

viſhing vermilion of her lips ſeemed quite faded. mY 

: He | | | 

1 


x56 CANDIDUS; or, Chap. 9. 


He perceived that ſhe did not walk well, and was 
not entirely ſatisfied with her breath. He alſo 
diſcovered a mole where he had conceived no 
blemiſh. The impetuoſity of her paſſion became 
troubleſome. In his other wives he cooly ob- 

ſerved many defects, which during his firſt tran- 
ſports, had eſcaped his notice : their lewdneſs 
grew offenſive, He was aſhamed to have follow- 
ed the example of the wiſeſt of all men, et invenit 
amariorem morte mulierem. 

Candidus, ſtill firm in his Chriſtian ſentiments, 
ſauntered for want of employment in the ſtreets 
of Sus; where, to his great ſurpriſe, a gentleman 
richly dreſſed, caught him in his arms, calling 
him by his name. Is it poſſible, ſaid Candidus, 
bleſs my ſpirit ! It cannot be—— Yet there is ſo 
ſtriking a reſemblance, —A bbe Perigourdin— 
It is even ſo, replied Perigourdin. Candidus ſept 
back three paces, and ingeniouſly ſaid, But are 
you happy, my dear Sir ? A fine queſtion truly, 
anſwered Perigourdin : the little trick -which I 
put upon you at Paris, ſerved only to eſtabliſh 
my credit. The police employed me a while; 
but diſagreeing with them at laſt, I threw off the 
eccleſiaſtical habit, which was of no longer uſe 


to me, and went over to England, where thoſe 


of my profeſſion are better paid. I revealed all 
that I knew, and all that I did not know, of the 
ſtrength and weakneſs of the country I had quit- 
ed. I ſwore that the French were a raſcally peo- 
ple, and that London was the only magazine of 
good ſenſe; in ſhort, I made a conſiderable for · 


tune, and am come hither to negotiate a treaty #t 
| che 


Chap. 8. 


the court of Perſia, in which the Sophi is bound 
to exterminate every European who ſhall enter 
his dominions in ſearch of cotton or ilk, to the 
prejudice of the Engliſh, The object of your: 
embaſſy, ſaid our philoſopher, is doubtleſs very 
commendable; but, Sir, you are a great raſcal : 
I do not like villany, and I have fome iatereſt at 
court: tremble, therefore, for your proſperity is 
at an end; you will ſoon feel the puniſhment due 
to your crimes. O Moſt Noble Lord Candidus, 
ſaid Perigourdin, falling on his knees, have mer- 
cy on me: I am driven to wickedneſs by an irre- 
ſiſtible impulſe, in the ſame manner as you are 
impelled to virtue. I perceived this fatal incli- 
nation the moment I was acquainted with Mr. 
Walſp, and. became a writer in the Feuilles— “ 
Feuilles, cries Candidus, what are thoſe? they 
are, replied Perigourdin, certain pamphlets of 
ſeventy pages, in which the public are perio. 
dically entertained with ſcandal, ſatire, and Bil- 
lingſgate, It is an honeſt man, who, having 
learned to read and write, and not being able to 
continue Jeſuite ſo long as he could have wiſhed, 
ſet about this pretty little performance, in order 
to buy lace for his wife, and bring up his chil- 
dren in the fear of God. There are allo a ſer 
of honeſt gentlemen who for a few pence, and now 
and then a gill of bad wine, aſſiſt the other honeſt 


ALL rox THE BEsr. 157 


* This is one of the thirty or forty periodical papers printed at 


Paris. It is only known in France, where it meets with ſucceſs 
amongſt all tauks. But theſe looſe ſheets of ſeventy two pages 
muſt not be confounded with others, compriſed under the ſame 
number of pages, ectein the author is indulgent to himſelf, and 
theſe papers, however, are much valued by philoſophers, 


« man 


159 CANDIDUS; or, Chap. 8. 


man in carrying on his work. This Monſieur 
Walſp is a member of an extraordinary club, 
whoſe chief amuſement is to make a few drunken 
people deny their God: or to aſſiſt Ame poor 
fool in ſpending his fortune, breaking his furni- 


ture, and then ſend him a challenge: theſe are no 


more than little gentilities, which theſe gentle - 
men call miſtiſications, and which nevertheleſs 
merit the notice of the police, In ſhort, this ve- 
ry honeſt Monſieur Walſp, who denies his ever 
having been ſent to the galleys, is blefled with a 
lethargy which renders him inſenſible to the ſe- 
vereſt truth ; and it is impoſſible to rouſe him 
but by certain violent means, which he endures 
with a magnanimity and refignation beyond all 
belicf. I laboured ſome time under this celebrat- 
ed author; I became famous in my turn, and 
had juſt left Monfieur Walſp, with an intention 
to begin for myſelf, when I had the honour to 
pay my reſpects to you at Paris——You are a 
vile rogue, ſaid Candidus ; but your fincerity 
moves me. Go directly to court, and prefent 
yourſelf to the Right Reverend Ed Ivan Baal- 


Denk: I will write to him in your favour, on 


condition that you promiſe to become an honeſt 
man, and that you do not inſift on having thou- 
ſands of people murdered, for the ſake of a little 
ilk and cotton. Perigourdin promiſed all that 


Candidus deſired of him, and they parted friends. 


CHAP- 


OZ Z + B 7 * FS DI 


\ P- 


Chap. 9. ALL rox THE BesrT. 159 


. 
Candidus s diſgrace, travels, and adventures. 


Erigourdin was no ſooner arrived at court, 
than he uſed all his art to gain the miniſter, 

and ruin his benefactor, He reported that Can- 
didus was a traitor, and that he had ſpoken diſ- 
reſpe&tfully of the ſacred whiſkers of the king of 
kings, It was the general opinion of the cour- 
tiers, that he ought to be roaſted at a ſlow fire; 
but the Sophi, with more humanity, was graci- 
ouſly pleaſed to condemn him only to perpetual 
baniſhment, after having kiffed the ſoles of his 
accuſer's feet, according to the cuſtom of Perſia, 
Perigourdia ſet out in order to put this ſentence 
in executian: he found our philoſopher in tole- 
rable health, and almoſt diſpoſed to renew his 
happineſs. My dear friend, ſaid the Engliſh am- 


daſſador, with the utmoſt regret I come to ac - 


quaint you, that you muſt quit this kingdom 
with all poſſible expedition, and alſo that you 
muſt kiſs the ſoles of my feet with ſincere con- 
trition, for the enormous crimes of which you 
have been guilty. ——Kiſs the foles of your feet! 
eried Candidus ; upon my word, Mr. Abbe, you 
carry your jokes too far : I do not comprehend 
you, He had ſcarce ſpoken, before the mutes, 
which attended Perigourdin, entered the room, 
and immedietely took off his ſhoes, He was then 
told, that he muſt either ſubmit to this humili- 
ation, or be impaled. Candidus, in virtue of his 

O 2 free 


160 CANDIDUS; or, Chap. . 


free agency, kiſſed the Abbe's feet, They cloth- 
ed him in a robe of coarſe canvas, and the hang- 
man drove him out of the city, crying aloud, — 
He is a traitor ! he has ſpoken diſreſpectfully of 
the dophi's whiſkers, even of the whiſkers of the 
great king! 

But what was the officious Cenebite doing, 
whilſt his favourite was thus diſgraced | I really 
cannot tell, Poſſibly he was grown weary of pa- 
tronizing Candidus. Who can . on prieſts 
or princes ! 

In the mean time, our hero trudged ſorrow- 
fully along. 1 never in my life, ſaid he to him- 
felf, ſpoke of the king of Perſia's whiſkers. I am 
fallen at once from the pinnacle of fortune into 
the abyſs of miſery, becauſe I am accuſed, by a 
wretch, who has violated all laws, of a crime 
which I never committed; and this fellow, this 
perſecutor of virtue, is happy. 

Candidus, after ſeveral days march found him- 
ſelt on the borders of Turky. He directed his 
ſteps towards Propontis, being determined to fix 
there once more, and to ſpend the remainder of 
his life in cultivating his garden. In paſling 
through a ſmall town, he obſerved a multitude of 
people gathered together. He enquired the cauſe 
of this effect. Tis a very odd affair, anſwered 
an old man : you muſt know, that, ſome time 
ago, the rich Mehemet obtained in marriage the 
daughter of the Janiſary Zamoud : he found her 
nota virgin, and very naturally, according to law, 
cut off her noſe, and ſent her back to her father. 
Zamoud, enraged at the affront, as was quite na- 

tural, 


— wh a 1 Ds 


Chap. 9. ALL rox THE BesrT, 101 


tural, in the firſt tranſport of his fury, cut off the 
head of his disfigured daughter, at one ſtroke of 
his ſcimitar. His eldeſt ſon, who had a great af- 
fection for his fiſter,, which you know is natural 
enough, in the violence of his paſſion, very na- 
turally plunged a dagger into his father's breaſt ; 
then like a lion, whoſe rage increaſes at the fight 
of his own blood, the young Zamoud flew to the 
houſe of Mehemet, and having killed half a do- 
zen ſlaves who oppoſed his entrance, he murder- 
ed Mehemet, his wives, and two children in the- 
cradle; after which he put an end to his own life 
with the dagger, yet reeking with the blood of 
his father, and of his enemies, which, you know, 
was alſo quite natural. O horrible | cried Can- 
didus. O Maſter Pangloſs ! if theſe barbarities 
are natural, would you not confeſs that nature is 
corrupted, and that all things are not ?—— No, 
replied the old man; the pre-eſtabliſhed harmo- 
ny —0 heavens ! cried Candidus, am I decei- 
ved? Are you not Pangloſs himſelf ? Tis even- 
fo, ſaid the old man; I knew, you at firſt, but I 
had a mind to penetrate into your ſentiments be- 
fore I diſcovered myſelf, Come, let us reaſon a. 
little upon contingent effects: let me ſee what 
progreſs you have made in the ſchool of wiſdom. 
Truly, Maſter Pangloſs, faid Candidus, you time 
2 ill: inform me rather what is become of 
Gunegonda, and where is Friar Girofflee, Pa- 
quetta, and the daughter of Pope Urban. I 
know nothing of the matter, replied Pangloſs; 
tis now two years ſince I left our habitation in: 
ſearch of you, I have travelled over all Turky, 


O 3 and 


162 CANDIDUS; or, Chap. 9. 


and was now going to the court of Perſia, where, 
as I was informed, you had made your fortune. 
I remained in this town among theſe good people, 
only to recover a little ſtrength in order to pur- 
ſue my journey, What do I ſee, ſaid Candidus 
in aſtoniſhment, You have loſt an arm, my dear 
Pangloſs, I hat's nothing at all, replicd Pangloſs; 
there is nothing more common than to ſee people 
with but one eye and one arm in this beſt of 
worlds. T he accident happened in my journey 
from Mecca, Our caravan was attacked by a 
troop of Arabs; and as our eſcort made reſiſt- 
ance, the Arabs being ſtrongeſt, according to the 
laws of war maſſacred us all. | 

There periſhed in this affair about five hun- 
dred people, among whom were about a dozen 
women with child. For my part, I eſcaped with 
only a cloven ſkull, and with the loſs of an arm. 
You ſee I am ſtill living, and have always found 
that every thing was for the beſt, But you your- 
ſelf, my dear Candidus, how happens it that you 
have a wooden leg? Candidus then related his 
adventures, Our philoſophers returned to Pro- 
pontis, amuſing themſelves as they went along 
with reaſoning on phyſical and moral evil, on 
free · will and predeſtination, on monades and pre · 
eſtabliſhed harmony. 


Chap. 18. ALL rox THE Brsr. 163 


— 


GE AF. £4. 


The arrival of Candidus and Pangloſi in Propontit, 
what they ſaw there, and what became of them, 


My dear Candidus, ſaid Pangloſs, why did 
you grow weary of cultivating your garden ? 


Why could not we be content with our preſerved 


citron, and piſtachio nuts ? Why were you tired 
of being happy? Why, becauſe all things are ne- 
ceflary in the beſt of worlds, it was therefore re- 
quiſite that you ſhould. undergo the baſtinado in 
the preſence of the king of Perñ̃a; that you ſhould 
have your leg cut off to make the Suſians happy, 
to try the ingratitude of mankind, and to draw 
down puniſhment upon.the heads of ſome villains 
who deſerved to ſuffer, Thus converſing, they 
arrived at their old habitation. Ihe firſt objects 
which ſtruck their eyes, where Martin and Pa- 


quetta, in the habit of ſlaves. Whence comes 


this ſtrange metamorphoſis ?- fgid Candidus, ten- 
derly embracing them. Alas they replied, ſigh- 


ing, you have no longer a place of abode ; ano- 


ther is intruſted with the cultivation of your gar» 


den; he cats your prelerved citron and piſtachio 


nuts, and uſes us like negroes. Who is this other? 
ſaid Candidus, *Tis, ſaid they, the general of the 
marine, the leaſt humane of all human beings. 
The Sultan, willing to reward his ſervices, with» 
out being at any expence, confiſcated all your 
poſſeſſions, under pretence that you were gone 
over to his enemy, and condemned. us to flavery, 


Believe 


164 CAN DID Us; or, Chap. 10. 


Believe me, Candidus, added Martin, and proceed 
on your journey. 1 have always told you, that 
every thing is for the worſt; the ſum of evil 
greatly exceeds the ſum of good; depart, and IL 
do not deſpair of your becoming a Manichean, if 
you arc not one already. Pangloſs was going to 
argue in form ; but Candidus interrupted him by 
inquiring after Cunegonda, the old woman, Friar 
Girofflce, and of Cacambo. Cacambo is here, 
replied Martin; he is now buſy in cleaning the 
common ſewer. The. old woman is dead of a 
kick in the breaſt which was given her by an eu- 
nuch. Friar Girofflee is entered among the Ja- 
niſaries. Madam Cunegonda is grown fat again, 
and has recovered her former beauty; ſhe is in 
our maſter's ſeraglio. What a ſtring of unhappy 
wretches ! ſaid Candidus. Was it neceſſary that 
Cunegonda ſhould recover her beauty to make 
me a cuckold ? It is of little importance, ſaid 
Pangloſs, whether Madam Cunegonda be hand- 
ſome or ugly ; whether ſhe is in your arms, or 
in thoſe of another ; it makes no difference in 
the general ſyſtem : for my part, 1 wiſh her a 
numerous poſterity. Phaloſophers never concern 
themſelves by whom women have children, pro- 
vided they have them at all. Population 
Alas, ſaid Martin, philoſophers had much better 
employ themſelves in contributing to the happi- 
neſs of a few individuals, than undertake to mul - 
tiply the ſuffering ſpecics. While they were 
ſpeaking, they heard a great noiſe. "Twas the 
| who had ordered a dozen ſlaves to be 
Logged for his amuſement, Pangloſs and Can- 
didus 


% Sha 4 Ah. ad. Ee. ara 


e , , . ENT 


Chap. 11. ALL rox THE Brsr. 165 


didus terrified, left their friends, with tears in 
their eyes, and haſtily took the road to Conſtan- 
tinople. 

Here they found every body in an uproar; the 
fire began in the ſuburbs of Pera; it had already 
conſumed ſive or ſix hundred houſes, aud two or 
three thouſand people had pcriſhed in the flames. 
What a ſhocking diſaſter ! cried Candidus. All 
for the beſt, ſaid Panglaſs z-thele little accidents 
bappen every year, It is very natural that fire 
ſhould catch wooden houſes, and that thoſe houſes 
ſhould burn, Beſides, it delivers many honeſt 
people from a miſerable exiſtence What do I 
hear? ſaid one of the officers of the Sublime 
Porte. How, wretch ! dareſt thou ſay it is all for 
the beſt, when half Conſtantinople is on fire ? 
Go, dog, curſed prophet, go receive the puniſh- 
men due to thy preſumption. In faying theſe 
words, he took Pangloſs by the middle, and threw 
him headlong into the flames. Candidus, half 
dead with fear, crept as well as he could into a 
neighbouring quarter, where things were more 
quiet ; and what became of him, we ſhall ſee in 
the next chapter. 


„ FF... A5 


Candidus continues his journey ; and in what capa» 
city. 


Have now no other courſe to take, ſaid our 
philoſopher, than to ſell myſelf for a ſlave, or 
turn Turk. Happineſs has abandoned me for e- 
* ” ver. 


— 


166 CANDID US; or, Chap, 11, 


ver. A turban would corrupt all my pleaſures, 
I feel myſelf incapable of enjoying peace of mind 
in a religion full of impoſture, and which I ſhould 
never embrace but from the baſe matixe of inte- 
reſt. No, I ſhall never be content if I ceaſe to be 
an honeſt man: I will therefore become a ſlave. 
No ſooner had Candidus taken this reſolution, 
than he determined to put it in practice. He fixed 
upon an Armenian merchant for his maſter: his 
- Character was very good, and he was reputed to 
have as much virtue as an Armenian could poſſi · 
bly have, This Armenian was ready to fail for 
Norway : he took Candidus with him, hoping 
that a philoſopher might be ſerviceable to him in 
his trade, They imbarked, and the wind was fo 
favourable to them, that they made their paſſage 
in half the time which is generally required, 
They had no occaſion to purchaſe 2 wind of the 
Lapland magicians, and therefore thought it ſuf- 
cient to give them ſome trifle, that they mighe 
not interrupt their good fortune by their witch» 
craft; which ſometimes happens, if one may be- 
lieve Moreri- s dictionary. 

As ſoon as they were landed, the Armenian. 
made his market of whale blubber, and ordered 


our philoſopher to traverſe the country in ſearch. ' 


of dry fiſh, He acquitted himſelf of his commiſ- 
ſion as well as he could, and was returning with à 
number of rein-deer loaded with this commodity, 
reflecting deeply on the amazing difference which 
he diſcovered between the Laplanders and other 
men, when he was accoſted by an extreme little 
Laponeſe, Her head was rather larger than the 

reſt 


. 


Chap. 11. ALL rox THE BEST. 167 


reſt of her body, her eyes red and fiery, her noſe 
flat, and her mouth reached. from car to ear: ſhe 
bid him good-morrow,. with the moſt engaging 
air imaginable. My dear little Lord, faid this a- 
nimal, who was herſelf but one foot ten inches 
high, you are exceedingly charming ; be ſo kind 
as to love me a little, So ſaying, ſhe threw her 
arms about his neck, Candidus puſhed her from 
him with inexpreſſible horror. She cried out; 
her huſband advanced, accompanied by a number 
of his countrymen. What is the meaning of 


this noiſe ? ſaid they. Tie, ſaid the little animal, 


only this ftranger——alas! I cannot ſpeak for 
grief; he deſpiſes me. I underſtand you, ſaid 
the huſband. Impolite, uncivil, brutal, infamous, 
cowardly raſcal, thou haſt brought ſhame upon 
my houſe ; thou haſt done me the greateſt injury; 
thou haſt refuſed to lie with my wife Is the man 
mad ? ſaid our hero. What would you have ſaid, 
had I lain with her? I ſhould have wiſhed you 
all manner of proſperity, ſaid the enraged Lap- 
lander ; but thou deſerveſt my utmoſt indig- 
nation. So ſaying, he exerciſed his ſtick upon 
the ſhoulders of Candidus without mercy. The 
rein- deer were ſeized by the relations of the af- 
fronted huſband ; and Candidus, fearing worſe 
treatment, was obliged to betake himſelf to his 
heels, and evermore to renounce his good maſter; 
for be durſt not appear before him without mo- 
ney, without f{h, and without rein- drer. 


CHAP. 


it 


168 CAN DID US; or Chap. 12. 


„ 
Candidus continues his journey. New adventures, 


NAndidus ſtrolled a long time, without even 
knowing whether he would go: he deter- 
mined, at laſt, to make the beſt of his way to 
Denmark, where, he had heard, things went well. 
He found himſelf poſſeſſed of ſome little money, 
which the Armenian had given him ; and, with 
this weak ſupport, he hoped to accompliſh his 
journey. This hope kept up his ſpirits, and he 
Kill enjoyed ſome happy moments. He chanced, 
one day to meet in an inn with three travellers, 
who were talking with carneſtneſs of a plenum, and 
materia fubtilis. Right, ſaid Candidus to himſelf, 
theſe are philoſophers. Gentlemen, ſaid he, as to 
the plenum, it is inconteſtible: there is no vacuum 

in nature, and the materia ſubtilis is well imagined, 
Then you are a Carteſian, ſaid the travellers, 
Yes, ſaid Candidus; and, what is ſtill more, I am 
a Leibnitzian, So much the worſe for yourſelf, 
replied the philoſophers. Deſcartes and Leibnitz 
had not common ſenſe. As for us, we are New- 
tonians, and we glory in the diſtinftion : if we 
diſpute, it is only to ſtrengthen our own ſenti- 
ments, for we are all of the ſame mind. We 
ſeek the truth upon Newtonian principles, becauſe 
we are convinced that Newton is a great man,— 
And ſo is Deſcartes, ſo is Leibnitz, ſo is Pangloſs, 
ſaid Candidus : theſe are great men worth all the 
others, You are very impertinent, friend, re- 
plied 


Chap. 12. ALL rox THE BusT, 169 


plied the philoſophers. Are you acquainted with 
the laws of refrangibility, of attraction, and of 
motion ? Have you read Dr. Clarke's refutation 
of your Leibnitz? Do you know what is meant 
by the centrifugal and centripetal force? Do you 
know that colours are formed by denſity ? Have 
you any notion of the theory of light, and of 
gravitation ? Are you ignorant of the period of 
25,920 years, which unfortunately does not agree 
with chronology? No; I warrant your ideas of 
all theſe things are falſe and imperfect: learn to 
keep ſilence therefore, for a pitiful Monade as you 
are; and be careful how you affront gentlemen, 
by comparing them with pigmies. Gentlemen, 
ſaid Candidus, if Pangloſs was here, he would 
teach you ſurpriſing things, for he is a great phi- 
loſopher : he has an abfolute contempt for your 


Newton, and, as I am his diſciple, Newton is no 


great favourite of mine. The philoſophers, quite 
enraged, fell upon Candidus, and our poor hero 
was drubbed moſt philoſophically. 

Their wrath appeaſing, they begged the hero 
pardon for their raſhneſs ; then one of them be- 
gan to ſpeak, and made a very beautiful diſcourſe 
on mildneſs and moderation. 

During this converſation there happened to 
paſs by a very pompous funeral, whence our 
philoſophers took occafion ro comment'on the 
ridiculons vanity of mankind. Would it not 
ſays one of them, be much more rational for the 
relations and friends of the deceaſed to carry, 


without pomp, the corpſe upon their own ſhould- 


ers? Would not the mournful employment 
P more 


170 CAN DID US; or, Chap. 12. 


more effectually excite the idea of death, and 
produce the moſt ſalutary and philoſophical ef- 
fect? Would not this reflection naturally ariſe ? 

This body which I carry is that of my friend, 
my relation ; he is no more, and, like him, I 
muſt ceaſe to exiſt?” Might not ſuch a cuſtom, 
in ſome meaſure, diminiſh the crimes committed 
in this unhappy world, and reclaim beings who 
believe in the ſoul's immortality ? Mankind are 
but too willing to keep the thought of death at 
a diſtance, that we ſhould be afraid of reminding 
them of their mortality too often. Why are not 
the weeping mother or huſband preſent at this 
Tolemnity ? the plaintive accents of nature, the 
piercing cries of deſpair, would do more ho- 
nour to the aſhes of the dead, than all thoſe 
ſable mutes, and that ſtring of clergy, jovially 
ſinging pſalms which they do not underſtand. 
It is well ſaid, replied Candidus : if you did but 
always talk in this manner, without beating peo- 
ple, you. would be a great philoſopher. 

Our travellers ſeparated with marks of mutual 
confidence and friendſhip. Candidus, ſteering 
his courſe towards Denmark, ſoon found him- 
ſelf in the middle of a wood; in ruminating on 
the misfortunes which had befallen him in this 
beſt of worlds, he had loſt his way. The day 
had conſiderably declined when he perceived his 
miſtake, His courage failed, and ſorrowfully 
lifting his eyes to heaven, our hero, leaning a- 
gainſt a tree, expreſſed himſelf in the following 

words : I have traverſed half this globe ; I have 
en fraud and calumny triumphant : my ſole in · 
_ tention 


ps =y a A © Int ns mend a _—_—_ a. 


„FS era gs ea n ew 


* 


Chap. 12. ALt ron Tas Besr. 171 


tention has been to be ſerviceable to mankind, 
yet I have been conſtantly perſecuted. A great 
king honours me with his favour and the baſti- 
nado, I am ſent to a delightful” province, but 
with a wooden leg : there I taſted pleaſure after 
my misfortunes. An Abbe arrives, and I protect 
him: by my means he infinuates himſelf at court, 
and I am obliged to kiſs the ſoles of his feet, I 
meet my poor Panglofs again only to fee him 
burnt, I ſtumble upon a company of philoſo 

phers, a ſpecies of animals the mildeſt and molt 
ſociable of any that are ſpread upon the face of 
the earth, and they beat me moſt unmercifully. 
Yet all muſt be right, becauſe Pangloſs ſaid'fo ; 
nevertheleſs I am the moſt miſerable of all poſſi · 
ble beings, 

His meditations were faddenty interrupted by 
piercing cries, which ſeemetl not far off, His 
curioſity led him on. He beheld a young vo- 
man tearing her hair in the moſt violent agita- 
tion of deſpair. Whoſoever you are, faid the, 
if you have a heart, follow me. He followed 
her, and the firſt object he beheld was a man and 
a woman extended on the graſs : their aſpect be- 
ſpoke the elevation of their minds and their diſ- 
tinguiſhed origin; their features, though disfr- 
gured by grief, expreſſed ſomething ſo intereſt- 
ing that Candidus ſympathiſed in their ſorrows, 
and could not help eagerly inquiring the cauſe of 
their misfortunes. Theſe, ſaid the young wo+ 
man, are my parents; yes, they are the authors 
of my unhappy being, continued ſhe, throwing: 
| herſelf into their arms. They were forced o 
I | P 2 fly 


172 c AN DID us; or, Chap. 12. 


fly to avoid the rigour of an unjuſt ſentence: I 
. attended them in their flight, and was contented 
to ſhare their misfortunes, in hopes that J might 
be of ſome ſervice in procuring nouriſhment for 
them in the deſert we were going to enter. We 
ſtopt here to repoſe a while, and unhappily diſ- 
covering that tree, I was d: ceived in its fruit, O 
Sir 1 I am a moſt horrid criminal! Arm your- 
ſclf in defence of virtue, and puniſh me as I de- 
ſerve, Strike !——That fruit—-—1 gave it to 
my parents; they eat of it with pleaſure: I re- 
zoiced that I had relieved them from the torment 
of thirſt. Unhappily, I preſented them with 
death : the fruit is poiſon, 7 
Candidus ſhook with horror ; his hair ſtood 
upright ; a cold ſweat covered his whole body. 
He immediately did all in his power to aſſiſt this 
 vrretched family; but the poiſon had already made 
ſo much progreſs, that the beſt antidote would 
now have been ineffectual. Dear, dear child, 
our only hope and comfort! ſaid the expiring 
parents, forgive thyſelf ; we fincerely forgive 
thee; it was thy exceſſive tenderneſs which de- 
prives us of life. O generous ftranger ! be 
careful he „ daughter: her heart is noble and 


{ 

| 
| 
| 
\ 
| 
f 
y 
N 
y 


formed virtue ; it is a treaſure which we 
commit to thy care, infinitely more precious 
than our paſt fortune. Deareſt Zenoide, re- 
ceive our laſt embraces z mix thy tears with ours. 
O heaven, what delightful moments are theſe | 
Thou haſt opened to us the door of the com- 
fortleſs dungeon; in which we have lived forty 
tedious years. We bleſs thee with our laſt breath, 

| praying 


Chap. 12. Axl FOR THE BesT. 72 


praying that thou mayſt never forget the leſſons 
which our prudence dictated ; and that they may 
preſerve thee from the danger to which thou wilt 
neceſſarily be expoſed, 

Pronouncing theſe words they expired. Can- 
didus had great difficulty to bring Zenoide to 
herſelf, The ſolitude of the place, and the pale 
light of che moon, rendered the melancholy 
ſcene ſtill more affecting. The day began to 
dawn before Zenoide recovered the uſe of her 
ſenſes. She no ſooner opened her eyes, than 
ſhe deſired Candidus to dig a hole to inter the 
bodies: even ſhe herſelf aſſiſted with aſtoniſhing: 
reſolution. 'This duty being diſcharged, ſhe gave- 
vent to her tears. Our philoſopher perſuaded: 
her to quit this fatal ſpot; and they walked along 
for ſome time, without knowing whither they 
went. At length they perceived a little cortage,- 
which was inhabited by an old man and his wife, 
who, in the midſt of this deſert, were always ready 
to render all the ſervice in their power to their diſ- 
treſſed brethren. This couple were in fact, what 
Philemon and Baucis are ſaid to have been. They 
had enjoyed the ſweets: of Hymen forty- years, 
without one bitter draught. Conſtant health, 
the produce of temperance and tranquillity ; a 
pleaſing ſimplicity of manners; an exhauſtleſs 
fund of candour in their diſpofition; all the vir - 
tues for which man is indebted to himſelf alone, 
compoſed the happy lot which heaven had been 
picaſed to grant them. They were held in great 
veneration in the neighbouring hamlets, whoſe 
. . 2 23 ON vi Jinba» 


aa 2 — 
_ — as — —ů— —— — 


174 | CANDIDUS; or, Chap. 13. 


inhabitants, happy in their ruſticity, might have 
paſſed for honeſt people, if they had been Ca- 
tholics, They conſidered it as their duty to ſup- 
port Agaton and Suname (ſuch were the names 
of this old couple) and they now extended their 
charity to the two ſtrangers. Alas | faid Can- 
didus, what pity it was that you, my poor Pan- 
gloſs, were burnt: I know you were quite right; 
but it was not in thoſe parts of Europe and Aſia, 
which we traverſed together, that all is for the 
beſt: it is in Eldorado, which it is impoſſible to 
reach; and in a little cottage, ſituated in the 
coldeſt, the moſt barren, and the moſt diſmal 
country in the whole world. What pleaſure 
ſhould I have had to hear you, in this cabin, talk 
of pre-eſtabliſhed harmony and manages ! I ſhould 
like to ſpend the reſt of my days among theſe ho- 
neſt Lutherans; but it would oblige me to re- 
nounce going to mals, and expoſe me to the laſh. 
of the Fournal Chretien. 

_ Candidus was very anxious to know the ad- 
Ventures of Zenoide.. Modeſty hindred him from 
iaquiring. She obſerved him, and ſatisfied his 
impatience by the AS narratis e. 


CH A P. MI, 


The flory of Zenoide. — How Candidus became ena- 
moured with her, and the conſequences. 


AM deſcended from one of the moſt ancient 
houſes of Denmark : one of, my anceſtors 
- periſhed in that place where the wicked Chri- 
ſtiern 


— —äö—ä—6 . .ñꝗZää—ä—.ñ — = — * Ay C4 


ALL ron THE BEsT. 175 


Chap. 13. 


ſtiern cauſed ſuch a number of ſenators to be put 
to death. The accumulated riches and honours 
of my family ſerved only to render their misfor- 
tunes more illuſtrious. My father had the bold - 
neſs to diſoblige a man in power, by ſpeaking the 
truth; he ſuborned falſe accuſers, who charged 
him with ſeveral imaginary crimes. The judges. 
were deceived: Alas ! what judge can always a- 
void the ſnares which calumay ſpreads for inno- 
cence? My father was condemoed to loſe his head 
an a ſcaffold. Flight only could preſerve him, and: 
he took refuge with a friend, one whom he 
thought worthy of this amiable appcllation. We 
continued ſome time concealcd in a caſtle on the 
ſea-ſhore which belonged to him; and here we 
might have been ſtill ſecure, if the cruel wretch, 
taking advantage of our deplorable ſituation, had 
not exacted a price for his friendſhip, which 
made us conſider him with deteſtation, The 
infamous creature had conceived a violent paſſion 
for my mother and me : he made an attempt on 
our virtue by methods unworthy of a gentle- 
man, and, to avoid the effects of his brutality; 
we were obliged to expoſe ourſelves to the moſt. 


frightful dangers: we betook ourſelves to flight 


. ſecond time, and you know the reſt. Here 
Zenoide finiſhed her relation, and ſhe began to. 
weep afreſh, Candidus dried up her tears and 
ſaid, in order to comfort her: It is all for the 
beſt, my dear Miſs; for, if your father had not 
been poiſoned, he would, moſt infallibly, have 
been difcovered, and they would have cutoff his. 
head : your modes would have died of grief, 


perhaps; 


LC s 
s [1 \ 
\ 
„ - 
. + 
* 
ä 
Es 9 
* 


196 CAN DID US; or, Chap: 13. 


perhaps; and we ſhould not now be in this poor 
cottage, where all things are much better, than 
in the moſt charming caſtle imaginable, Alas! 
Sir, replied Zenoide, my father never told me- 
that all was for the beſt. We all belong to one 
God who loves us ;. but he will not exempt us 
from the devouring cares, the cruel diſtempers,. 
the innumerable evils to which. human nature is 
liable. In America, poiſon, and the bark grow 
cloſe to each other. The happieſt of mortals has 
med tears. A mixture of pleaſures and pain 
conſtitutes what we call life; that is to ſay, a de- 
termined ſpace of time (always too long in the 
opinion of wiſdom), which ought to be employ · 
ed in being uſeful to the ſociety of which we are 
members, to rejoice in the works of the Al- 
mighty, without fooliſhly enquiring into their 
cauſes; to-regulate our conduct upon the teſti- 
mony of our conſcience ; and above all, to re- 
ſpe our religion: happy if we could always ob- 
ſerve iis precepts 
ln this manner have I heard my honoured ſa- 
ther frequently ſpeak. What preſumptuous 
wretches, would he ſay, arc thoſe raſh ſcribblers 
who ſeek to penetrate into the ſecrets of the Al- 
mighty? On the principle, that God expects to 
be honoured by the numberleſs atoms to whom 
be has given exiſtence, mankind have united ri- 
diculous chimeras, with the moſt reſpectable 
truths. The Derviſe among the- Turks, the 
Bramin in Perfia, the Bonze in China, the Tala« 
poin in India, all worthip the Deity in a diffe- 


rent manner; nevertheleſs they enjoy peace. of 
mind, 


\ 


L 


— WB 2 wo — — = 405 ZG — CS SD — S2 belt  - —— 4 e 


Chap. 14. ALL rox THE Bzsr. 199: , 


mind, though bewildered in obſcurity ; thoſe who 
would endeavour to diſpel the miſt, would do 
them no ſervice ; he cannot be ſaid to love man- 
kind, who would remove their prejudices. 

You ſpeak like a philoſopher, ſaid Candidus :. 
may I preſume to aſk you, my deareſt young la- 
dy, of what religion you are. I was brought vp 
a Lutheran, replied Zenoide ; it is the religion of 
my country. Every thing you ſay, continued 
Candidus, is a ray of light which penetrates wy 
ſoul ; you fill me with eſteem and ad miration.— 
How is it poſſible that ſo much ſenſe ſhould in- 
habit ſo fair a body? Indeed, My dear Miſs, I 
love and admire you to ſuch a degree—Candidus 
ſtammered out ſomething more; but TZenoide, 
perceiving his confuſion, retired : from that mo 
ment, ſhe avoided all occaſions of being alone 
with him, and Candidus ſought every opportu- 
nity of being eicher alone with ber, or entirely 
by himſelf, He was ſeized with a melancholy, 
which, however, was not unpleaſing: he was 
violently in love with Zenoide, yet endeavoured 
to difſemble his paſſion ; but his looks betrayed 
the ſecret of his heart. Alas ! ſaid he, if Pan- 
gloſs was here, he would give me good advice, 
for he was a great philoſopher. 


CH A FP. . 


Continuation of Candidus's amour. 


Andidus was forced to be content with the 


poor conſolation of converſing with the 
a beautiful 


178 CANDIDUS; or, Chap, 14. 


beautiful Zenoide in the preſence of the old man 
and his wife, And was it poflible, ſaid he one 
day to the miſtreſs of his heart, that the king 
whom you were allowed to approach, could per- 
mit ſuch a flagrant act of injuſtice to your fami- 
ly? You have great reaſon to hate him. Alas! 
replied Zenoide, who can hate their kiny ? 
Who can avoid loving him who is intruſted 
with the glittering blade of the law? Kings are 
the viſidle images of the Deity ; we ought never 
to condemn their conduct: obedience and reſpect 
are the duties of good ſubjects. I admire you more 
and more, anſwered Candidus: pray, Miſs, are you 
acquainted with the great Leibnitz, and the great 
Pangloſs, who was burnt, after having eſcaped 
hanging? Do you know the monades, the materia 
ſubtilis, and the vortices ? No, Sir, ſaid Zenoide; 
my father never mentioned any of theſe things ; 
he gave me only a flight notion of experimental 
philoſophy, and taught me to deſpiſe every kind 
of philoſophy which did not directly tend to pro- 
mote the happineſs of mankind; which inſpires 
him with falſe notions of his duty to himſelf and 
to his neighbour; which does not teach him how 
to regulate his manners; which ſerves only to 
fill his mind with unintelligible words, and raft 
conjectures ; which cannot give a clearer idea of 
the author of our being, than, that which we 
form from his works, and the miracles which 
are daily performed before our eyes. Upon my 
word, Miſs, ſaid Candidus, I admire you beyond 
exprefſion; I am inchanted ; I am raviſhed; you 
are certainly an angel ſon from heaven to con- 
fute 


— r eetSsS_ 


Chap. 14. ALL rox THE BEST. 179 


fute the ſophiſms of Maſter Pangloſs. Ignorant 
animal that I was? After baving endured a pro- 
digious number of kicks on the backſide, of 
ſtripes acroſs my ſhoulders, of ſtrokes with a 
bull's pizzle on the ſoles of my feet; after having 
fel an earthquake; after having been preſent at 
the hanging of Doctor Pangloſs, and lately ſeen 
him burat alive; after having been ignominiouſly 
uſed by a vile Perſian; after having been plun- 
dered by order of the divan, and drubbed by a 
company of philoſophers ; notwithſtanding all 
this, I believed that all was for the beſt; but I 
am now entirely undeceived. Nevertheleſs, na- 
ture never appeared to me ſo beautiful as ſince I 
have beheld you. The rural concerts of birds 
ſtrike my cars with a harmony, to which, till 
now, I was quite inſenſible. All nature blooms, 
and the beauty of your ſentiments ſeems to ani- 
mate every object. I feel none of that voluptuous 
languor which I experienced in my garden at 
Sus; the paſſion you. inſpire, is quite different. 
Forbear, ſaid Zenoide, leſt you offend that deli- 
cacy which you ought to reſpect. I will be fi- 
kent then, faid Candidus, but that will only aug- 
ment my paſſion, He looked earneſtly at Ze- 
noide, as he pronounced theſe words ; he per- 


ceived that ſhe bluſhed, and thence, like a man 
of experience, he conceived the moſt g 


hopes. 

, The young Dane continued * ſome time to 
ſhun her lover. One day as he was walking ha- 
ſtily io the garden, he cried out in a tranſport of 
love, © that I had but my Eldoradonian ſheep! 
40 Why 


= 222 


= CAN DID Us; or, Chap. 14. 
Wby am I not able to buy a Mttle kingdom 
Wha would you make me ſaid a voice that 
thor through the heart of our philoſoper. Is it 
_ you, charming Zenoice ? faid he; falling upon 
his knees at her feet, 1 thought myſelf alone. 
"The few. words you ſpoke feemed to flatter my 
hopes. I ſhall never be à King, and poſſibly ne- 
ver ſhall be rich 3 but if 1 1 
Odo not turn away thoſe charming eyes, but 

let me read in them a confeflion which alone can 
make me happy. Beautiful Zenoide, I adore 
you: for heaven's ſake be merciful, all? 
what do I'ſee?” You weep. Gods, I am too hap- 
py- Ves, ſaid Zenoide, you are happy; oothing 
obliges me to conceal my ſenſibility from a per- 
fon who deſerves it. Hitherto you have been 
attached to my defiiny by the ties of humanity 
only 2 it is now time to ſtrengthen our union 
with more holy bonds, I have deliberately con- 
ſulted my own heart; do you alſo maturely re- 
fied; and above all things remember, that by 
marrying me you engage to become my protec- 
tor; to ſoften and participate the miſeries which 
fate may fiillfhave reſer ved for me. Marry you ? 
ſaid Candidus; theſe words have at once open- 
ed-myteyes, and ſhewn me the imprudence of 
my conduct. Alas] fwect lady, I am unworthy 
of your goodneſs: Cunegonda is yet living.— 
Cunegonda, who is the ? my wife, Wr * 
n his uſudt ingeovity. 

Our lovers food filent for ſome moments ; 
ep: would have ſpoken, but the words expired 
Vs n tears. Can« 

32 vs | didus 


Chap. it. ALL FOR THE brer. | 18 · 
didus held boch her hands in his; he preſſed 

them to his heart; he devoured them with kiſſes. 
He had the courage to touch her heaving breaſt, 


and found that ſhe breathed with difficulty. His 
ſoul roſe vp to his lips, which by preſſing thoſe 


of Zenoide, brought her to herſelf, Candidus 
thought he ſaw his pardon written in her eyes. 
Dear Candidus, ſaid ſhe, ; my diſpleaſure wo 
but ill repay | thoſe tranſports which my heart 


dpite of me approves. Let hold; you will ruin 


me in the opinion of mankind, and you will ccaſe 


to love me when l am become the object of their 


Contempt. Stop then, and reſpect my weakneſs. 
What | {aid Candidus, becauſe the ſtupid vulgac = 


ſay that a girl is diſhonoured in making her lo- 


ver happy in following the generous dictates ot | 


nature, which in the carly ages of the world 

We ſhall not relate all this intereſting conver · 
ſation; we ſhall content ourſelves with ſayiog 
that Candidus' s eloquence, -embelliſhed. by the 
expreſſions of love, had all the effect. that he 
could expect, on a young. ann ſe- 
ole: philoſopher. 8 

Our lovers, who had hitherto paſſed. their time 


in diſquietude and affliction, were now contiuu- 


ally intoxicated with pleaſure. The ſilence of 
the foreſt, the mountains covered with brambles 
aad ſarrounded with precipices ; tbe frozen wa- 
ters, and barten fields with which they were en- 
vironed, ſerved but to perſuade them of the ne · 
ceſſity of love: they reſolved. never to quite this 


Arighiful ſolitude; but deſtivy was not yet weary 


i 


2 


182 CAN DID US; or, Chap. 15. 
„ ue mana. ſee in the next 
| A 110 

N CH A P. XV. 

" The ve of Volb. ul. panty fo Copenhagen. 


YAndidus and his miſtreſs amuſed themſelves 
with reaſoning on the works of the Creator, 
on the worſhip due to him from mankind, on 
the duties of ſociety, more eſpecially on charity, 


which, of all other virtues, is the moſt uſeful to 


our fellow creatures. They were not content 
with vain declamations: Candidus taught youth 
io reſpect the ſucred reſtrictions of the law, and 

Zenoide inſtructed young maidens in their duty 
to their parents; they united their endeavours to 
ſot the prolific ſeeds of religion in juvenile minds. 
One day as they were buſied in this pious employ- 
ment, Suname acquainted Zenoide, that an old 
gentleman, with ſcveraF attendants, was juſt come, 
and inquired for a-perſon, who, the was convin- 
ced by his deſcription, could be no other than 


the beautiful Zcnoide. The gentleman, who 


followed her cloſe,” 1 Ang at ws fame 
-joſtarit- ö 

. TZenoide fainted away as foot: as ſhe few bim; 
dut Voſhall, unmoved ar this affecting fight, took 
Sher by the hand, and dragged her with ſo much 
"violence tliat ſhe" came to herfelf ; but it was only 
to ſhed a torrent of tears. It is very well, niece, 
ſuicl he, with a ſevere ſmile, T have caught you in 


ine n no wonder you ſhould prefer it to 
the 


Chap. 15. ALL ror THE Basr. 183 


the capital, to my houſe, and to your own family. 
Yes, vir, replied Zenoide, I prefer the habitation. 
of truth and candour to that of «treachery and 
impoſture. I ſhall never behold, without horror, 
the place where my misfortunes began, where I 
have had ſuch convincing proofs of your baſeneſs, 
and where you are the only relation I have. No 
matter, Miſs, replied Volhall, you ſhall follow 
me, if you pleaſe, though you were to have ano- 
ther fit, 80 ſaying, he dragged her along, and 
put her into a chaiſe, She had but juſt time to 
bid Candidus follow her, to bleſs her kind hoſt 
and hoſteſs, promiſing to reward them for their 
generous hoſpitality. 

One of Volhall's fervants, belag moved wich 
Candidus's affliction, and believing he had no o- 
ther intereſt in the young lady than what-virtue 
in diſtrefs might inſpire, adviſed him to take a 
journey to Copenhagen. He told him, he could 
probably get him admitted into Volhall's family, 


if he had no other reſource, Candidus accepted 
his offer, and being arzived, his future comrade 


preſented him as a relation for whoſe fidelity he 


would anfwer. Maraut, faid Volhall, I conſent: 
you ſhall have the honour of waiting on a man of 
my rank and diſtinction ; but be careful always to 
pay an implicit obedience to my will : anticipate 
my commands, if you are cadowed with ſufficient 
penetration : remember that a man of my diftinc- 
tion degrades himſelf by converſing with ſuch a 
wretch as you, Our philoſopher replied: with 
| gout * to this en ane 

Qz and 


- ww K AS” — ek ene = - 


—— —ͤ—ũ 2. 


2 


— nw . 4 


184 CANDIDUS; os, Chap. 16. 
and that very day he was dreſſed in his maſter's 


far from being quite caſy : ſhe ſometimes con- 
demned her paſſion for Candidus, and would now 
and then afflict him for amuſement; but Candi - 
dus adored her ; he knew that perfection did not 
fall to the lot of man, much leſs of woman. Ze- 
noide recovered her good humour in his arms; 
the conſtraint they were obliged to obſerve in 
creaſed their enjoyment, and they were yet 


„ 
How Candides found bis wiſe ogain. How be bf 
| bis miffreſs. 


O hero had no hardſhip to bear but the 
hanghtineſs of bis maſter, and this was nt 
porchafing at 100 dear 2 raue the favours of bis 
miſtreſs. Happy lovers cannot conceal thcir paſ- 


Chap. 16. ALL For rnt Bes r. 165 


his head, and was in no doubt that the perſon 
who had been fo dear to him was upon the poiut 
of accelecating his misfortuncs, 

For ſome days paft, Candidus had obſerved 2 
woman, whoſe face bore 2 ſtrong reſemblance 6 
that of Cuncgonda: be now ifaw ber again in the 
court-yard, but ber garb was meas ; beſides, there 
was not the leaft probability, that the favourite 
miſtreſs of a rich Mahometan ſhould appear in the 
court - yard of an inn at Copenhagen. Neveribeleſa, 


Fangio alſo, by the greateſt chance imaginable, 
was 2 palſcoger is dhe ame ſhip: we were caſt 
aways few miles from hence; I eſcaped with 
home Cacambo, whoſe fleſh, I aſſure ther, is 6s 
fires as thine ; and 1 have bnd thee again-t0 
* Q3 r 


186 CANDIDUS; or, Ct. i 16. 
my ſorrow, for thy infidelity is manifeſt, Trem- 


ble, therefore, and dread the vengeance of an in- 


Jared woman. 
Candidus was ſo gupifed with this moving 
Pits: that he ſuffered Cunegonda to depart with- 
out confidering how neceikiry it is to keep terms 
with thoſe who'are in our ſecrets, when all at once 
Cacambo preſented. himſelf to his view. They 
tenderly embraced. Candidus enquired into the 
truth of what he bad heard, and was extremely 
afflicted for the loſs of the great Pangloſs, who, 
after having been hanged and burnt, was moſt 
miſerably drowned. He ſpoke of him with that 
eſtuſion of heart, which true friendſhip inſpires. 
A billet which Zenoide thew out of the window 
put an end to their converſations. — Opens 
ed it, and read as follows: 
Hy, my dear lover, every thing is diſcovered. 
An innocent and natural-inclination, which docs 
no injury to ſociety, is a crime in the. eſtimation 
of credulous and cruel men. Volhall has this 
moment left my chamber, after treating me with 


the utmoſt inhumanity 2 he is gone to obtain an 


order to have you immured in à dungeon. Fly, 


therefore, my dear, dear lover, and ſave a life 
-which I am no longer ſuffered to enjoy. Thoſe 


happy days are paſt, when our mutual cenderneſs 
Ah! wretched Zenoide, what haſt thou done 


t deſerve the wrath of heaven l But I wander: 


O do net forget thy dear Zenoide. © Dear Can- 


didus, thy image will never be effaced from my 


heart. No, thou never knew how much L loved 
idee. Oh that thou couldſt receive from my 
wt | | burning 


y PR 


treachery and guik.— 


vent by the ſhorteſt way out of the city. Can- 


W effeuate it. What happened to him of anos. 


was with you, ſhe revealed the whole ſeene to the 


| _ Eandidus, death is my only refuge. Our philo- 
ſopher then taking a penkniſe eut of his pocket, 


Chap, 1Y Att ren TR Ber... if 


burning lips, my laſt farewel, and my laſt Ggh l 
I feel that I am ready to follow my unhappy fa 
ther: 1 hold the world in ablrorrence j it 42 15 


Cacambo, always remining his wiſdom and pru- 
dence,- drew along with him Candidus, who had 
loſt all the power of his ſenſitive faculties. They 


didus did not open his mouth; and they had got 
a pretty conſiderable diſtance from Copenhagen 
before he was rouſed from his lethargy; but, at 
laſt, ſtaring on his * NN de * 
what follows. | - 


4 


0 n A F. uu. 
Bow Candidus intended to kill himſelf, and did not 


Ear Cacambo, formerly my ſervant, now 
| my equal, and always my friend, thou haft 
partaken ſome of my misfortunes, thou haſt gi- 
ven me ſalutary advices, thou” haft ſeen my love 

for Miſs Ounegonda. Alas! my dear old maſter, 
ſaid Qacambo, it is ſhe who played you this moft 
baſe trick. Being informed by your companions 
that you was as deep in love with Zenoide; as ſhe 


barbarous Volþat.. Since this is the caſe; ſaid 


Bom to whet it with a compoſure worthy of an 
kent * or of an 6— What do 


9 


188 CANDID US; of, Chap. 17. 


vou mean ? ſaid/Cacambo. To ent my throat, 
ſaid Candidus. An excellent thought, replicd 
Cacambo ; but wiſdom ſhould never determine, 
till after mature deliberation: the means of death 
will be always in your own power, if you conti- 
nue in the ſame. mind. Be adviſed, my dear ma- 
iter, and put it off till to-morrow ; the longer 
youzdefer it, the more courageous will be the 
action. I like thy reaſoning, ſaid Candidus; be ; 
ſides, if I ſhould cut my throat now, the: gazet- 
teer of Trevoux would inſult my memory: it is 
then determined I will not cut my throat for this 
two or three days at leaſt. Ihus converſing they 
arrived at Elſineur, a pretty conſiderable town, at 
a little diſtance from Copenhagen: here they reſt- 
ed that night, and Cacambo applauded himſelf 
for the good effect which ſleep had produced, in 
the mind of Candidus. They took their leave 
of this town at break of day ; and Candidus, al- 
ways a philoſopher, for the prejudices af Fvuth 
are not eaſily effaced, entertained his friend Ca- 
cambo with a diſſertation on moral and phyſical 
good, with the; diſcourſes of the viſe Zenoide, 
and the; true lights he had received from her 
learned converſation. I Pangloſs was not dead, 
faid he, 1-wovld confuie his ſyſtem beyond con- 
tradiction. .God, preſerve me from becoming a 
Magichean-... My dear miſtreſs, has taught ae 40 
reſpc,the impenetrable. veil by which che Deity 
chuſes to conceal; his deſigns from mankind. Per- 
haps man himſelf is the cauſe of the misfortunes 
under which be groans: fruit · eaters are become = 


6 { The ſavages we have ſeen 
| | 22 


tr 


- 


1 % 
4 
9 
* K Is 1 k 4 = — 
's 1 . * 


Chap. 179. ALL ron PHE BEsr. 139 


devour only the Jeſuits, yet they live in perfect 
harmony among themſelves; and thoſe which, 
by chance, are ſcattered through the deſert, and 
feed only upon roots and herbs, are ecrtainly 
happy. Society has given birth to the moſt hai · 


nous crimes. There are people who, from their 


fituation, ſeem, as it were, obliged to deſire the 
death of their fellow creatures, 'Fhe ſhipwreck 
of a veſſel, the burning of a houfe, and the loſs 
of a battle, is the occaſion of grief to ſome, and 


of joy to others. Things go very ill, my dear 


— 


Cacambo, and a wiſe man has nothing to do but 


to cut his throat as gently as poſtibly. You are 


in the right, ſaid Cacambo; but I perceive an 
inn, you muſt be thirſty; come, my old maſter, 
let us take a glaſs, and then we will proceed in 
our philoſophical diſquiſitions. 

They entered the inn, where a croud of pea- 
ſants were dancing in the middle of the court, to 
the ſound of very bad inſtruments, A chearfult 
ſmile ſat-on every face: it was a picture worthy 
the-pencil of Vatau. As ſoon as they perceived 
Candidus, a young girl took him by the hand, in- 


treating him to dance. My fweet lafs, replied 


Candidus, when a man has loſt his miſtreſs, found 
his wife, and but juſt heard of the death of the 
great Pangloſs, he can have no inclination to cut 
capers : beſides, I intend to kill myſelf 'to-mor- 
row; and you know, when à perſon bas but z 
few hours to live, be ſhould not waſte his time in 
dancing, Cacambo then advanced, and expreſſ - 


ed himſelf in the following manner } Great phi- 
ers have always had a' paſion for glory. 


loſoph 


: 


—— Q 


99 CAN DID Us; er, Chap. 17, 


Cato of Utica killed himſelf after having ſlept 
ſoundly ; Socrates ſwallowed. hemlock after fa - 
 miliarly, converſing with his friends; fevejal Eng- 
liſhmen have blown out their brains after coming 
from an entertainment: but I have never heard 
of any great man who cut his ihroat after dancing. 
No, my dear maſter, this glory is reſerved for you. 
Let us dance our bellics full to-day, and we will 
Kill our ſelves to-morrow, Doſt thou not obſerve, 
replied Candigus, that pretty lively wench? There 
is ſomething vaſtly ſtriking in ber countenance, 
faid Cacambo. She ſqueezed my band, replied 
our philoſopher. Did you take notice, faid Ca- 
cambo, of her lie round breaſts, when her 
handkerchief fiew back as ſhe, was dancing? Yes, 
I obſerved them well, ſaid Candidus: if my heart 
was not full of the charms of Miſs Zervide—— 
But the linle black girl interrupted. Candidus, 
and again beſought him to dance. Our here was 
At laſt perſuaded, and danced with the geatceleſt 
air imaginable, He then embraced the pretty 
peaſant, and retired to bis ſeat without aſk ing ihe 
queen of the ball to dance, Immediately there 
was a confuſed murmur ; both the aftors and 
ſpectators were, ſhocked at ſuch a manifeſt neglect. 
Candidus was ignorant of his fault, and therefore 
could make no apology. Atlength a great clown 
came forward, and gave him a flap io the face, 
which was! returned by Cacambo with a kick in 
the belly. The inftruments were ſcattered about 
in an inſtant, the women loſt their caps. Can- 
didus and Cacambo behaved like heroes; but they 
were forced OT IRR to their heels, 

29 | though 


Chap. 18. Art ron THe Brsr. 191 
though quite oh - ban with the THEO Oy: kad 
received. f 

Lam very nete, ſaid Civaidus, e 
vis fried Cacambo; I have experienced great 


mis fortunes, but I never expected to have had my 


bones broke er (one, with a prafant at her own 
n NN | : ON 15 * 


e ee ee 1Bs 1: I 
8 Candidus and Cacambs retire to an hpi Adven- 
ture there. 


Aenne and his quondam maſter were uns- 


ble to proceed; they began to give way to 


that malady of the ſoul which deſtroys all Its fa- 
eulties, dejection and deſpair : when looking up, 
they eſpied an hoſpital built for travellers. Ca- 
cambo entered, and Candidus followed him ; 


they were treated in the manner in which people 


are generally treated for the love of God. Their 
vounds were ſpeedily healed ; but they both got 
the itch, which was not to be cured in a few days. 
This idea drew tears from the eyes of our philo- 


ſopher, and ſcratching himſelf, he ſaid; O my. 


dear Cacambo, why didſt thou hinder me from 
cutting my throat? Thy pernicious counſel hath 
plunged me again into difgrace and | misfortune : 
if 1 ſhould now cut my throat, they would ſay, 
in the Journal of Trevoux, he was a coward ; 
he killed himſclf becauſe he had the'irch, -Sce 
to what thou haſt expoſed me by thy injudicious 
'fricadfhip. Our miskfortunes are not without a 
/ WY 1, IF * 2338 "7s | remedy, 


* 


JI 


— *» = — 
LEY — —— 


192 CAN DID Us; or, Chap. 18. 


remedy, aid Cacambo; if you will follow my ad- 
vice, we will become brothers of the hoſpital; I vn- 
derſtand a little of ſurgery, and I will engage to 

render-our woeful condition ſupportable. Ah! 
cried Candidus, pox take all che aſſes in the 
world, and eſpecially thoſe chirurgical aſſes ſo 
fatal to human nature ! No, I will not ſuffer thee 
to paſs for what thou art not; it were a piece of 
treachery, the conſequences of which might be 
terrible. Beſides, if thou didſt but know, after 
having been viceroy of a rich province, after 
having been able to purchaſe kingdoms, after 
having been the happy lover of Miſs Zenoide, 
how hard it is to. reſolve to ſerve as mate in an 
hoſpital. All this I know full well; but J alfo 
know chat it is very hard to die of kunger. Pe- 
Lides, the plan which I propoſe is perhaps the 
"only one to clude the cruelty of Volhall, 

Whilſt he thus ſpake, one of the brothers of 
the hoſpital happening to paſs, aſked him a few 
queſtions, to which he replied properly. This 
brother aſſured them that the fraternity lived 
well, and enjoyed decent liberty. Candidus re- 
ſolved : they were admitted without ſcruple, and 
theſe two miſerable beings began to adminiſter 
comfort to beings yet more miſerable. 

One day as Candidus was diſtributing ſome bad 
broth among the patients, an old man particular- 
ly caught his attention. He ſeemed. in the agony 
of death. Poor man ſaid Candidus, how I pity 
you! You muſt ſuffer terribly, Indeed I do, 
he replied, with a hollow ſepulchral voice: they 
tell me that I have a complication of diſtempers, 
and that I am poxed to the very bone; if fo, I 

muſt 


- . 


Chap, 19, ALL ron THE BWS NWC. 13 


muſt needs be extremely ill. Nevertheleſs, it is' 
all for the beſt; and that is my conſolation. No- 
man in the world, ſaid Candidus, but Doctor 
Pangloſs, could maintain optimiſm in ſuch a de- 
plorable ſituation, when every other mortal 
would preach peſſ . Do not pronounce that 
deteſtable word; ſaid the poor old man; I am» 
that very Pangloſs. Wretch, let me die in peace: 
all things are good, every thing is beſt. The 
effort he made in pronouncing theſe words, coſt 
him his la{t tooth, __ in a few moments after 
be expired. 

Candidus bewaile® his At, for by ory a 
good heart: his obſtinacy, however, afforded” 
matter of reflection to our Philoſopher. He 
would frequently ruminate on bis adveutures. 
Cunegonda had remained: at Copethazen, where 

* he was informed, ſtre mendech hires: and ſtock - 
ipgs with great reputation. He hid now Toft- 
all his paſſion for travelfing: The fafchful Ca. 
cambo aſſiſted him with his advice and friendſhip. 
He never murmuted at the diſpenſations of provis | 
dence : 1 knew he: would ſometimes fay,- that 
happineſs is not the lot of hütnatmty; it is no 
where to be found except in the good country! ef 
Bdorado ; dot to . is W e 


„ 1 S638 3! 


os lib 1005 | made ame bade 5 
N 6. A E. E 54 6 1. i 


& 1 +1483 3d «\; M74" » A 
J e Ae Ne Adventures, 2-300 p 244 
7 nnd, was not quite diy? 61 my "os 

a true friend. He had found in ah” Ame⸗ 


rican "mongrel valet, what in Europe, we ſeek in 
5 | | R: vain - 


194 CAND ID us z.. Or, Chap,.19; 


vain. Perhaps nature, who has planted ſimples in 
America proper for the maladies of European bo- 
dies, may there alſo have ſown remedies for the 
diſorders. of our hearts. and minds. Perhaps 
there are a ſpecies of men, in, this new world, 
who are formed differently from us, who are 
not ſlav es to ſelf-intereſt, who are capable of fin» 
cere friendſhip,  - Twere happy, if inſtead. of 
bales of indigo and cochineal, ſtained, with blood, 
they would, bring us ſome of theſe, men: this 
kind of commerce would be very, advantageous 
to mankind. Cacambo was of more value. to 
Candidus- than a dozen of red. ſheep loaded 
with the pebbles of Eldorado. Our philoſos 
pher now began to be reconciled to life. He 
conſoled himſelf that he was employed in the 
preſervation, of the human, ſpecies, and in not 
deing an. uſeleſs member of ſociety. Heaven re · 
warded the purity; of his intentions, by reſtoring 
to him, as well as to his, friend Cacambo, the 
bleſſing. of bealtb. They had no longer the itch, 
and they performed the dujies of their function 
with great alacrity.; but alas fate ſoon broke in 
upon: their peaceful ſecurity. Cunegonda, who. 
had ſet her heart upon tormenting her huſband, 
fallied forth from Copenhagen in purſuit of him: 
chance directed her to the hofpital ; ſhe was ac- 
companicd by a man whom Candidus ſoon diſco- 
vered to be the Baron of Thunder-ten-tronckh 
his ſurpriſe may be eaſily ſuppoſed. The Baron, 
perceiving it, ſpoke to him in theſe words, I 
ad · not loog continue to row in the Turkiſh. gal- 
keys i the Jeſuits bearing of mz. misfortune re-. 
n er 900141 0 ede - tolny 1235 degmed 


— 46 35 * 1 <1 
4 
-a 


= 
«& + po”. - 


Chap. 19. ALL ron true Brat, 195 


deemed me for the honour of the ſociety. I made 
a tour to Germany, where I received ſome civi- 
lities from my father's heirs. I left nothing un- 
attempted to get intelligence of my ſiſter; and 
hearing at Conſtantinople, that ſhe had imbark- 
ed on board a veſſel which was caſt away on the 
coaſt of Deumark, I diſguiſed myſelf and de- 
parted, being provided with proper letters of re · 
rommendation to Daniſh merchants in connec- 
tion with the ſociety: in ſhort, I have found my 
ſiſter again, who loves yu notwithſtanding you 
are unworthy of that honour; and ſince ou 
have had the inſolence to lie with her, I conſent 
to the ratification, or rather à new © celebra- 
tiomof your nuptials; that is to ſay, provided 
ſhe glves you only her left hand, which is but 
reafonable, as ſhe hats mo leſs than ſevemty+one 
quarters, and you have none at all. Alas, fays 
Candidus all the quarters in the world without 
beauty ——Miſs Cunegonda was very ugly when 
T imprudentiy married her; ſhe became hand- 
ſome, and another has enjoyed her charms : ſhe 
is again grown ugly, and you would have me 
give ny hand to her a ſecond time: no, no, re- 
verend father, ſend her back to her ſeraglio at 
Conſtantinople ; ſnhe has done me but too much 
injury in this country. Ungrateful man, ſaid 
Cunegonda, making horrible contortions, how 
can you be ſo hard hearted ? Do not oblige the 
Baron, now a prieſt, to waſh the blot out of his 
eſcutcheon with your blood. Doſt thou believe 
me capable of conſenting to the act of infidelity ? 
What wouldſt thou have had me done when I 
N R 2 Was 


196 CAN DI DUs; of, Chap. 49. 


was in the power of a Turk who thought me 
handſome ? Neither tears, nor my cries, had 
any effect on his ſavage brutality : ſo that, find - 
ing it in vain to reſiſt, I contrived to be as com - 
modiouſly raviſhed as poſſible, as any other wo- 
man would have done in my ſituation: this is all 
my crime. But my greateſt offence is having 
robbed thee of thy miſtreſs, which, on the con · 
trary, thou ſhouldſt conſider as a proof of my 
affection. Come, come, my dear little ſoul; if 
ever I ſhould grow handſome again; if my 
breaſts, which now are ſomewhat. pendent,ſhould 
recover their rotund elaſticity ; if they ſhall 
be all for thee alone, my dear Candidus; we 
are no longer in Turky, and I ſwear that I will 
never ſuffer myſelf to be raviſhed again. 
This diſcaurſe made no very deep impreſſion 

upon Candidus. He deſired a little tume for con- 
ſideration. The Baron granted him two hours, 
which he ſpent in conſulting with his friend Ca- 
cambo. After having weighed every argument 
pro and con, they determined o accompavy the 
Baron and his ſiſter to Germany. Accordingly 
every thing being ſettled, they ſet out all toge- 
ther; not on foot, but mounted on good caval- 
Ty, which the gqeſuit Baron had brought along 
with him. They were now arrived at che fron- 
tiers of the kingdom, when a tall i- favoured fel- 
low fixed his eyes attentively on our bero- It is 
the very man, ſaid he; pray, dir, if 4 may be ſo 
bold, is not your name Candidus? Yes, Sir, re- 
plied Candidus, ſo 1 have always been called. I 


Am 1 glad of ir, ſaid the man. Ves ju - 
deed, 


Chap. 19. AtL ron THE Beer, 197 


deed, you have black eyebrows, ears of a mode- 
rate ſize, a round face, and ruddy complexion, 
and you appear to be about five feet five, Yes, 
Sir, ſaid Candidus, that is exactly my height; 
but what are my ears and my height to you? 
Sir, replied the man, we cannot be too circum- 
ſpect in our employment: permit me to aſ you 
another queſtion; Was you not in the ſervice 
Squire Volhall? In truth, Sir, ſaid Candidus, 
little diſconcerted, I do not underſtand But 1 
underſtand perfectly well that you are the per- 
ſon whoſe-deſcription I have in my hand. Pleaſe 
to walk into che guard room. Soldiers, conduct 
the gentleman in; prepare the black hole, and 
tell the ſmith to make a flight chain of about 
chirty or forty pounds weight. Mr. Candidus, 
you” have got a good · like horſe there; I want 
one of chat wa : we all agree about him 0 
ny by. | [64% 4 34% 

The Baron id oot- vm to claich his beaſh 
— wept, for à quarter of an hour. The 
Jeſuit beheld the ſcene without emotion. I ſhould 
have been obliged, ſaid he to his ſiſter, either to 
kill him or force him to re- marry you; and, all 
things conſidered, it is the beſt that could hap- 
pen for the honour of our family. Cunegonda 
and her brother ſet out for Germany; but the 
faithful Cacambo reſolved not to abandon * 
friend in diſtreſs. | 


8 CAN DI DUS; ert Chap. 20. 


CA AF... A. 


The continuation of Candidurt misfortunes ; 'how he 
Fund his miftreſi again, and what was the con- 
| ſequence E. | | 


| Pangloſs! ſaid Candidus, it is a: thouſand 
pities that you have periſhed ſo milcrably : 
you have been witneſs onlyito the ſmalleſt part 
of my misfortunes, and I was in hopes to make 
vou rejett that groundleſs opinion you ſo obſti · 
nately maintained, even unto death. There is 
not a man in the worbi who has experienced 
greater adverſity than I have; and yet there is 
not a fingle foul · ho- has not curſed his o¼n⁰ ex- 
iſtence, as the daughter of Pope Urban very pa- 
metically told us. What will become of me, my 
dear Cacambo ? I cannot tell, replied Cacambo; 
all LKao ds, that I witbnever forſake you. But 
Cunegonda has forſaken me, ſaid 'Candidus. 
Alas! a wife is not worth an American friend. 
This was 'the conmverſation of Candidus and 
Cacambo in a dungeon, from whence they were 
- dragged in order to be conveyed to Copenbagen, 
here our philoſopher was to learn his fate. He 
feared it would be a dreadful one, as the reader 
may alſo apprehend; but Candidus was miſtaken, 
and fo is the reader. He was deſtined to be hap- 
py at Copenhagen, where he was no ſooner ar- 
rived than he was appriſed of the death of Vol- 
hall ; this brute died unlamented, and every bo- 
dy concerned themſelves about Candidus. His 
| chains 


N 
C 


* 


Chap, 20 ATL rox TR BEST, 199 


chains were immediately knocked off, and liberty 
was the more agreeable to him, as it furniſhed 
him with the means of finding Zenoide. He 
haſtened to her houſe; he was a long time be- 
fore he could utter a ſyllable, but their ſilence 
was ſufficiently. expreſſive. They embraced ; they 
endeavoured to ſpeak, but they could only weep. 
Cacambo enjoyed this delightful ſcene like a be- 
ing of ſenſibility; he ſympathized in his friend's 
joy, and was almoſt in the ſame ſituation. My 
dear Cacambo, my beloved Zenoide, cried Can» 
didus, Iam now recompenſed for all my ſufferings. 
Love and friendſhip: ſhall ſweeten the remainder 


of my life. What numberleſs difficulties have 


paved the way to this unexpected happineſs? But 
all is now forgotten, deareſt Zenoide, I:ſfee you, 
you love me; all things go well vnh me now, 
every thing is for the beſt, 

The death of Volhall left Zenoide her on 
miſtreſs, and the court allowed her a ꝓenſion aut 
of her father's fortune, which had been confiſ- 
cated. She readily ſhared with Candidus and Ca - 
cambo, whom ſhe permitted to live in the ſame 
houſe, and induſtriouſly reported, that, having 
received ſuch fignal ſervices from theſe two ſtran · 
gers, ſhe thought herſelf obliged to reward them 
with all the pleaſures of life. Some threwd peo · 
ple penetrated into the motives-of her kindneſs, 

which was not very difficult, as her intrigue with 
Candidus had unluckily tranſpired. Moſt peo- 
ple condemned her, and her conduct was approv- 
ed only by a few people who knew the world. 
Tenoide, who paid ſome regard to the eſteem of 
Tones 


Yu 


4 


HE» 2 


"20 CANDID Us; en Chap. 204 


fools, was not quite happy in her ſituation, The 
death of Cunegonda which the correſpondents 
of trading Jeſuits. reported at Copenhagen, fur- 

niſhed Zenoide with an opportunity to reconcile 
the ſcrupulous: ſhe ordered a pedigree to be 
made for Candidus; and the author, who was a 
man-of parts, proved him. to be deſcended from 
one of the moſt ancient families in Europe : he 
even pretended that his real name was Canur, 
the name of an ancient Daniſh king, than which 
nothing could be more probable ; for to change 
did into ut was no very extraordinary metamor- 
phofis. In conſequence. of this tritling altera- 
tion, Candidus became a nobleman of diſtinction 
He was married publicly to Zenoide; they lived 
together as happily as it is poſſible to live. Ca · 
cambo was their common friend; and Candidus 
uſed frequently to ſay, All things are not fo well. 
with us here as- in Argo but yet ed are. 


r well. 


FV I N T 82 


