28ented by 


> 
8 
T 
2 
T 
D 


THE FRIENDS OF THE BODLEIAN 


, 
— 
. 


A = % 4 
. x on N _ — tA * , 
1 4 * f F _— 4 4 3 * , * . 
x * 1 r 7 - hy . 4 l 7 N 8 
% 5 1 * 2 * * 2 
$\ 1 " © g * * . 5 g \ 
* . 
* . ” : 
- \ N 
. \ 
* r = 
- 44 
* * * 1 


—_ - 


O R, 


ALL FOR THE BEST. 


Newly Tranſlated from the Fazxcu of 


M. DE VOLTAIRE. 


— 


In TWO PARTS 


L ON DON: 
Sold by D. Jacxson, R. Dari, J. Taoursonx, 
A. Brax, and W. Srax ron. 


M DCCLXIILX., 


g 


* X X * — 
2 2 


LS S. 
* 


* 
* 


* 
— 


2 


AN DID U 8 


O R, 


ALL FOR THE BEST. 


N 


CHAP. 1. 
How Candidus was brought up in @ fine caſtle, 
ns how he was expelled from DENCE. 


N the caſtle of my Lord the Baron 8 
der ten · tronckh in Weſtphalia, there lived a 
young man, on whom nature had beſtowed 
the moſt agreeable parts. His face was the in- 
dex of his mind. He had an upright heart, 
with an eaſy frankneſs; for which reaſon, I be- 


lieve, he got the name of Candidus He was 


imagined by the old ſervants of the family to be 
the ſon of my Lord the Baron's fiſter, by a good 
worthy gentleman of the neighbourhood, whom 
that young lady declined to marry, becauſe he 


could only produce . ſeventy one armorial quar- 


A 2 terings, 


1 CANDIDUS. 


terings, the reſt of his genealogical tree having 
been deſtroyed by the injuries of time. 

The Baron was one of the moſl powerful lords 
in Weſtphalia; for his caſtle had bcth a gate 
and windows ; and his great hall was even adorn - 
ed with rap<firy, The dogs ot his outer yard com- 
poſed his pack upon occaſion ; his greoms were 
his huntimen; and the vicar of the pariſh was 
his great almoner. He was called by every 
body, My Lord; ard every one would laugh 
when he told his ſtory. 

My Lady the Baronefs, who wei ghed about 
three bundred and fiity pounds, atraQted-by that 
meens very great regard, and did the honcurs 
of the houſe with a dignity that rendered her 
Kill more refſpeQtable. Her daughter Cune- 
gonda, aged about ſcyenteen years, was of high 
complexion, freſh, plump, and the object cf 
defire. The Baron's fon appeared to be in eve- 
ry reſpeQt'wertby of his father. The preceptor, 
Pangloſs, was the oracle of the houſe, and litile 
Candidus heaikened to his IcCtures with all the 
ſimplicity that was ſuitable to his age and bis 

character. | 
Puangloſs tavght metaphyfico theclogo-cofm.o- 
lonigology. He proved molt admirably, that 
there could not be an effect without a cauſe; 
| that, in this beſt of pcfſible worlds, my Lord the 
Baron's caſtle was ihe moſt magrificent of caſtles, 
and my lady the beſt of Barenciies that poſhbly ' 
could be. 

„% It is dewonſtrable,“ faid be, % that things 
car not be otherwiſe than they are: for all things 


baving 


- — 


CANDIDUS. 


having been made for ſome end, they muſt ne- 
ceſſarily be intended for the belt end. Obſerve 
well that the noſe has been made for carrying 
ſpectacles, therefore we bave ſpectacles. The 
legs are viſibly deſigned for ſtockings, and there - 
fore we have (ſtockings. Stones have been for- 
med to be hewn, and to make caſtles ; therefore 
my lord has a very fine cattle: and th: greateſt 
baron of the province ought to be the belt lodge 
ed. Swine were made to be eat; therefore we 


eat pork all the year round : conſequently, thoſe 


who have afferted, that all is good, have ſaid a 
fooliſh thing; they ſhould have ſaid, that all is 
for the beſt.” 

Candidus liſtened attentively, and believed 
implicitly; for he thought Miſs Cune gonda ex- 
tremely handſome, though he had never had 
the courage to tell her ſo. He concluded, that 
next to the good fortune of being born Baron of 
Thunder-ten-tronckb, the ſecond degree of hap- 
pineſs was that of being Miſs Cunegaada. the 
third to ſee her every day, and the fourth to 
hear Maſter Pangloſs, the greateſt philoſopher of 
the province, and conſequently of the whole 
world. 

One day Cunegonda having taken a walk hard 
by the caſtle, in a little wood, which they cal- 
led the park, eſpied among the buſhes Doctor 
Pangloſs, giving a lecture in experimental 


philoſophy to her mother's chambermaid, a lit. 


tle brown wench, very handſome, and very tract- 
able. As Miſs Cunegonda had a ſtrong incti- 


nation for the ſciences, ſhe obſerved, without 


2 on” * 


. " 

N 9 N ; 

. l " 2 - Fg PR ty * * W 4 4 * 5 * 
p x 4 — 2 5 9 _ * x * 1 Nn E l . " F t y 7 1 2 4 

* o j = * N 2 ». e * - "A 4 * 4 N 98 
7 TY . 7 I | + 
9 * = 
\ C : 
- * 7 
* 


CANDID US. 


making any noiſe, the experiments repeated be- 
fore her eyes; ſhe ſaw very clearly the ſufficient 
reaſon of the Doctor, the effects and the cauſes: 
and ſhe returned greatly flurried, quite penſive, 
full of deſire to be learned; imagining, that ſhe 
might be a ſufficient reaſon for young Candidus, 
as he alſo might be the fame to her. 


In ber return to the caſtle ſhe met Candidus, 


and bluſned; Candidus alſo bluſhed : ſhe with» 


ed him good morrow with a faultering voice; and 


Candidus made anſwer, without knowing what 
he ſaid. The next day, after dinner, as they 
roſe from table, Cunegonda and Candidus hap» 
pencd to get hehind the ſcreen. Cunegonda 
dropt her handkerchief, and Candidus took it 


barm neither, kiſſed the band of the young lady, 
with an eagerneſs, a ſenſibility, and grace, whol · 
ly ſingular ; their mouths met, their eyes ſpar» 
led, their knees trembled, their hands ſtrayed. 
— The Baron of Ihunder ten- tronckh happen · 
ing to paſs cloſe by the ſcreen, and obſerving 
this cauſe and effect, kicked Candidus out of 
the caſtle, with luſty blows on the backſide. 
Cunegonda fell into a ſwoon ; and as ſoon as 
ſhe came to herſelf, was heartily cuffed on the 
car by my Lady the Baroneſs. Thus all was 
caſt into confuſion in the _ 
able caſtle in the world. 


CHAP. 


up ; ſhe, not thinking any harm, took hold of 
bis hand z and the young man, not thinking any 


— 


AND DUS. 
nA. u. | 
What became of Candidus among the Bulgarians: 


Andidus being driven from the terreſtrial 
'$ paradiſe, rambled a long time without 
knowing where, in tears, lifting up his eyes to 
heaven, and ſometimes turning them towards 
the fineſt of caſtles, which contained the molt 
handſome of baroneſſes. He laid himſelf down, 
without his ſupper, in the open fields, between 
two furrows, while the ſnow fell in great flakes. 
Candidus, almoſt frozen to death, crawled next 
morning to the neighbouring village, which is 
called Waldberghoff trarbh dikdorff Having no 
money, and dying with hunger and fatigue, he 
ſtopped in a dejected poſture, before the gate of 
an inn. Two men drefſed in blue, obferv- 
ing him in fuch a ſituation, Brother,” ſays 
one of them to the other, there is a young fel- 
low well built, and of a proper height.” They 
accoſted Candidus, and invited him very civilly- 
to dinner. Gentlemen,” ___— Candidus 
with an agreeable modeſty, you do me much 
honour, but I have no money to pay for my 
ſhot.” 4* Q Sir,” ſaid one of the blues, per- 
ſons of your appearance and merit never pay any 
thing: are you not five feet five inches high?“ 
Tes, Gentlemen, that is my height,” return- 
ed he, making a bow. Come, Sir, fit down 
at table: we will not only treat you, but we 
will never let ſuch a mow 26 200 wont mEngy 5 | 
3 to aſſiſt one another. Tou are 
A 4 in 


— 


8 CANDIDUS. 


in the right, ” ſaid Candidus; © that is what 

Pangloſs always told me, and I ſee plainly that 
every thing is for the belt.” They intreat him to 
take a few crowns : which he accepts of, and 
would have given them his note, but they refuſ- 
ed it, and fat down to table. Do you not love 
tenderly — 144 © yes,” replied be, I 
love tenderly Miſs Cunegonda.“ No,“ faid 
one of the gentlemen; © we aſk you if you do 
not love tenderly the King of the Bulgarians :”* 
„Not at all,” ſaid he,“ for I never faw bim, 
« How ! he is the moſt charmiog of kings, and 
you muſt drink his health.“ O with all my 
heart, Gentlemen, and drinks. That is e- 
nougb, faid they to him; you are now the 
 bulwark, the ſupport, the defender, the hero of 
the Bulgarians ; your fortune is made, and you 
are certain of glory.” Inftantly they clap bim in 
irons, and carry him to the regiment. He is 
made to turn about to the right and to the leit, 
to draw the rammer, to return the rammer, to 
preſent, to fire, to double; and they give him 
thirty blows with a cudgel. The next day be 
performs his exerciſe not quite ſo bad, and re- 
ccives but twenty blows ; third day the blows 
are reſtricted to ten, and he is looked upon by 
his fellow- ſoldiers as a kind of prodigy. 

Candidus quite ſtupified, could not well con- 
ceive how he had become a hero. One fine day 
in the ſpring it came into his head to take a walk, 
going ſtraight forward, imagining that the hu- 
man, as well as the animal ſpecies, were intitled to 
make whatever uſe they pleaſed of their limbs. He 


e AN DID us. 9 


had not travelled two leagues, when four other 
heroes, fix feet high, came up to him, bound 
bim and put him into a dungeon. de is 
aked by à court martial, whether he chuſes to be 
whipped ſix and thirty times through the whole 
regiment, or receive at once twelre bullets 
through the forchead ? He in vain argued that 
the will is free, and that he choſe neither the one 
nor the other ; he was obliged to make choice : 
be therefere reſolved, in virtue of God's gift, 
called free will, to run the gaunlet fix and thicty 
times. tHe underwent this diſcipline twice. 
The regiment being compoſed of two thouſind 
men, he received four thouſand laſhes, which 
laid open all his muſcles and nerves from the 
nape of the neck to the poiteriors. As they were 
proceeding to the third operation, Candidus 
being quite ſpent, begged as a favour, that they 
would be ſo kind as to ſhoot bim: he obtained 
his requeſt ; they hoodwink him, and make 
bim kneel; the King of the Bulgarians paſſing 
by, inquired into the crime of the delinquent; 
and as this prince was a perſon of great pene- 
tration, he diſcovered from what he heard of 
Candidus, that ke was a young metaphyſician, 
quite ignorant of the things ot this world; and 
he granted him. his pudon, with a clemency 
which will be praiſed in all hiſtories, ant 
throughout all ages. An experienced ſurgeon 
Cured Candidus in three weeks, with ointinents 
preſcribed by no leſs a maſter than Dioſcorvies, 
He had now acquired ſome ſkin, and was able 

n to 


' 46 - CANDIDUS: 
to walk, when the king of the Bulgarians gue | 


battle to the King of the Abares. 


CHAP. ' © 


How | Candidus eſcaped from the Bulgarians, and 
what afterwards happened to him. 


Othing could be fo fine, fo neat, fo fplem 
did, fo well diſpoſed, as the two armies. 
The trumpets fifes, hautboys, drums, and the 
cannon, formed an harmony fuperior to what 
hell could invent. The cannon ſwept off at firſt a» 
bout fix thouſand men on each fide; afterwards 
the muſketry carried away from the beſt of 
worlds, about nine or ten thouſand raſcals that 
infeQed its ſurface. The bayonet was likewiſe 
the ſufficient reaſon of the death of ſome thou» 
fands of men l be whole number might amount 
to thirty thouſand fouls. Candidus, who trem- 
bled like 2 philoſopher, hid himfelf as well as he 
could during this heroic butchery. 

In ſhort, while each of the two kings were 
cauſing Te Deum to be ſung in their reſpective 
camps, he reſolved to go ſomewhere elſe, to rea- 
fon upon the effects and caufess He walked o- 
ver heaps of the dead and dying: he came 
at firſt to a neighbouring village belonging to the 
Abares, but found it in aſhes; for it had been 
burut by the Bulgarians, according to the law of 


-.CANDIDUS. 11 
nations. Here were to be ſeen old men full of 


bloody breaſt. You might ſee in another place, 
virgins having their bellies ripped vp, after they 


had ſati>fbed the natural defires of ſome of thoſe. 


heroes, breathing out their laſt Gghs. Others 


balf- burnt prayed earneſtly for inſlant death. The 
whole field was covered with brains, and with 
legs and arms lopped off. 

Candidus betock himſelf with full ſpeed to a- 
nother village. It belonged to the Bulgarians, and 


had met with the ſame trea ent from the Aba» 


rian heroes. Candidus walking ſtill torward o- 


ver quivering limbs, or through rubb ſn of houſes, 
got af iaſt out of the theatre of war, h.ving ſome 


| ſmall quantity of proviſions in his kuapſack, and 
never :orgetting Miſs Cuncgonda. tiis provi- 
ſions fai, ed him when he arrived in Holland; 


bu“ having heard that every one was fich in that 
country, ai'd that they were Chriſtians, he did not 


doubt but he ſhould be as well treated there as 
he ha:' been in my Lord the Garon's ca'tle, be - 
fo." he had been expelled thence on account of 


M. Cuncgunda's tparkling eyes 


die ſalked alms trom ſeveral grave- loc king per- 
ſons who all replied, that if he continued chat 


trade, they would confine bim in a houſe of cor- 


rection, where he ſhould learn to get his \ 


bread 


nie applied himſelf afterwards to a man, who 
for 2 u ole hour had been diſeourſing on this 
ſubject ot charity, before a la: ge aſſembly. ihe - 
A 6 ota- 


wounds, caſting their eyes on their murdered 
wives, who were holding their infants to their. 


-v 


* 


CAN DID US. 


orator locking on him afkance, faid to him, 


T2 


What are you doing here? are you for the 


good cauſe ?” There is no effect without a 


; cauſe,” replied Candidus modeſtly ; “ all is ne- 


cc ſſarily linked, and ordered for the beſt. A ne- 
ceſſity ban;ſhed me from Miſs Cunegonda ; a ne- 
ceſſity forced me to run the gauntlet z and ano» 


ther neceſſity makes me beg for my bread, till Ican 


fall on a buſineſs to earn it. All this could not 
be otherwiſe.” My friend,“ ſaid the orator 
to him, “do you believe that the Pope is Anti- 
chriſt ?” I never have heard whether he is or 
not,” replicd Candidus ; “ but whether he is, or 
1s not, I r bread.” © You do not deſerve to 
eat any,” ſail the other; get you gone, you 
rogue, get you gone, you wretch; never in thy 
life come near me again The orator's wife, 

having popped her head out of the window, and 


ſeeing a man who doubted whether the Pope 


was Antichriſt, poured on his head à full. 


— 0 heavens, to what exceſs does religious 


zeal tranſport the fair ſex! 
A man who had not been baptized, a good A- 


* nabaptiſt, named James, ſaw the barbarous and 


ignominious manner with which they treated 
one of his drethren, a being with two feet, un- 
feathered, and endowed with a rational ſoul. He. 
took him home with him, cleancd him, gave 


bim bread and beer, made bim a pgeſcnt of two 
florins, and offered to teach him the method of 
working in his manufactories of Perſian ſtulfs, 


which are fabricated in Holland. Candidus pro- 
ſeating himſelf almoſt at his knees, cried out, 


">. Me. 


CAN DID US. 13 


« Mr Pangloſs argued well when he ſaid, that 
every thing is for the beſt in this world : for I 
am infinitely more affected with your very great 


generobity, than by the hard- heartedneſs of that 


gentle man with the black cloak, and the lady his 
wife,” 
As he was taking a walk next day, he met a 


| 
| 
| 


beggar all covered over with ſores, his eyes dead, 


the tip of his noſe eat off, his mouth turned to 
one fide of his face, his teeth black, ſpeaking 
through bis throat, tormented with a violent 
cough, and ſpitting a tooth at every time be at- 
tem pte to draw his breath. 


CHAP. Iv. 


How Candidus met with his old maſter of philoſophy, 
Dr. Panglcſs, and what befel them. 


Andidus, moved more with compaſſion 
than horror, gave this frightful ſuppliant 
the two florins wh ch he had received of his ho- 
neſt Anabaptiſt James. The ſpectte fixed his 


eyes attentively upon him, dropt ſome tears, and 


was going to fall upon his neck. Candidus af- 
frighted, drew back. Alas!“ faid the one 
wretch to the other, do you not know your 
dear Pangloſs any longer?“ What do I hear! 
la it you, my dear maſter! you in this frighttul 
condition! What misfortune has befallen you? 
Why are you no longer in the moſt magnificent of 


caltles? What is become of Miſs Cunegonda, 
i tze 


% 1 


| 
| 


14. CANDIDU'S. 


the nonpaceil of the fair ſex, the maſterpiece of 
nature ? 1 have no more ſtrength,” ſaid Pan- 


gloſs. Candidus immediately carried him to 
| the Anabaptiſt's ſtable, where he gave him a. 
| little bread to eat When Pangloſs was refreſn · 


ed a little, Well,“ faid Candidus, what is be- 
come of Cunegonda ?“ © She is dead,” replied. 
the other. Candi us fainted away at this word: 
but his friend recovered his ſenſes with a little 
bad vinegar which he found by chance in the 
ſtable. Candidus opening his eyes, cricd out, 
% Cunegondais dead! Ah, beſt of worlds, where 
art thou ? But of what diilemper did ſhe die? 


Was not this the caute, her ſeeing me driven 


out of the caſtle by my Lord, her father, with - 
great kicks on the breech ?“ ** No,” ſaid Pan- 
glos, the was gutted by ſome Bulgarian ſol- 


| diers, after. having been barbaroufly raviſhed: 


they knocked my Lord the Baron on the head, 
for attempting to protect her; my Lady the 
Baroneſs was cut in pieces: my poor puptl was 


treated preciſely like his filter 3 and as tor the 


eallle, tnere is not one ſtone left upon another, 
nor a barn, nor a heep, nor a duck, nor a tee. 
But wc have been ſufficiently tevenged; for the 
Abarians hive done the very fame thing to a 
net, hhouting barony, which belonged to a Bul: 


= 


gatian lord.“ 


At this diſcou ſe Candidus fainted away 2. 
ſecond time: but coming to himfclt, and having 


| faid all that he ought to fay, he 11 quires into 


the c uſe and the effect, and into the ſuthc.ent. 


reaſon that had reduced Pangioi to lo depio- 
| table 


SAN DID us. 15 


rable a condition. © Alas,” faid the other, it 
was love; love, the comforter of the human 
race, the preſerver of the univerſe, the foul of all 
ſenſible beings, tender love.” *©* Alas!” faid 
Candidus, I know this love, the ſovereign of 
hearts, the ſoul of our ſoul; yet it never coſt 
me more than a kiſs, and twenty kicks on the 
breech. But how could this charming cauſe 
produce in you ſo adominable an effect ?“ 
Pangloſs made anſwer as follows. O my 
dear Candidus, you know Paquetta, that pretty 
attendant on our Noble Baroneſs : I taſted in her 
arms the delights of paradiſc, which produced 
thoſe torments of hell with which you ſee me de- 
voured. She was inf cted, and perhaps ſhe is 
dead. Paquetta received this preſent from a 
learned cordelicr, who had traced it to the ſource : 
for he had it from an oid counteſs, who had re- 


_ ceived it from a captain. of horſe, who was in- 


debte d for it to a marcrioneſs, who got it from a 
page, who had received it from a Jeſuit, who in 


his noviciate had it in a direct line irom one of 


the companions of Chriſtopher Columbus. For 
my part, I will give it to nobody, for I am dy- 
ing 

% Pangloſs P" cried Candidus, what a 
ſtrange genealo,y ! Has not the devil given riſe 
to it?“ Net ai all,” replied this great man; it 


was a thing indiſpe niable, a neceſſary ingredient, 


in the beſt of worlds, for if Columbus had not 
catciey in an ſland of America, this diſtemper, 


| which poiſons the ſource of generation, frequent» 
| ly hinders generation, and is evidently oppoſite 


to 


10 CANDIDUS.. 


to the great deſign of nature, we ſhould have had 
neither chocolate nor cochineal. It may alſo 
bc obſerved, that to this day, upon our continent, 
this malady, like a point of controverſy, is pe- 
culiar to us. The Turks, the Indians, the Per- 
ſians, the Chineſe, the Siameſe, and the Japaneſe, 
know nothing of it yet. But there 1s a ſufficient 
rea'on why they, in their turn, ſhould become 
acquainted with it, a few centuries hence. In the 
mean time, it has made a marvellous progreſs 
among us, and eſpecially in thoſe great armies 
compoſed of honeſt hirelings well ditcipiined, 
who decide the fate of ſtates; for one may be 
aſſured, that when thirty thouſand men in a 
pitcned battle fight againſt troops equal to them 
in number, there are about * thoukad of 
them pcx:d on each ſide.” 
© That is ſurprifvng,” ſaid Candidus : © but 
you mult be cured” Ah! how can 1?” ſaid Pan- 
gloſs : © I have not a penny, my friend; and 
throughout the whole extent of this globe, one 
cannot be let blood, nor get a gliſter, without 
paying for it, or ſame other perſon doing that 
office for us.” 

This laſt ſpeech determined Candidus. He 
went to throw himſelf at the feet of his chari- 
table Anabaptiſt James; and gave him fo ſtrik- 
ing a deſcription of the ſtate his friend was re- 
duced to, that the good man did not hefitate to 
entertain Or. Panploſs ; and he had him cured 
at his dn expence. Duriag the cure, Pangloſs 
loſt only an eye and an car. As he wrote well, 
and underitood arithmetic *.. the Ana- 
baptiſt 


e CANDID US. 17 
baptiſt James made him his bock keeper. At 
the end of two months, being obliged to go to 
Liſbon about the affairs of his trade, he took the 
two philoſophers with him in his ſhip. Panglofs 
explained to him how every thing was ſuch as it 
could not be better. James was not of this ſenti · 
ment. Mankind,” faid he, muſt have a little 
corrupted their nature; for they were not born 
wolves, and yet they are become wolves: God 
has given them neither cangon of twenty-four 
pounds nor bayonets to deſtroy one another, I 
might throw into the account bankrupts 3 and the 
law which ſeizes on the effects of - bankrupts, 
only to bilk the creditors.” All this was indiſ- 
penſable, replied the one eyed doctor, and 
private misfortunes conſtitute the general good: 
ſo that the more private misſortunes there are, 
the whole is the better.” While be was reaſon- 
ing, the air darkened, the winds blew from the 
four quarters of the world, and the ſhip was at» 
tacked by a moſt dreadful ſtorm, within fight of 
the harbour of Liſbon, 


CHAP. 


18 CAN DID US. 


CHAP. V. 


Tempeſt, ſhipwreck, earthquake, and what be- 
came of Dr. Pangloſs, Candidus, and James the 
Anabaptift. 


NE half of the paſſengers being weakened, 
and ready to breathe their laſt, with the 
incomprebenfible anguiſh which the toſſing of 
the ſhip conveyed through the nerves and all the 
humours of the body, which were quite diſor- 
dered, were not capable of being alarmed at the 
danger they were in. The other half uttered 
cries and made prayers; the fails were rent, the 
maſts broken, and the ſhip became leaky. E- 
very one worked that was able; nobody regarded 
any thing, and no order was kept The Ana- 
baptiſt contributed his affiitance to work the ſhip, 
As he was upon the deck, a furious ſailor tude- 
ly ſtruck him, and laid bim ſprawling on the 
planks ; but with the blow he gave him, he him · 
ſelf was fo violently jolted, that he tumbled over- 
board with his head foremot, and remained ſuf- 
_ pended by a piece of broken mait. Honeſt 

James runs to his affiſtance, and helps him to get 
up again; but in the attempt is thrown into the 
ſea, in the fight of the ſailor, who ſuffered him 
to periſh without deigning to look upon bim. 
Candidus draws near, and ſees his benefactor one 
moment emerging, and the next ſwallowed up foc 
ever. He was juſt going to throw himſelf into 
the 


\ 


CAN DID US. 19 


the fea after him, when the philoſopher Pangloſs 
hindered him, by demonſtrating to him, that the 
road of Liſbon had been made on purpoſe for 
this Anabaptiſt to be drowned there. While be 
was proving this a priori, the veſſel foundered, 
nd all periſhed except Pangloſs, Candidus, and 
this brute of a ſailor, who drowned the virtuous 
Anabaptiſt. The villain luckily ſwam aſhore, 
whither Pangloſs and Candidus were carried on 
a plank. 

When they had recovered themſelves a lirele, 
they walked towards Liſbon, They had ſome 
money left, with which they hoped to fave them- 
ſelves from hunger, after having 23 from 
the ſtorm. 

Scarce had they ſet foot in the city, bewail · 
ing the death of their benefactor, when they 
perceived the earth to tremble under their feet, 
and ſaw the ſea ſwell and foam in the harbour, 
and daſh to pieces the ſhips that were at anchor. 
The whirling flames and aſhes covered the itreets 
and public places, the houſes tottered, and their 
roofs fell under the foundations, and the foun- 
dations were ſcattered : thirty thouſand inhabits 
tants of all ages and ſexes were cruſhed to death 
in the ruins. The ſailor whiſtling and ſwear» 
ing, faid, * There is ſome booty to be got here.” 
«© What can be the ſufficient reaſon of this 
% pkznomenon ?” ſaid Pangloſs. * This is cer- 
© tainly the laſt day of the world,” cried Candi- 
dus. The ſailor ran immediately into the midſt of 
the ruins, encountered death tofind money, found 
it, laid hold of it, got drunk, and having flept 

bimſelf 


20 CANDIDUS. 


himſelf ſober, purchaſed the favours of the firſt 
good ratured girl he met with, upon the ruins 
of the demoliſhed houſes, and in the midft of 
the dying and the dead. In the mean time, 
Pangloſs pulled him by the ſleeve: My friend,“ 
ſaid he, this is not right; you treſpaſs again(t 
univerſal reaſon, you improve your time badly,” 
Brains and blood!” anſwered the other; I am 
a ſailor, and was born at Batavia; four times 
I have trampled upon the crucifix in four voy- 
| ages to Japan ; thou mayeſt go ſeek ſor thy man 
with thy univerſal reaſon,” 

Some pieces of ſtone having wounded Can- 
didus, he lay ſtretehed in the ſtreet, and covered 
with rubbiſh. 4 Alas!“ ſaid he to Pangloſs, 
de get me a little wine and oil, I am a dying,” 
This trembling of the eacth is no new thing,” 
anſwered Pangloſs. The city of Lima, in Ameri- 
Ca, experienced the ſame concuſhons laſt year; 
the ſame cauſe has the ſame effects; there ig 
certainly a train of ſulphur under the earth from 
Lima to Liſbon.” Nothing is more probable,” 
ſaid Candidus; “ but, for God's fake, a little 
oil and wine.” © How probable!” replied the 
philoſopher ; I maintain that the point is de- 
monſtrable.“ Candidus loft all fenſe; and Pan- 
gloſs brought him a little water from a neigh- 
bouring fountain. 

The day following, having found fome provi- 
fions in rummaging through the rubbiſh, they 
recruited their ſtrength a little Afterwards 
they employe l themſelves, like others, in ad- 
minilleting relief to the inhabitants that bad e- 

| ſcaped 


CAN DID US. 22 


ſcaped from death. Some citizens that had 
been relieved by them, gave them as good a din» 
ner as could be expected amidſt ſuch a diſaſter. 
It is true, that the repaſt was mournful, and the 
gueſts watered their bread with their tears, But 
Pangloſs confoled them, by aſh-ming that things 
could not be otherwiſe: “ For,” ſaid he, if an 
univerſe exiſt, that univerſe muſt neceſſarily be 
the beſt. Now, in the beſt of worlds, all is 
good, all is well, all is for the beſt ; comfort 
vourſelves, be merry, and let us take a glaſs.” 
A little man clad in black, who belonged to the 
inguiſition, and fat at his fide, took him up very 
politely, and ſaid, “ In all appearance, the gen- 
tleman does not believe original ſin; for if all 
is for the beſt, then there has been neither fall 
nor puniſhment.” 

« | moſt humbly aſk your excellency's par: 
don,” anſwered Pangloſs ſtill more politely; “ for 
the fall of man and the curſe neceſſarily entered 
into the beſt of worlds poſſible.” Then the 
gentleman does not believe there is liberty,” ſaid 
the inquiſitor. Your excellency will excuſe 
me,” ſaid Pangloſs; liberty can confilt with ab- 
ſolute neceſſity; for it was neceflary we ſhould 
be free; becauſe, in ſhort, the determinate 
will - 

Pangloſs was in the middle of his propoſition, 
when the inquiſitor ſigned with his head to his 
lacquey who attended bim, to bring him a glaſs 
of port wine. 


CHAP. 


CANDIDUS. 


CHAP. vi. 


How a fine auto-da-fe was celebrated, to —— 
earthquakes ; and how Candidus was whipped. 


Frer the earthquake, which had ruined 
three-fourths of Liſbon, the ſages of the 
country could not find any means more effectual 
to prevent a total deſtruction, than to give the 
people a brilliant auto-da-fe, It had been de- 
cided by the univerſity of Coimbra, that the 
icht of ſome perſons burnt by a flow fire, with 
great ceremony, was an infallible noſtrum to 
prevent the earth from quaking. 
In conſequence of this reſolution, they had 
ſeized a Biſcayner, convicted of having married 
his god - mother and two Portugueſe, who, in eat - 
ing a puller, had tripped off the lard. After din- 
ner they came and ſecured Dr Pangloſs, and bis 
_ diſciple Candidus, the one for having ſpoke too 
freely, and the other for having heard with an 
air of approbation. 'ſhey, were both conducted 
to ſeparate apartments, extremely freſh, and ne- 
ver incommoded with the fun. Eight days af - 
ter, they were both clothed with a ſanbenito, and 
had their heads adorned with paper mitres, Can- 
didus's mitre and ſanbenito were painted with 
inverted flames and with devils that had neither 
| fails nor claws : but Pangloſs's devils has claws 
and tails, and the flames were pointed upwards. 
Being thus dreſſed, "my marched in proceſhon, and 
heard 


p m 
4 4 
" * 
= 
4 
- 


CANDIDUS. 23 


| heard a very pathetic ſermon, followed with 
fine muſic on a ſqueaking organ. Candidus was 
whipped in cadence, while they were ſinging; 
the Biſcayner, and the two men who would not 

eat lard, were burnt; and Pangloſe, though it 
was contrary to cuſtom, was hanged. The fame 
day the earth ſhook anew with a moſt dreadful 
noiſe. 

Candidus, affrighted, interdicted, aſtoniſhed, 
all bloody, all panting, faid to himſelf, ** If this 
is the beſt of poſſible worlds, what then are the 
reſt ? Suppoſing 1 had not been whipped, I have 
been among the Bulgarians: but, O my dear 
Pangloſs ! thou greateſt of philoſophers, that it 
ſhould be my fate to ſee you hanged without 
knowing for what! O my dear Anabaptiſt! thou 
beſt of men, that it ſhould be thy fate to be 
drowned in the bar bour | © Miſs Cuncgonda ! 
the jewel of ladies, that it ſhould be thy fate to 
have thy belly cut open ! 

He returned, with difficulty ſupporting bim- 
ſelf, after being lectured, whipped, abiotved, and 
bleſſed, when an old woman ſaluted him, and 
ſaid, * Child, take courage, and follow me.“ 


CHAP. 


24 AN DID US. 
— 
CHAP. VII. 


Huw an old woman teck care of Candidus, and how 
he found the object he le ved. 


Andidus took not courage, but followed 
the old woman into a ruinated houfe. 
She gave him a pot of pomatum to anoint him ;- 
ſelf, left him ſomething to eat and drink, and 
ſhewed him a very neat little bed, near which 
was a compleat ſuit of cloaths. Eat, drink, 
and ſleep,” ſaid ſhe to him, and may our lady of 
Mocha, our Lord dt. Antony of Padua, and our 
Lord St James of Compoſtella, take care of you. 
I] will be back to-morrow.” Candidus aſtoniſh- 
ed at all that he had ſeen, at all he had ſuffered, 
and ſtill more at the charity of the old woman, 
offered to kiſs her hand. ** You muſt not kiſs 
my hand,” ſaid the old woman; I will be back 
to-morrow. Rub yourſelf with the pomatum, 
eat, and take reſt.” 

Candidus, notwithſtanding ſo many misfor- 
tunes, eat, and went to ſleep. Next morning 
the old woman brought him his breakfaſt, look- 
ed at his back, and rubbed it herſelf with ano-_ 
ther ointment : ſhe afterwards brought him bis 
dinner; and ſhe returned at night and brought him 
his ſupper. The day following ſhe performed the 


| ſame ceremonies. ** Who are you?” would 
Candidus always ſay to her: Who bas inſpir- 
ed you with ſo much goodneſs? What thanks 

can 


CANDIDUS. 25 


can I render you?“ The good woman made him 
no anſwer ; ſhe returned in the evening, but 
brought him no ſupper. ** Come along with 
me,” ſaid ſhe, and fay net a word.” She 
took him by the arm, and walked with him into 
the country about a quarter of a mile : they ar- 
rived at a houſe that ſtood by itſelf, furrounded 
with gar“ ms and canalss The old woman 
knocked at a little door; which being p:ned, 
ſhe conducted Candidus by a private ſtair-cafe 
into a gilded cloſet, and leaving him on a bro- 
cade couch, ſhut the door and went her way. 
Candidus thought he was in a reverie, and Jook- 
ed upon all his life as an unlucky dream, but on 
the preſent moment as an agreeable dream. 

The old woman returned very ſoon, ſupport- 
ing with difficulty a woman trembling, of a ma- 
jeſtic port, glittering with jewels, and covered 
with a veil. ** Take off that veil,” ſaid the old 
woman to Candidus. 'The young man ap- 
proaches, and takes off the veil with a trembling 
hand. What joy! what ſurpriſe ! he thought 
he faw Miſs Cunegonda : he ſaw her indeed, it 
was [he herſelf, His ſtrength fails him, he can- 
not utter a word, but falls down at her feet. 
Cunegonda falls upon the carpet. The old wo- 
man applies aromatic waters ; they recover their 
ſenſes, and ſpeak to one another. Art firſt their 
words were imperfect, their queſtions and an- 
ſwers were carried on croſ*-wiſe, with ſighs, 
tears, and cries. The old woman recommend- 
ed to them to make no noiſe, and then left them 
to themſelves. *©* II? is it you!” ſaid Can- 
B didus 


26 C AND ID US. 


didus to her: Are you alive? do IT find you 
again in Portugal ? was not you raviſhed then ? 
was not your belly ripped up, as the philoſopher 
Pangloſs affured me?” Tes, the caſe wa: fo,” 
6 ſaid the lovely Cunegonda ; but death does 
not always follow from theſe two accidents.” 
© But your father and mcther ! were not they 
killed ?” © It is but too true,” anſwered Cune- 
gonda, weeping. * And your brother?“ „ My 
brother was killed too.“ And why are you 
in Portugal ? and how did you know that I was 
bere? and by what ſtrange adventure did you 
contrive to bring me to this houſe ?“ 1 will 
tell you that,” replied the lady: but firſt you 
muſt inform me of all that has happened to you 
fince the barmleſs kiſs you gave me, and the rude 
kicking which you received.” 

Candidus obeyed her with the molt profound 
reſpect; and though he was forbidden to ſpeak, 
though his voice was weak and faultering, and 
though bis back fill pained him, yet he told her, 
in the moſt genuine manner, every thing that 
had happened to him fince the moment of their 
ſcparation. Cunegonda raiſed up her eyes to 
heaven ; ſhe ſhed tears at the death of the good 
Anabaptiſt, and of Pangloſs; after which ſhe 
thus ſpoke to Candidus, „who loſt not a word, 
but dwelt upon her eyes as if he would devour 
them. 


CHAP. 


CANDIDUS. 27 


CHAP. vn. 


The hiftory of Cunegenda. 


6 Was in my bed and faſt aſſeep, when heaven 

was pleaſed to ſend the Bulgarians to our 
fine caſtle of Thunder=ten»tronckh: they killed 
my father and my brother, and cut my mother 
in pieces. A huge Bulgarian, fix feet high, ob- 
ſerving the light had deprived me of my ſenſes, 
ſet himſelf to rariſn me. This abuſe made me 
come to myſelf; I recovered my ſenſes, I cried, 
I ſtruggled, | bir, I ſcratched, I wanted to tear 
out the huge Pulgarian's eyes, not confidering 
that what had happened in my father's caſtle was 
a common thing in war. The brute gave me 
a cut with his hanger in the left flank, the mark 
of which I till bear about me. Ah! I hope 
I ſhall fee it, faid the ſimple Candidus. You 
ſhall,” anſwered Cunegonda ; but let us con- 
tinue,” Do fo,” replied Candidus. 

She then reſumed the thread of her ſtory in 
this manner. A Bulgarian captain came in, 
and ſaw me bleeding; but the ſoldier was not 
at all diſconcerted. The captain flew into a 
paſſion at the little reſpect the brute ſhewed him, 
and killed him upon my body. He then cauſed 
me to be dreſſed, and carried me as a priſoner of 
war to his own quarters. I waſhed the little 
linen he had, and dreſſed his victuals. He found 
me very pretc, I muſt fay it; and I cannot deny 

| B 2 but 


28 C ANDID US. 


but he was well ſhaped, and that he had a white, 
ſoſt (kin 3 but otherwiſe he had little ſenſe or 
philoſophy; one might evidently fee that he 
was not bred under Dr. Pangloſs. At the end 
of three months having loſt all his money, and 
being grown out of conceit' with me, he fold me 
to a Jew, named Don Tſachar, who traded to 
Holland and Portugal, and who had a moſt vio- 
lent paſſion for women. This Jew laid cloſe 
ſiege to my perſon, but could not triumph over 
me; [I have refiſted him better than I did the 
Bulgarian ſoldier. A woman of honour may be 
_ raviſhed once, but her virtue gathers ſtrength 
from ſuch rudeneſs, The Jew, in order to ren- 
der me more tractable, brought me to this coun» 
try-hcuſe that you ſee, I always imagined bi- 
ther to, that no place on earth was fo fine as the 
caſtle of Thunder-ten-tronckh; but I am now 
undeceived. 

The grand inquiſitor obſerving me one day at 
maſs, ogled me pretty much, and got notice ſent 
me that he wanted to ſpeak with me upon pri» 
vate buſineſs. Being conducted to his palace, I 
informed him of my birth; upon which he re- 
preſented to me, how much it was below my 
family to belong to an Iſraelite. A propofal 
was then made by him to Don Iffachar, to yield 
me up to my Lord. But Don Iſſachar, who is 
the court banker, and a man of credit, wculd 
not come into his meaſures. The inquiſitor 
threatened him with an auto-da-fe. Ar laſt the 
Jew, being affrighted, concluded a bargain, by 
Nene the houſe agd myſelf ſhould belong to 

them 


CANDIDUS. 29 


them both in common; that the Jew ſhould have 
Monday, Friday, and Saturday, and the inquiſi- 
tor the other days of the week. U his agree- 
ment has now ſubſiſted fix months. It has not 
however been without quarrels ; for it has been 
often diſputed whether Saturday night or Sunday 
belonged to the old. or new law. For my part, 
I have hitherto refilted them both; and I be» 
lieve that this is the reaſon I am (till beloved by 
them. | 
At length, to avert the ſcourge of earthquakes, 
and to intimidate Von Iffachar, it pleaſed his 
Lordſhip the Inquiſitor to appoint an auto-da-fe. 
He did me the honour to invite me to it. I got 
a very fine ſeat ; and the ladies were ſerved with 
refreſhments between the maſs and the ex-cuti- 
on. I was really ſeized with horror at ſeeing 
them burn the two Jews, and the honeſt Biſcay- 
ner who married his god mother: but how great 
was my ſurprize, my conſternation, my anguiſh, 
when I ſaw in a ſanbineto and mitre a per ſon that 
ſome what reſembled Pangloſs! I rubbed my eyes, 
I looked upon him very attentively, and I ſaw 
bim hanged ; I fell into a ſwoon 3 and ſcarce had 
I recovered my ſenſes, when I ſaw you ſtripped 
ſtark naked; this was the height of horror, con- 
ſternation, grief and deſpair. I. will frankly own 
to you, that your ſkin is ſtill whiter, and of a 
better complexion than that of my Bulgarian. 
captain. This light increaſed all the ſenſations 
that oppreſſed and diltrafted my foul. I cried 
out, I was going. to ſay, Stop, barbarians ; but 
my voice failed me, and my cries would have 
By deen 


30 CANDIDUS. 


been to no purpoſe. When you had been ſe- 
verely whipped, bow is it poſſible, ſaid I, that the 
charming Candidus, and the ſage Pangloſs, ſhould 
both be at Liſbon, the ore to receive a hundred 
laſhes, and the other to be hanged hy order of 
my Lord Inquiſitor, by whom I am greatly belov- 
ed? Pangloſs certainly deceived me moſt cruelly, 
when he told me that every thing is for the beſt 
in this world. 

Being agitated, aſtoniſhed, ſometimes beſide 
myſelf, and ſometimes ready to die with weak- 
neſs, I had my head filled with the maſſacre of 
my father, my mother, and my brother; the in- 
ſolence of the vile Bulgarian foldier, the ſtab he 
gave me with his hanger; my abject ſervitude, 
and acting as cook to the Bulgarian captain; the 
raſcally Don Iſſachar, my abominable inquifitor, 
the execution of Dr Pangloſs, the grand Miſerere 
on the organ while you was whipped, and eſpe- 
cially the kiſs I gave you behind the ſcreen, the 
laſt day I faw you. I praiſed the Lord for hav- 
ing reſtored you to me after ſo many trials. I 
charged my old woman to take care of you, 
and to bring you hither as ſoon as ſhe could, 
She has executed her com miſſion very well; 1 
have taſted the incxpreſſible pleaſure of ſeeing 
you, hearing you, and ſpeaking to you. You 
muſt have a ravenous appetite by this time; I 
am hungry myſelf too; let us therefore fit down 
to ſupper. 

On this they both ſat down to table; and af- 

ter ſupper they ſeated themſelves on the fine 
couch which was mentioned before. They were 
there 


CANDIDUS. 31 


there when Signior Don Iſſachar, one of the maſ- 
ters of the houſe, came thither. It was his 
ſabbath day; and he came to enjoy his right, and 
to cxpreis bis tender love. 


CHAP. IX. 


lat befel Cunægenda, Candidus, the grand inqui- 
Aitor, and the Jew. 


HIS Ifſachar was the moſt paſſionate He- 

brew that bad been ſeen in Iſrael fince the 
captivity in Babylon. What,” ſays be, © you 
bitch of a Galilean, is it not enough to take in 
Maſter Inquiſitor ? but muſt this varlet alſo ſhare 
with me?” When he had thus ſpoke, he drew 
out a long poinard, which he always carried about 
him, and not ſuſpecting that bis antagoniſt had- 
any arms, fell upon Candidus; but our honeſt 
Weſtphalian had received a fine ſword from the 
old woman, along with bis full (ſuit. He drew 
his rapiet, and though he had the moſt agreea- 
ble temper, he laid the Iſraelite dead upon the 

ſpot, at Cunegonda's feet. | 

Holy Virgin!“ cried ſhe; what will be» 
come of us; a man murdered in my apartment l 
If the peace - officer comes, we are ruined.” If 
Pangloſs had not been hanged,” faid Candidus, 
«© he would have given us excellent advice in this 
emergency; for he was an excellent philoſopher. 
Io. this extremity let us coufſult the old woman.” 
| B 4 ——oluc 


9 CANDIDUS 
—— She was a very prudent woman, and began 
to give her advice, when another little door o- 
pened. It was now about one o'clock in the 
morning, and conſequently the beginning of 
Sunday. This morning was allotted to my Lord 
the inquiſitor. Entering, he ſaw the whipped 
Candidus with a ſword in his hand, a dead bo- 
dy ſiretched out on the floor, Cunegonda in a 
mighty fright, and the old woman giving ad - 

See now what paſſed in Candidus's mind at 
this inllant, and how he reaſoned. ** If this ho- 
Iy man calls in :fiftance, he will infallibly have 
me burnt; he may treat Cunegonda in the ſame 
manner; he has cauſed me to be whipped without 
mercy ; he is my rival: I am in the way of 
killing, there is no time to heſitate.” This 
reaſoning ves clear and precipitate; and, with- 
out giving time to the inquiſitor to recover from 
his ſurpriz-, he run him through the body, and 
laid him by the fide of the Jew. * Bebold, here 
is a ſecond killed,” ſaid Cunegonda z there is no 
pardon for us; we are excommunicated, our laſt 
hour is come. How could you, that was born 
ſo gentle, kill in two minutes time a Jewand a 
prelate? My fair Lady,” anſwered Candidus, 
* when one is in love, jealous, and whipped by 
the Inquiſition, one does not know what one 
does.” 

The old woman then put in her word, and 

faid, ** there are three Andaluſian horfes in the 
table, with their ſaddles and bridles, which the 
_ gallant Candidus may get * Madam has 
fome 


* — Irene” 
= 8 N * 


e AN DID uͤs. 33 


fome moidores and jewels 1 let us get on horſe g 
back without delay, though I cannot fit but on - 
one buttock : and let us go to Cadiz: it is the 
finelt time in the world, and very pleaſant it is 
to travel in the cool of the night. 

Candidus immediately ſaddled the three hore 
fes. Cunegonda, the old woman, and he. tra- 
velled thirty miles on a ſtretch. While they were 

making the beſt ot their way, the holy 4armandad 

came to the houſe; they buried my Lord in a 
magnificent church, and threw Iflachar upon a 
lay-Rall. 

Candidns, Cunegonda, and the old woman, 
had now arrived at the (mall town of Avacena, 
in the middle of the mountains of Sierra More- 
na; and thus ſpoke in an inn. 


CHAP. X. 


Ti what diftreſs Candidus, Cunegonda. and the old 
woman arrived at Cadiz, and of their imbar- 
tation. 


2 H O could have robbed me of my 
pittoles and my jewels *” ſaid Cune- 
with tears in her eyes: what (hall we 

ſubaſt on? what ſhall we do? where ſhalt 1 
fiad inquifitors and Jews to give me more?“ 
4 Alas,” faid the old woman, * | ſtrongly ſuſ- 

pect a Kev. Father Cordelier, who lay jpeſter- 
day with us at the fame inn at Badzjos. God 
B 5 preſervg,, 


34 CANDIDUS. 


preferve me from judging raſhly, but he came 
twice into our chamber, and weiſt away a long 
time before us.” © Ah!” faid Candidus, ** the 
good Pangloſ has often demonſtrated to me, that 
the goods of the earth are common to all men, 
and that every one has an equal right to them. 
According to theſe principles, the Cordelier 
ought to have left us enough to carry us to our 
jou ney's end. Have you nothing at all left you 
then, my pretty Cunegonda?” Not a farthing,” 
ſaid ſhe. ** What courſe ſhall we take?” ſaid 
Candid us. Let us ſell one of the horſes,” ſaid 
the old woman; I will mount behind Miſs, 
though I cen bold myſelf only on one buttock, 
and we ſhall reach Cadiz.” 
In the ſame inn was a BenediQtine prior, who 
bought the horſe very cheap. Candidus, Cune ; 
gonda and the old woman, paſſed through Luce- 
na. Chillas, and Lebrixa, and arrived at length 
at Cadiz They were fitting out a fleet, and af- 
ſembling trcops, for bringing to reaſon the Rev. 
fathers the Jeſuits of Paraguay, who were accuſ- 
ed of having excited one of their hordes, near 
the city of St. Sacrament, to revolt from their al- 
legiance to the Kings of Spain and Portugal. 
Candidus having ſerved among the Bulgarians, 
performed the exercife of that nation before the 
commander of this little army with ſo much 
grace, celcrity, addreſs, dexterity, and agility, 
that he gave him the command of a company of 
infantry. Being now made a captain, he im- 
barked with Miſs Cunegonda, the old woman, 
two valcts, and the two Andalufian horſes, which 
| had 


CANDIDUS. 35 


bad belonged to his Lordſhip the grand inquiſitor 
of Portugal. 

During the. whole voyage, they argued a great 
deal on the philoſophy of poor Pangloſs. We 
are going to another world,” ſaid Candidus ; 
« it is there without doubt that every thing is 
beſt. For it muſt be confefled, that one has rea- 
ſon to be a little uneaſy at what paſſeth in our 
world, with reſpect both to phyſicks and ethicks.“ 
« I love you with all my heart,” ſaid Cunegon- 
da; „but my mind is till terrified at what [ 
have ſeen and experienced.” All will be well,” 
replied Candidus ; the ſea of the new world is 
already preferable to thoſe of our Europe; 
it is more calm, and the winds more conſtant. 
Certainly the new world is the beſt of all poſſi- 
ble worlds.” God grant it,” ſaid Cunegonda ; 
but I have been ſo terribly unfortunate in mine, 
that my heart is almoit ſhut againſt hope.” 
« You complain indeed,” ſaid the old woman 
to them; alas ! you have not met wth ſuch 
misfortunes as I have.” 

Cunegonda was almoſt ready to fall a-laugh- 
ing, and thought the old woman very comical, 
for pretending to be more unfortunate than her» 
ſelf. ** Alas! my good dame,” ſaid Cunegonda, 
* unleſs you had been raviſhed by two Bulgari- 
ans, hadreceived two cuts with a hanger in your 
belly, bad had two fathers and two mothers mur- 
dered, and had ſeen two lovers whipped at an 
auto-da-fe, I cannot fee how you could have the 
advantage of me. Add to this, that | was born 
2 baroneſs with ſeventy two armorial quatterings, 

B 6 —_— 


36 CANDIDUS. 


and that I have been a cook-maid.” * My. La» 
dy,“ replied the old woman, you know nothing 
of my <xrraftion ; and were I to ſhew you my 
backfide you would not talk as you do, but 
would iuſpend your judgment,” This diſcourſe 
having raifed an inſatiable curiofity in the minds 
of Cunegonda and Candidus, the old woman te- 
lated her flory as follows. 


CHAP. XI. 


The hiflory of the old woman. 


Had not always eyes bleared, and bordered 

with red; my noſe has not always touched 
my chin: nor have I been always a ſervant. TI 
am the daughter of Pope Urban X. and of the 
Princeſs of Paleſtrina | was brought up till 1 
was fourteen, in a palace, to which all the caſ- 
tles of your German barons would not have ſerv- 
ed for ſtables; and- one of my robes coſt more 
than all the magnificence in Weltphalia, I in- 
created in beauty, in charms, and in fine accom- 
pliſhments, in the very centre ot pleaſures, of 
bhomages, and of high expectations. I now be · 
gan to captivate every heart. My neck was ſo 
formed, and what a neck! white, firm, and ſhap- 
ed like that of the Venus of Medicis. And what 
eyes! what eyelids! what fine black eyebrows ! 
what flames ſparkled trom my eyeballs, and, as 
the poets of our country told me, eclipied the 
twinkling 


CANDIDUS. 37 


twinkling of the ſtars! The maids who dreſſed 
and undreſſed me, fell into an ecſtaſy when they 
viewed me before and behind, and all the men 
would have been glad to have been in their pla- 
ces. 

I was betrothed to 2 prince, the ſovereign of 
| Maſſa Carara. What a prince! As handſome 
as myiclf, made up of ſweetneſs and charms, of 
a witty mind, and burning with love. I loved 
him, as one uſes to do for the firſt time, with i- 
_ dolatry, with tranſport. Preparations were made 
for our nuptials. The pomp and magnificence 
were inconceivable; nothing but continual tealts, 
carouſals, and operas; and all Italy made ſon- 
- nets upon me, of which their was ſcarce one to- 
lerable. I was juſt on the point of reaching the 
ſummit of happineſs, when an old marchionelſs, 
who had been miltreſs to my prince, invited him 
to drink chocolate at her houſe. He died there 
in leſs than two hours time in terrible convul- 
fons. But this is only a mere irifle. My mo- 
ther in deſpair, and yet leis affl cced than me, 
reſolved to retreat for ſome time iron fo mourn» 
ful a place. dhe had a very fine ſeat near waiet- 
ta. We embarked on board a galley ot the coun- 
try, gilt like the altar of St. Peter's at Rome. 
We were ſcaice ut dt ſca, when a corſair of 
Sailce fell upon us, and buarded us. Our tol- 
die's defended the nſclves like thoſe of the Pope; 
they all fell down upon their knees, atter chrows 
ing away their arms, and aſked 3 in ar- 
ticuls mortis f the co fair 
They inſtantly ripped 4 us as naked as mon- 
| keys 5 


38 CANDIDUS. 


kevsz my mother, our maids of honour, and 
myſelf too, meeting with no better uſage. It is 
a very ſurpriſing thing with what expedition 
theſe gentry undreſs people. But what ſurpriſed 
me moſt was, that they ſhould pur their fingers 
| Into a place into iich we women ſeldom ſuffer 
and thing to enter but pipes. This ceremony 
apf eared very ſtrange to me; but fo we judge 
of every thing that is not produced in our own 
country [I foon learned, however, that it was 
to ſ-arch whether we had not concealed ſome of 
our jewels there. It is a cuſtom eſtabliſhed time 
out of mind among civilized nations that ſcour 
the ſea. I know that the gentlemen the reli- 
gious knights of Malta never omit to practiſe it, 
when they take I urks of either ſex. It is one 
of the laws of nations, from which they never 
_ deviate. 

IL need not tell you how great a bardſhip i it 19 
for a young princeſs and her mother to be carried 
flaves to Morocco. You may eafily form a no- 
tion of all that we muit ſuifer on board the veſſel 

of the corfair. My mother was ſtill very hand- 
ſome; our maids of honour, nay our plain cham- 
bermaids, had more charms than are to be found 
throughout all Africa. As for myſelf, I was all 
attraQtion, | was all beauty, and all charms, nay 
more, I was a virgin. tlowever, | was not one 
long: this flower, which had been reſerved for 
the accompliſhed Prince of Maſſa Carara, was 
taken from me by the captain of the corſair. He 
was an ugly negro, but fancied he did me a 
great deal of honour, Indeed, ber bighneſs the 

| Princefs 


CANDIDUS. 35 


Princeſs of Palaſt rina and myſelf muſt have bꝰ en 
very ſtrong to re ſiſt all the violence we met with 
till our arrival at Morocco Bur let me paſs o- 
ver that: theſe are ſueh common things, that they 
are ſcarce worth the mentioning. 

Morocco was over flowed with blood when we 
arrived there. Fifty fons of the tmperor Muley 
Iſmae] had each their adherents : this» protuced 
in effect fifty civil wars, cf biacks againſt blacks, 
of blacks againit tawnies, of tawnies againſt 
tawnies, and of mulattoes againſt mulattoes. In 
a word, there was one continued carnage all over 
the empire. 

No ſooner were we landed, than the blacks of 
a party adverſaries to that of my corſair made an 
attempt to rob him of his booty Next to the 
jewels and gold, we were the moſt valuable 
things he had. I was here witneſs to ſuch a bat- 
tle as you never ſaw in your European climates 
The people of the north bave not ſo much fire 
in their blood; nor have they that raging paſſion 
ſor women that is ſo common in Africa. One 
would think that you Europeans had nothing but 
milk in your veins: but it is vitriol and fire 
that runs in thoſe of the inhabitants of Mount 
Atlas, and the neighbouring countries. They 
fought with the ſury of lions, tygers, and ſer» 
pents of the country, to know who ſhould have 
us. A moor ſeized my mother by the right-arm, 
while my captain's lieutenant held her by the 
left: a moorith foldier then took hold of her by 
one leg, and our pirates held her by the other. 
All our women found theaabeives almoſt in a 
moment 


40 e AN DI DS. 


moment ſeized thus by four ſoldiers. My cap - 
tain. kept me concealed at his back. He had a 
ſeimitar in his hand, and killed every one that 
oppoſed his fury. In ſhort, I ſaw all our Italian 
women, and my mother, torn in pieces, hacked; 
and mangled by the brutes that fought for them, 
My fellow priſoners, thoſe who had taken them, 
foldiers, ſailors, b'acks, whites, mulattoes, and 
laſtly my captain himſelf, were all killed ; and 
L.remained expiring among a heap of dead bo- 
dies, Theſe barbarous ſcenes extended, as every 
one knows, over more than three hundred 
leagues, without ever omitting the five prayers a. 
day ordained by Mahomet. 

I difengaged myſelf with great difficulty from 
the weight of ſo many bloody carcaſes heaped 
upon me, and made a ſhift to crawl to a large o- 
range tree on the bank of a neighbouring rivulet;. 
where I fell down oppreſſed with fear, fatigue, 
horror, deſpair, and hunger. Soon after, my 
ſenſes being overpowered, were locked op in a 
fleep, which reſembled a fit rather than fleep.. 
IT was in this ſtate of weaknef- and inſenfibility, 
between dea:h and lite, when I elt mytelt preſſed 

by ſomething that moved upon my body, Il o- 
pened my eyes, and faw a white man, of a very 
good aſpect, who fighed and muttered theſe 
words between his teeth, O che ſciagura d'efſere 
ſenza coghioni! i. e © © this misfoctune of be- 
ing deprived of teiticles i? 


CHAP. 


CANDID US. 


CHAP, III. 
The ſequel of the old uoman's adventures. 


Stoniſhed and tranſported to hear my own 
country language, and not leſs ſurpriſed 
at the words uttered by the man, I made an- 
ſwer, that there might be far greater misfortunes 
than thoſe he complained of. I then gave him 
a ſhort hint of the horrid ſcenes 1 had under- 
gone, and relapſed again into a ſwoon. He 
carried me to a neighbouring houſe, cauſed me 
be put to bed, and gave me ſomething to eat, 
waited upon me, comforted and flattered me, and 
ſaid, that he had never ſeen any one ſo band - 
ſome as me, and that he had never regrettcd ſo 
much the loſs of what no one could reſtore to 
bim. I was born at Naples,” ſaid he, where 
they caſtrate two or three thouſand children e- 
very year; ſome die of the operation, others ac - 
quire a finer vgice than that of any woman, and 
others become ſoveteigus of ſtates. This ope» 
ration was performed oi me with great ſucceſs, 
and | became a finger in the chapel of her High- 
neſs the Princeſs of Paleftrina.” ** Of my mo- 
ther l“ cried I. Of your mother l“ cried he a- 
gain, ſheding tears. * What ! are you that young 
princeſs, whom I had the care of bringing up 
till ſhe was fix years old, and who promiled e- 
ven then to be as bandſome as you are now !“ 
3 


4  CANDIDUS. 


„ Tt is I myſelf: my mother lies about four 
hundred paces from hence, cut into four quar- 
ters, under a heap of dead bodies.” 

I related to him all that had befallen me; 
he likewiſe told me his adventures; and in- 
formed me, that he was ſent to the King of Mo» 
rocco, by a Chriſtian power, to conclude a trea- 
ty with that monarch, by which he was tofurniſh 
bim with ammunition, artillery, and ſhips, to e- 
nable bim entirely to deſtroy the commerce of o- 
ther Chriſtians. ** My commiſſton is fulfilled,” 
ſaid the honeſt eunuch to me; I am going to 
imbark at Ceuta, and will carry you to Italy. 
But © my misfortune in wanting teſticles!” 

I thanked him with the tears of gratitude ; but 
inſtead of conducting me to Italy, he carried me 
to Algiers, and fold me to the Dey of that pro» 
vince. Scarce was I ſold, when the plague, 
which had made the tour of Africa, Afia, and Eu- 
rope, broke out at Algiers with great fury. You 
have ſeen earthquakes : but pray, Miſs, have you 
ever had the plague? Never,” replied the Ba- 
roneſs. : 3 

If you had had it, replied the old woman, you 
would confeſs that is far more terrible than an 
earthquake. It is very common in Africa; I 
was ſeized with it. Figure to yourſelf the Gatu- 
ation of a Pope's daughter, about fifteen years of 
age, who, in the ſpace of three months, had un- 
dergone poverty and flavery, had been raviihed 
almoſt every day, had ſeen her mother cut into 
four quarters, had experienced both famine and 
war, and was dying of the plague at Algiers. 1 
| did 


CANDIDUS. 43 


did not die for all*that. But my eunuch, and 
the Dey, and almoſt all the ſeraglio at Algiers 
periſhed. 

When the firſt ravages of this dreadful peſti» 
lence were over, they fold the ſlaves belonging 
to the Dey. A merchant purchaſed me, and car» 
ried me to Tunis. There he fold me to another 
merchant, who ſold me again at Tripoli; from 
Tripoli I was fold again at Alexandria; from A- 
lexandria | was fold again at Smyrna ; and from 
Smyrna at Conſtantinople. At laſt 1 became 
the property of an aga of the Janifaries; who 
was ſoon after ordered to go to the defence of 
Afoph, then beſieged by the Ruſſians. 

The aga, who was a man of gallantry, took 
all his ſeraglio along with him, and lodged us in 
a ſmall fort on the Palus Mzvtis, under the 
guard of two black eunuchs and twenty ſoldiers. 
We killed a great number of the Ruſhaus, who 
returned the compliment with intereſt. Aſoph 
was put to fire and ſword, and no regard was 
paid to age or ſex. There remained only our 
little fort ; which the enemy reſolved ro reduce 
by famine. [be twenty Janiſaries had ſworn, 
that they would never ſurreuder. The extremi- 
ties of famine to which they were reduced, o- 
bliged them to eat our two eunuchs, for fear of 


violating their oath ; and a few days after they 
reſolved to devour the women. | 

We had an Iman, a very religious and humane 
man. He preached an excellent ſermon to them, 
in which be diſſuaded them from killing us all 
at once. Cut off only one of the buttocks of 
theſe 


44 CANDIDUS. 


theſe ladies,” ſaid he, © and you will fare extreme- 
ly well: if you muſt come to it again, you will 
have the ſame entertainment a few days hence: 
Heaven will bleſs you for ſo charitable an action, 
and you will find relief.“ 

As he had an eloquent tongue, he eaſily pers 
fuadet them. his horrible operation was per- 
formed upon us; and the Iman applied the 
ſame balſam tv us that is applied to children af- 
ter they ate citcumciſed. We were all ready to 
die. 
be Janifaries bad ſcaree finiſhed the repaſt 

with which we had fupplied them, when the 
Ruſſians came in flat bottomed boats; and not 
a lingle Janiſary eſcaped. The Ruſſi ins ſhewed 
no concern about the condition we were in. As 
there are French furgeons in every country, one 
of whom, who was a perion of very great ſkill, took 
us under his care, and cured us; and 1 will re» 
member it all my life, that when my wounds 
were pretty well healed, he made me amorous 
propoſals Fo be ſhort, he bid us all comfort 
ourſelves; and affured us, that the like misfortune. 
had happened in ſevetal ſieges, and that it was 
the law of war. 
As ſoon as my companions were able to —Y 
they were obliged to go to Motcow | fell to 
the lot of a Boyard, who made me his gardener, 
and gave me twenty laſhes with his whip eve= 
ry day. But my Lord having been broke upon 
the wheel, within two years after, along with 
| thirty more Boyards, on account of fome buitle.. 
at court, I avaited myſelf of this event, and 
made 


CANDIDUS. 45 


made my eſcape. After traverſing all Ruſſia, I 
was a long time ſervant to an innkee per at Kiga, 
aſterwards at Roſtock, Wiſmar, Leipfic, Caſſel, 
Utrecht, Leyden,the Hague, and Rotterdam. I 
grew old in miſery and diſgrace, having only 
one half of my poſteriors, but fill remembring 
that 1 was a Pope's daughter. A hundred times 
have I had thoughts of killing myſelf ; but ſtill 
] was fond of life. This ridiculous weakneſs is 
perhaps one of our moſt melancholy foibles. 
For can any thing be more ſtupid, ihan to be 
deſirous of continually carrying a burden, which 
one had a mind to throw down on the ground ? 
to dread exiſtence, and yet preſerve it? In a 
word, to careſs the ſerpent that devours us, till 
he has pnawed our very heart? 

In the countries through which it has been 
my fate to travel, and in the inns where I bave 
been a ſervant, I have ſeen a prodigious number 
of people who looked upon their own exiſtence as 
a curſe; but I never knew of more than eight 
who voluntarily put an end to their miſery, viz. 
three negroes, four Engliſhmen, and a German 
profe ſſor, named Robeck. My laſt ſervice was 
with Don Iſſachar the Jew, who placed me near 
your perſon, my fair Lady. I am reſolved to 
ſhare your fate; and I have been more affected 
with your misfortunes than my own. I ſhould 
never bave ſpoke of my ſufferings, if you had not 
vexed me a little, and if it had not been cuſtoma- 
ry on board a ſhip to tell ſtories, by way of amuſe- 
ment. In ſhort, Miſs, 1 have a good deal of ex- 
perience, and I have known the world. Disert 

© yourſelf, 


46 CAN DID US. 
yourſelf, and prevail upon each paſſenger to tell 
you his ſtory ; and if there is one found who has 
not frequently curſed his life, and has not as of- 
ten ſaid to himſelf, that he was the moſt unhap- 
py of mortals, I will give you leave to caſt me 
into the ſea, with my head foremoſt. 


CH AP. XIII. 


How Candidus was obliged to part from the fair 
Cunegonda and the old woman. 


JE charming Cunegonda having heard the 
| old woman's ſtory, paid her all the civili- 

ties that were due to a perſon of her rank and 
merit. She approved of her propoſal ; and enga- 
ged all the paſſengers, alternately to relate their 
adventures: and then both Candidus and the 
confeſſed, that the old woman was in the right. 
« It is a great pity,” ſaid Candidus, „ that the 
ſage Pangloſs was hanged, contrary to cuſtom, at 
the auto-da-fe; for he would tell us moſt ſurpriſe 
ing things cancerning the phyſical and moral e- 
vil which cover both land and fea: and I ſhould 
be bold enough, with due reſpect, to propoſe 
ſame objections. 

While each paſſenger was relating his ſtory, 
the ſhip advanced in her voyage. They landed 
at Buenos- Ayres. Cunegonda, Capt. Candidus, 
and the old woman waited on the governor, 
Don Fernandes d'Ibaraa, y Figueora, y Maſcare- 
nes, 


CANDIDUS 47 


nes, y Lampourdos, y Souza. This nobleman 
was poſi: ſſed of pride ſuitable to a perſon digni- 
fied with ſo many titles. He ſpoke to other 
people with ſo noble a diſdain, carried his noſe 
ſo high, raiſed his voice ſo intolerably, affamed 
ſo imperious an air, and affected fo lofty a gait, 
that all thoſe who ſaluted him were tempted to 
beat him. He was an exceſſive lover of the ſair 
ſex. Cunegonda appeared to him the prettieſt 
woman he had ever ſeen. Ihe firſt thing he did, 
was to aſk whether ſhe was not the Captain's 
wife ? The manner in which he propoſed the 
queſtion alarmed Candidus. He durſt not fay 
that ſhe was his wife, becauſe in reality ſhe was 
not; he durſt not tell him that ſhe was his ſiſter, 
becauſe ſhe was not that neither : and thouzh 
this officious lie might have been of ſervice to 
him, yet his ſoul was too refined to betray the 
truth. Miſs Cunegonda,” ſaid he, ** intends 
me the honour of marrying me, and we beſeech 
your excellency to grace our * with your 
preſence.” 

Don Fernandes d'Ibaraa, y Figueora, y Maſca- 
renes, y Lampourdos, y Souza, turning up his 
muſtaches, forced a grim ſmile, and ordered 
Capt. Candidus to go and review his company. 
Candidus obeyed, and the governor remained a- 
lone with Mifs Cunegonda. He declared his 
paſſion, proteſted that he would marry her the 
next day in the face of the cburch, or otherwiſe, 
as it ſhould be agreeable to a perſon of her 
charms. Cunegonda de ſired a quarter of an hour 


48 CANDIDUS. 


to confider of the propoſal, to conſult with the 
old woman, and to take her reſolution. 

Says the old woman to Cunegonda: Mil, 
you can reckon up ſeventy two deſcents in your 
family, and not one farthing in your pocket Is 

is now in your power in be wife to the greateſt 

Lord in South America, who has very pretty 

whiſkersz and what occaſion have you to pique 

yourſelf upon inviolable fidelity ? You have been 

raviſhed by the Bulgarians; a Jew and an in- 

quiſitor have been in your good graces, misfor- 

tunes have no law on their fide. I confeſs, 

were I in your place, I ſhould have no ſcruple 

to marry the governor, and to make my Lord 

Capt Candidus's fortune. 

When the old woman was thus ſpeaking, wich 
all the prudence which age and experience dictat - 
ed. they deſcried a ſmall veſſel entering the port, 
which had on board an alcaid and alguazils. 
The occaſion of their voyage was this. 

The old woman had ſhrewdly gueſſed, that it 
was 2 cordelicr with a great flceve that ſtole the 
money and jewels from Cunegoada in the city of + 
Badajox, when ſhe and Candidus were making 
their eſcape, The friar having offered to ſell 
ſome of the daimonds to a jeweller, he knew 
them to be the inquiſitor's. The cordelier, be- 
fore he was hanged, confefſed he had ſtole them. 
He deſcribed the perſons he had ſtole them from, 
and told the route they had taken, The flight 
of Cunegonda and Candidus being by this means 
diſcovered, they were traccd to Cadiz; where a 
veſſel was immediately ſent in purſuic of them; 

oo and 


c AN DID us. 49 


and now the veſſel was in the port of Buenos 
Ayres. A report was ſpread that the alcaid was 
going to land, and that he was in purſuit of the 
murderers of my Lord the grand inquiſitor. 
The old woman ſaw in a moment what was to be 
done. You cannot run away,” ſaid the to 
Cunegonda, ** and you have nothing to fear; 
it was not you that killed my Lord: and beſides, 
the governor, who is in love with you, will 
not allow you to be uſed ill: therefore ſtay 
here,” She then ran to Caudidus : ** Fly,” ſaid 
ſhe, ** or in an hour you will b: burnt alive.” 

He had no tive to laſe ; but how could he part 


from Cunegonda, and where could he 17 for 
ſhelter? 


CH AP. XIV. 


How Candidus and Cacambo were received by the 
Jeſuits »{ Paraguay. 
- 18 
Andidus bad brought ſuch a valet with him 
from Cadiz as one frequently meets with in 
| great numbers on the coaſts of Spain, and in 
the colonies. He was a fourth part a Spaniard, 
born of a mongrel in Tucuman ; and had been 
a finging-boy, a ſexton, a ſailor, a monk, a fac- 
tor, a foldier, and a footman. His name was 
Cacambo, and he had an entire regard to his 
malter, who was a very good fort of man. Ela» 
ving ſaddled the two Andaluſian horſes with all 


C expedition; 


50 CAN DID US. 


expedition; Let us go, maſter, let us follow 
the old woman's advice, let us ſet off, and run 
without looking behind us.“ Candidus dropped 
ſom e tears: O my dear Cunegonda,” ſays he, 
„ mult I leave you juſt at a time when the gover- 
nor is going to fee us married! Cunegonda, 
when you are brought ſo far, what will become 
of you ?” She will do as well as ſhe can,” ſaid 
Cacambo; women are never at a loſsz God 
will provide for her ; let us run.” © Whether 
a:t thou carrying me ?“ ſaid Candidus; where 
are we going? What ſhall we do without Cu- 
negonda?“ „ By dt James of Compoltella,” 
ſaid Cacambo, ** you was going to fight againſt 
the Jeſuits z now let vs go and fight for them. 
1 know the road perfectly well; IT will conduct 
you to their kingdom; they will be charmed to 
have a captain that knows the Bulgarian exerciſe; 
you will make a prodigious fortune; though one 
cannot find bis account in one world, he may in 
another. It is a great pleaſure to ſee variety of 
obje As, and to perſot m u exploits.” 

„Have you then bes der Paraguay?“ ſaid 
Candidus, Les in truth I have, faid Cacam- 
bo; I was uſher to the college of Aſſumption, 
and am acquainted with the government of the 
good fathers, as well as | am with the ſtreets of 
Cadiz. It is an admirab'e fort of government. 
The kingdom is upwards of three hundred leagues 
in dian.cter, and divided into thirty p.ovinces. 
The fathers there are ma{lers of every thing, and 
the people have rcthing. It is the maſterpiece of 
reaicn and j.iticc. For my part, I fee nctl.ing 

ſo 


CANDIDUS. 


ſo divine as the good fathers, who wage war here 
againſt the Kings of Spain and Portugal, and in 


51 


Europe are their confe ſſors; who in this coun- 
try kill Spaniards, and at Madrid ſend them to 
heaven. Ibis tranſports me: let us therefore 
puſh forward ; you are going to be the happieſt 
of mortals. What pleaſure will it be ro thoſe 
farhers, when they know that a captain who un- 
derſtands the Eulgatian exerciſe, comes to offer 
them his ſervice !” 

As ſoon as they reached the fi:{t paſs, Ca- 
cam bo told the advanced guard, that a captain 
deſired to ſpeak with my I ord the commandant. 
They went to inform the main guard of it. A 
Paraguayan oſſicet ran on foot to the comman- 
dant to impart the news to him. Candidus and 
Cacambo were at fi: ſt diſarmed, and their two 
Andalufian horſes feized. The two ſirangers 
were introduced between two files of muſketeers: 
the commandant was ſeen at the further end, 
with a three-cornered cap on his bead, his gown 
tucked up, a ſword by his fide, and a ſpontoon 
in his hand. He made a ſignal, and ſtraigbtway 
four and twenty ſoldiers ſurrounded the new 
comers. A ſerjeant told them they muſt wait; 
that the commaudant could not ſpeak to them ; 
that the Rev. Father Provincial does not permit 
any Spaniard to open his mouth but in his pre- 
ſence, or to ſtay above three hours in the pro- 
viace, ** And where is the Rev. Father Pro- 
vincial ?“ ſaid Cacambo. ie is upon the pa- 
rade, aiter ſaying maſs,” anſwered the ſcrjcant ; 
* and you cannot kiſs his ſpurs in leſs than three 
C 2 cuts,” 


52 CANDIDUS. 


bours.” © But,” faid Cacambo, my maſter, 
the Captain, who is ready to die for hunger as 
well as myſelf, is not a Spaniard, but a German, 
cannot we bare ſomething for breakfaſt, while 
we wait for his Revererce?” 

'The ſerjeant went that inflant, to give an 
account of this diſcourſe to the commandanr. 
* Ged he praiſed,” faid the Rev. Commandant; 
„ ſince he is a German, I may ſpeak with him; 
bring him into my arbour.” Candidus was im- 
d iately conducted into a green pavilion, decorat- 
ed witha very handſome balluſtrade of green ard 
gold marble, with intertextures of vines, con- 
taining parrots, humming birds, fly birds, Gui- 
nea- hens, and all other forts of rare birds. An 
excellent breakfaſt was provided in veſſels of 
gold; while the Paraguayans were cating Indi- 
an corn out of wooden diſhes, in the open 
fields, expoſed to the ſultry heat of the (un, the 
Rev. Father Commandant retired to his ar- 
bour. | ee. 

He was a very handſome young man, with a 
full face, tolerably fair, freſh coloured, bis eye» 
brows were arched, his eyes full of fire, his eat 
red, his lips like vermillion ; his air was fome- 
what fierce, but of a fierceneſs which differed 
both from that of a Spaniard and a Jefunt, They 
now returned Candidus and Cacambo their arms, 
which had been taken from them, together with 
the two Andalufian horſ:s; which Cacambo 
took the liberty to ſeed near the arbour, keeping 
his eye upon them, for fear of a ſurpriſe. 

Candidus immediately kiſſed the hem of the 
comman - 


c AN DID us. 53 


commandant's garment ; after which they both, 
by his order, fat down to table. You ate a 
German then?“ ſaid the Jeſuit to him, in that 
language. Yes, my Reverend Father,” (il 
Candidus. In pronouncing theſe words, they 
looked on each other with an extreme ſurpriſe, 
which they were not able to account ſor. And 
what part of Germany do you belong to?“ ſaid 
the Jeſuit. ** To the lower part of Weltphalia?” 
ſaid Candidus: I was born in the caſtle of 
'Thunder-ten-trouckh.” * Heavens! is it poſſi- 
ble!“ cried the commandant. ©* What a miracle 
is this!” cried Candidus. Is it vou?“ faid the 
commandant. *% [Lis impoſſible !” ſaid Candi- 
dus. On this they both fell backwards; but 
getting up again, embraced each other, and ſhed 
tears. What! is it you, my Reverend Father ! 
you! the brother of the fair Cunegonda! you 
that was ſlain by the Bulgarians! you, the Ba- 
ron's ſon! are you a Jeſuir at Paraguay! I mult 
confeſs, that this is a ſtrange world indeed ! Ah 
Pangloſs! Pangloſs! how glad would you have 
been, if you had not been hauged !” 

The commandant ordered the negro ſlaves, 
the Paraguayans, that poured out theic liquor in 
cups of rock cryſtal, to retire. He thanked God, 
and St. Ignatius, a thouſand times; folded Cans 
didus in his arms; their taces ail the while bathe 
ed in tears. You will be more altoniihed, 
more affected, more out of your wits,” ſaid Cane 
didus, when I. tell you that Miſs Cunegonda, 
pour filter, who you thought was ripped up, is ag 
well as Lam.” “ Where?” © In your neighbour- 


C 3 hood, 


54 CAN DID US. 


hood, at the houſe of the governor of Buenos Ay- 
res; and I was going to fight againſt you.” 
Every word they ſpoke in this long converſation, 
heaped ſurpriſe upon ſurpriſe. Their ſouls dwelt 
upon their tongues, liſtened in their ears, 
and ſparkled in their eyes. As they were Ger- 
mans, they made a long meal, (according to 
cuſtom), waiting for the Reverend Father the 
Provincial ; when the commandant thus beſpoke 
Candidus. 


CH AP. XV. 


How Candidus killed the brother of his dear Cune- 


Shall ever have prefent to my memory that 
dreadful day when I faw my father and mo- 
ther killed, and my filter raviſhed. When the 

| Bulgarians were gone, my dear fiſter could be 
found no where; and I, together with my father 
and mother, two maids, and three little lads that 
were murdered, were flung into a cart, in order 
to be buried in a chapel, which belonged to the 
Jeſuits, about two leagues diſtant from our ſamily- 
caſtle. A Jeſuit ſprinkled us with holy water, 
which being very falt, and ſome drops falling 
into my eyes, the Father could-perceive my eye- 
balls move ; on which he put his hand upon my 
fide, and felt my heart beat: I was taken care 
of; and in about three weeks time, no one would 
have thought that any thing had ailed me. _You 
| know 


CAN DID US. 55 


know very well, my dear Candidus, I was very 
handſome, but I grew more ſo: on which ac- 
count the Reverend Father Didrius, ſuperior of 
the houſe, conceived a very great affection for 
me; gave me the habit of a novice; and ſome 
time after ſent me to Rome. The ſuperior was 
then looking out for a recruit of young Jeſuits 
from Germany. For the rulers of Paraguay 
take as few Spaniſh Jeſuits as they can; but 
chooſe foreigners, becauſe they think they can 
tyrannize over them as they pleaſe, I was 
therefore made choice of by the Reverend Father 
General, as a proper perſon to go to work in 
this vineyard. I ſet fail in company with a Po- 
lander, and a Ticolehan. On my arrival I was 
honoured with a ſub-deaconry and a lieutenancy. 

At preſent I am a colonel and a prieſt. We 
ſhall give the King of Spain's army a warm re- 
ception ; I can aſſure you that they will be ex» 
communicated and beaten. Providence has ſent 
| you hither to aſſiſt us. But is it true, that my 
dear ſiſter Cunegonda is in our neighbourhood, 
at the governor of Buenos Ayres's houſe ? Candi- 
dus ſwore that it was as true as the goſpel, On 
this their tears guſhed out afreſh, 

The Baron could not refrain embracing Can- 
didus, whom he called his brother and his pro-+ 
tector. Ah, perhaps,” ſaid he, ve two may 
enter the city in triumph, and recover my filter 
 Cunegonda.” © There is nothing Icould wiſh for 
more,” ſaid Candidus; for I expected to be 
married to her before to-morrow, and I have ſome 
hopes I ſhall yet.” © The inſolence of the fel - 

= al low 1” 


r * oy 4 


— 


36 CANDIDUS. 


low !” replied the Baron ; would you have 
the impudence. to marry my fiſter, who can 
ſhew ſcventy two quarterings in her coat of 
arms?” Candidus being quite thunderſtruck at 
this, made him the following reply: My Re- 
verend Father, all the quarterings in the world 
do not ſiguiſy a farthing. I have delivered your 
fiſter from the hands of a Jew, and an inquiſi - 
tor; ſhe lies under a great many obligations to 
me; and is willing to marry me. Maſter Pan- 
gloſs always told me than all men are equal. I 
am ſure I ſhall have her.“ We will ſee whe- 
ther you will or no, you villain!” ſaid the Jeſuic 
Baron of Thunder-ten tronckh ; and at the ſame 
time gave him a blow on the face with the flat - 
part of his ſword. Candidus drew his immedi» 
ately, and plunged it up to the hilt in the Ba- 
ron's body; but drawing it out again, and look- 
ing upon it as it reeked, he cried out, O God! 
I have killed my old maſter, my friend, my bro- 
ther-in-law, I am one of the beſt natured men 
in the world, yet I have killed three men, and of 
tue three, there were two of them prieſts.” 

Cacambo, who. ſtood ſentry at the door of the 
arbour, and who heard the noiſe, ran in. We 
have nothing now to do but to fell our lives as 
dear as we can, faid his maſter to him; “ and if 
they ſhould force their way into the arbour, let 
us at leaſt die with our arms in our hands.” 

Cacambo, who had been in circumſtances of a 


ſimilar nature, did not ſtand to rack his brains 
for an expedient ; but took the Jeſuit's dreſs, 
which the Baron wore, put it upon Candidus, 
gare 


C AND TD Us. 57 


gave him the dead man's cap, and made him get 
upon his horſe. All this was done in the glance 


of an eye. Let us gallop away, Maſter,” 
ſeys he; © every one will take you for ſome je- 
fuit that is going expreſs, and we ſhall get to the 
frontiers before they can overtake us.“ 

te fled like lightning, before theſe words 
were quite out of his mouth, exclaiming in Sp2- 
niſh, *+* Make way, make way for the Reverend 


CHAP. Xvi. 


What paſſed between our two travellers, and two 


girls, two monkeys, and the ſavages called O- 
reillons. 


AN DID Us and his man had got beyond 
the paſs, before any body in the camp 
knew any thing of the death of the German Je- 
fuir. The provident Cacambo had taken care 
to fill his wallet with bread, chocolate, hams, 
and ſome bottles of wine. They puſhed with 
their Andaluſian horfes into a ſtrange country, 
where they could not diſcover any path or road. 
At laſt they perceived a pleaſant meadow, which 
was divided by a river. Our two travellers turn- 
ed their horſes a grazing. And Cacambo made 
a propoſal to bis maſter to eat a bit, and at the 
fame time fet him the example. Do you. 
think,” ſaid Candidus, that I can fealt upon 
ham, when. I have killed the Baron's ſon, and 
| S& find. 


88 CAN DID US. 
find myſelf under a neceſſity never to ſee Cune- 
gonda again, as long as I live ? What Ggnifies 
It to prolong my days in miſery, fince muſt 
drag them far from her, a puay to remorſe and 
deſpair ? and what will the Journal of Trevoux 
ſay of me? 

Having thus ſpoke, he refuſed to eat a morſel. 
The ſun was now ſet; when our two wanderers, 
to their very great ſurpriſe, heard a faint cry, 
which ſeemed to come from ſome women. It 
was not eaſy to determine whether it was occa- 
fioned by diſtreſs or mirth ; they roſe immedi- 
ately with all the anxiety and apprebenfion to 
which people are ſubject in a ſtrange place. The 
noiſe was made by two girls that ran ſtark na- 
ked on the banks of the meadow, purſued by two 
large monkeys that bit their backſides. Candi- 
dus was moved with pity ; and as he had learn; 
ed to ſhoot among the Bulgarians, and was ſo 
good a markſman, that he would hit a nut in a 
buſh without touching the leaves, be took up his 
ſuzee, which was double charged, and killed the 
two monkeys. God be praiſed, my dear Ca- 
cambo,” ſaid he, I have delivered the two poor 
girls from this great danger; however, if I have 
been guilty of a fin in killing the inquiſitor, I 
have now made ample amends for it, by faving 
the lives of the two girls. They may chance to 
prove a couple of ladies of rank; and who knows 
but this adventure may do us ſome ſervice in | 
this country? 

He vas going on at this rate, thinking that be 


had done a great feat; but how great was his 
ſurpriſe, 


c AN DID usSV. 59 


ſurpriſe, when, inſtead of rejoicing, be ſaw 
the two girls embracing the monkeyd. with 
all the marks of the moſt tender affection! they 
bathed their bodies with tears, and filled the air 
with ſhrieks, that teſtiked the deepeſt diſ- 
treſs. I could never have expected to have 
feen ſo much as this,” ſaid he to Cacambo ; who 
replied, © You have done a fine piece of work 
indeed, Sir, you have killed the ladies“ two ſu eet- 
hearts.” Their ſweethearts ! is is poſſible | you 
are in jeſt ſure, Cacambo; who the duce could 
believe you to be in earneſt ?” © My dear Sir,” 
replied Cacambo, © you are always for making 
mountains of - mole-hills; why ſhould you think 
it incredible that there are ſome countries wacre 
monkeys enjoy the favours of the ladies? Why, 
they ate got by human creature:, in the ſame 
manner as I was got by a Spaniard.” ** Ay,” 
rephed Candiuus, © now I recollect, Mr Panglols - 
has told me, that there may be many an inſtance 
of this kind, and that theſe mixtures gave birth 
to the Egipans, Fauns, and Satyrs ; that a great : 
many of the ancients: had ſeen them with their 
own eyes: but I always-looked upon it as a: 
mere romance.” ** You ought, at preient, to fee. 
your millake,” ſaid Cacambo, and own that 
the doctor was in the right. And you may ſee 
what influence the prejudice of education has 
upon the underſtanding. All I am afraid o 
je, that theſe ladies will play us ſome unlucky 
trick.” 

Theſe wiſe reflexions induced Candidus to 
quit the meadow, and take to a wood; where ho 
C.6 » and: 


60 CANDñ ID Us. 


N 0 
4 9 ==! 


8 * 
* Fer: 
* 


and Cacambo ſupped together: and after heart 
Iy curfing the Portugueſe inquiſitor, the gover- 
nor of Buenos Ayres, and the Baron, they fell 
aſleep. 

On their awaking, they ſound that they could 
not ſtir ; for the Oreillons, the inhabitants of the 
country, whom the two laſſes had informed of 
their adventure, had bound them in the night 
time, with cords made of the bark of a tree. 
They were ſurrounded by a body of fifty Oreil- 
Ions, ſtark naked, armed with arrows, clubs, and 
hatchets made of flint: ſome of them were mak- 
ing a great cauldron boil, others preparing ſpiis ; 
and all of them crying out, ©* He's a Jeſuit, he's 
a Jeſuit; we will make bim pay ſauce for it, we 
will pick his bones for him; let us eat the Je- 
fuir, let us eat the Jeſuit.“ 

« You may remember I told you, my dear 
Maſter,” cried Cacambo in a melancholy tone, 
that thoſe two ladies would play us ſome ugly 

wick.” | | 
CQandidus perceiving the cauldron and the 
ſpits, cried out, O Lord ! we are certainly go- 
ing to be roafted or boiled. Ah! would Mr 
Pangloſs now ſay, on ſeeing nature without diſ- 
guiſe, that whatever is, is right? It may be fo : 
but I muſt confeſs it is a ſad thing to have loſt 
Miſs Cunegonda, and to be ſpitted by the Oreil- 

Ions. | 

Cacambo was never at a loſs for an in- 
vention : © Never deſpair,” faid he to the dif- 
conſolate Candidus. I underſtand the jargon of 
theſe people a little, and am going to ſpeak to 


them . 


4 hy ' l 4 1. * 4 AS. To, 
bu »- 
_— / * 7 
* [4 
y »* 

" E oo 
: d .. 

+" 

— 
\ 

2 


them.” © Don't fail,” ſaid Candidue, to repreſent 
to them the inhumanity of dreſſing men for 
meat, and ſet forth what an unchriſtian practice 
it is.” 

Gentlemen,“ ſays Cacambo, yon fancy 
that you ſhall feaſt on a Jeſuit to-day; a very 
good dith, I make no doubt, nor is there any 
thing more juſt than to ſerve one's enemies fo. 
In effect, the law of natuie teaches us to kiil our 
neighbour, and it is a principle which is put in 
practice all over the globe. If we do not make 
uſe of the right of -ating him, it is becauſe we 
have plenty of victuals without it ; but as you 
have not thatadrantage, it muſt certainly be better 
for you to eat your enemies, than fling away the 
fruit of your victories as a feaſt to crows and ra- 
vens. But, Gentlemen, I ſuppoſe you would not 
be for eating your friends. You fancy you are 
going to ſpit a Jeſuit; but, believe me, I aſſute 
you it is your defender, it is the enemy of your 
enemies that you are going to roaſt. As for my 
part, I was born among you. I be gentleman 
you ſee here, is my maſter, and fo far from be · 
ing a Jeſuit, he has juſt now killed a Jeſuit, 
and he is only dreſſed in his ſpoils; which is the 
cauſe of your miſtake. In order to confirm my 
aſſertion, let one of you take his gown off, carry 
it to the firſt paſs of the fathers, and inform him» 
felf whether my maſter has not killed a Jeſuit 
officer. It is an affair that won't take up much 
time; and you may always have it in your pow- 
er to eat us, if you catch me in a lie. But if I 
have told you the truth, and nothing but the 
truth, 


4 . % 5" 
* ü 8 _ : * * 
7 9 y es i. tl x 
* 
* 
” . 


a  CANDIDUS. 


truth, you are too well acquainted with the prin- 
eiples of natural right, morality, and law, not to 
ſhew us ſome favour.” 
be Oreillons were ſo fully convinced of the 
reaſonableneſs. of his propoſal, that they deputed 
two of their chiefs to go and inform themſelves 
of the truth of what he had told them. The two 
deputies acquitted themſelves of their charge like 
men of ſenſe, and returned ſoon with a favoura- 
ble account. The Oreillons then unbound their 
priſoners, ſnewed them a thouſand civilities, offer- 
ed them women, gave them ſome: hing to refreſh 
them, and conducted them back again to the con- 
fmes of their ſlate, crying all the while, like 
madmen, ** He is no Jeſuit, he is no Jeſuit.” 
Candidus could not belp admiring the ſubject. 
of his deliverance. ** What a people!” ſaid he; 
«-what men! what manners! If I had not had 
the good fortune to whip Miſs Cunegonda's bro» 
ther through the lungs, I ſhould inevitably have 
been eaten up. But after all, the dictates of 
pure nature are always beſt, ſince this people, 
inſtead of eating me ſhewed me a thouſand civi- 
lities as ſoon as they were informed that I was 
not a Jeſuit.” — 


CHAP: 


oun country? the Bulgarians and Abarians kill 


CANDIDUS. 63 


CHAP. XVI. 


Candidus and his man arrive at the country of 
| Eldorado, and what they ſaw there. 


HEN they had reached the frontiers of 

the Oreillons, You obſerve now,” 
 faid Cacambo to Candidus, ** that this part of 
the world is no better than the other. Take a 
fool's advice for once, and let us return to Europe, 
as faſt as ever we can.. How is that poſſible 7 
ſaid Candidus: And pray what part of it 
would you have us go to? hall 1 go into my 


all they meet with there; if I return to Poctu» 
gal, I am ſure 1 ſhall be burnt alive; if we te- 
main in this country, we run the hazard of be- 
ing roalted every moment. And again, bow 
can I think of leaving that part of the globe 
where Miſs Cunegonda lives ? | 

„% Why then, let us take our courſe towneds 
Cayenne,” ſaid Cacambo ; * we ſhall meet with 
ſome Frenchmen there, for you know they are 
to be met with all over the globe; perhaps they 
will give us ſome relief, and God may have pity 
upon us.” 

It was no eaſy matter for them to go to Cay- 
enne, as they did not know whereabouts it lay; 
be ſides, mountains, rivers, precipices, banditti, and 
ſavages, were difficulties they were ſure to en- 

counter in their journey, Their hor.es > 
DI 8 


64 CANDIDUS. 


ed with fatigue, and their proviſions were ſoon 
conſumed, Aſter having lived a whole month 
on the wild fruits, they found themſelves on the 
banks of a ſmall river, which was bordered by 
cocao trees, which at once preſerved their lives, 
and kept up their hopes. 

Cacambo, who was on all occaſions as good a 
counſellor as the old woman, ſaid to Candidus, 
« We can hold out no longer; we have walked 
enough already, and here's an empty canoe up- 
on the ſhore, let's fill it with cocao, then get on 
board, and let it drive with the ſtream; a river 
always carries one to ſome inhabited place. It 
we don't meet with what we like, we are ſ:1re 
to meet with ſomething new.” © Why, what 
you ſay is very right, Cen let us go, faid Can- 
didus, and recommend ourſclves to the care of 
Providence.” 

They rowed ſome leagues between the two 
banks, which were enamelled with flowers in 
ſome places, in others barren, in ſome parts level, 
and in others very ſteep. The river grew broad- 
er as they proceeded, and, at laſt, loſt itſelf in a 
ſpacious horizon, that was bounded by ſome 
icightful rocks, which reached as high as the 
clouds. Our two travellers had the courage to 
trult themſelves to the ſtream. The river be- 
ing very narrow in this place, drove them along 
with ſuch a rapidity and noiſe as fied them with 
the utmoſt horror. In about four and twenty 
hours they got fight of day-light again, bue rheir 
canoe was dathed in pieces againſt the breakers. 
They were obliged to crawl from one rock to 

| | another 


CAN DID US. 65 


another for a whole league; after whieh they 
got ſight of a ſpacious plain, bounded with inac- 
ce ſſible mountains. The country was cultivated 
both for pleaſure and profit ; which latter was al- 
ways mixed with the agreeable. The roads were 
covered, or, more properly ſpeaking, were adorn- 
ed with carriages, whoſe figure and materials 
. were very brilliant; they were full of men and 
women, of an extraordinary beauty, and drawn 
with great ſwiftneſs, by large red ſheep, which 
for fleetneſs ſurpaſſed the fineſt horſes of Andalu- 
ſia, tetuan, or Mequinez. 

This certainly,” ſaid Candidus, ** is 2 bets 
ter country than Weſtphalia.” He and Cacam- 
bo got on ſhore near the firſt village they came 
to. The very children of the village were dreſ- 
fed in gold brocades, all tattered, playing at quoits 
at the entrance of the town. Our two travel- 
lers from the other world amuſed themſelves 
with looking at them. The quoits were made 
of large round pieces, yellow, red, and green, 
and caſt a ſurpriſing light. Our travellers hands 
itched prodigiouſly to be fingering ſome of them: 
for they were almoſt certain, that they were ei- 
ther gold, emeralds, or tubies, the leaſt of which 
would have been no ſmall ornament to the throne 
of the Great Mogul. To be ſure,” ſaid Ca- 
cambo, ** theſe muſt be the children of the king 
of the country, diverting themſelves at quoits.“ 
The maſter of the village coming at that inſtant 
to call them to ſchool : I hat's the preceptor 
to the royal family,” cried Candidus. 

The little 1 immediately quitted their play, 

leaving 


-- 


66 CANDIDUS. 


leaving their quoits and other play- things be- 
hind them. Candidus picked them up, run to 
the ſchool - maſter, and preſented them to him 
with a great deal of humility, acquainting him, 
by ſigns, that their Royal Highnefſes had forgot 
their gold and jewels. 'The maſter of the village 
fmiled, and flung them upon the ground ; and 
having ſtared at Candidus with ſome degree of 
ſurpriſe, walked off. 

Our travellers did not fail immediately to pick 
up the gold, rubies, and emeralds. ** Where 
are we got to now?“ cried Candidus. © The. 
princes of the blood muſt certainly be well edu- 
| cated here, fince they are taught to make fo 
light of gold and jewels.” Cacambo was as much 
ſurpriſed as Candidus. At length they drew 
near to the firſt houſe in the village, which was 
built like obe of our European palaces. There 
-was a vaſt droud of people at the door, and ſtill 
® greater within. They heard very good muſie, 
and their noſtrils were ſaluted by a moſt refreſh». 
ing ſmell from the kitchen. 

Cacambo went up to the door, and heard they 
were ſpeaking the Peruvian language, which 
| was his mother tongue; for every one knows 
that Cacambo was born at 'Tucuman, in a village 
where they make uſe of no other language. Pit 
be your interpreter, maſter, maſter,” cries Ca- 
eambo, in the greateſt raptures, this is an innz 
in with you, in with you.“ 

Immediately two waiters and two maids that 
belonged to the houſe, dreſſed in cloaths of gold 
tiſſue, and having their hair tied back with rib- 

A bands, 


CANDIDUS. 67 


bands, invited them to fit down to table with the 
dandlord. They ſerved up four ſoups, each gar- 
niſhed with two parroquets, a large diſh of bouille, 
that weighed about two hundred weight; two 
apes roaſted, of an excellent taſte, three hundred 
humming birds in one plate, and fix bundred fly 
birds in another ; together with exquiſite ragouts, 
and the moſt delicious tarts, all upon plates of a 
ſpecies of rock cryſtal. After which the lads and 
' maids ſerved them with a great variety of liquors 
made from the ſugar canes. 

The gueſts were moſtly tradefmen and carriers, 
all extremely polite ; who aſked ſome queſtions 
of Cacambo with the greateſt diſcretion and eir- 
eumſpection, and reeeived as ſatisfaftory anſwers. 

When the repaft was ended, Cacambothought, 
as well as Candidus, to diſcharge their reckoning, 
by putting down two of the large pieces of gold 
which they had picked up. But the landlord and 
landlady burſt out into a prodigious,fit of laughing, 
and could not reſtrain it for ſome time. Re- 
covering themſclves at laſt : * Gentlemen,” ſays 
the landlord, we can ſee pretty well that you are 
firangers ; we are not much uſed to ſuch gueſts 
here. Pardon us, if we fell a laughing, when 
you offered us the ſtones of our highways in diſ- 
charge of your reckoning. It is plain you have 
got none of the money of this kingdom; but 
there is no occaſion for it, in order to dine here. 
All rhe inns, which are eftabliſhed for the con- 
veniency of trade, are maintained by the govern- 
ment. You have had but ſorry entertainment 


here, becauſe this is but a poor village : but any 
10 where 


1 CR 


68 AN DID us. 


where elſe you will be ſure to * received in a 


manner ſuitable to your merit.” 

| Cacambo explained the bolt's ſpeech to Can- 
didus, who heard it with as much aſtoniſhment 
and wonder as his friend Cacambo interpreted 
it. What country can this be,” ſaid they to 
each other, which is unknown to the reſt of 
the univerſe, and of fo different a nature from 
ours ? It is probably that country where every 
thing is right; for it is neceſſary there ſhould 
be one of that kind. Andi for all Doctor, Pan- 
gloſs has faid, I could not help noticing many a 
time that nathan extremely bad in Weſt ; 


— 


What they ſaw in the country of Eldorado. 


Acambo could not bide his curiofity from 
Endlerd to him, I am very ignorant, but not 
the worſe on that account : but we have an old 
man here, who has retired from court, and 1s 
counted both the wiſeſt and the moſt communi» 
cative perſon in the kingdom,” And ſaying 
this, without any more ado, be conducted Ca- 


_ Cambo to the old man's houfe. Candidus ated now 


only a ſecond chat acter in the play, and follow- 
ed his ſervant. They entered into a very plain 
houſe ; for the door was nothing bat filver, and 


CANDID US. 69 


the ceilings nothing but gold, but finiſhed with 
fo much taſte, that the richeſt ceilings of Europe 
could not ſurpaſs them. The antichamber was 
indeed only covered with rubies and emeralds, 
but the order in which every thing was arran- 
ged, made amends for this great ſimplicity. 

The old gentleman received the two ſtrangers 
on a ſopha ſtuffed with the feathers of humming 
birds, and ordered them to be ſerved with liquors 
in veſſels of diamond; after which he ſatisfied 
their curioſity in the following manner. 

* 1 am now in my hundredth and ſeventy- 
ſecond year ; add | have heard my deceaſed fa- 
ther, who was groom to his majeſty, mention the 
ſurprifing revolutions of Peru, of which he was 
an cye-witneſs. The kingdom we are in at 
preſent, is the ancient country of the Incas, who 
left it very indiſereetly in order to conquer one 
part of the world; inſtead of which, they thems 
ſclves were all deſtroyed by Spaniards. 

The princes of their family who remained in 
their native country, were more wiſe ; they made 
a law, by the unanimous conſent of the whole 
nation, that none of our inhabitants ſhould ever 
go cut of our little kingdom; and it is owing 
to this, that we have preſerved bath our inno- 
cence and our happineſs. The Spaniards have 
had ſome confuled idea of this country, and 
have called it E/ Dorado; and an Engliſhman, 
named Sir Walter Raleigh, has likewiſe been on 
our coaſts above a hundred years ago: but as we 
are ſurrounded by inacceſſible rocks and preci- 
pices, we . always been hitherto ſheltered 
from 


70 C ANDID Us. 


From the rapacity of the European nations, who 
are inſpired with an inconceivable rage for the 
ſtones and dirt of our land, and who, to poſſeſs 
themſelves of 2 would murder us * to the 
very laſt man.” 

Their conference was pretty long, and 5980 
upon the form of their manners, their women, 
their public ſhews, and their arts. At laſt 

Candidus, who had always a taſte for metaphyſics, 
bid Cacambo aſk, if there was any religion in 
that country ? 

The old gentleman reddening a little, How 
is it poſſible, ſaid he, that you ſhould queſ- 
tion it ? Do you take us for ungrateful wretch- 
es?“ Cacambo then bumbly aſked him, what 
the religion of Eldorado was? This made the 
old gentleman redden again. Can there be 
more religions than one ?” ſaid he: We pro- 
feſs, I believe, the religion of the whole world; 

| we worſhip the Deity from evening to morning.” 
© Do you worſhip but one God ?“ faid Cacam- 
do, who ſtill acted as interpreter in repreſenting 
Candidus's doubts. © You may be ſure we 
do,” faid the old man; ** Gnce it is evident 
there can be neither two, nor three, nor four. 
I muſt confeſs, that the people of your world 
propoſe very odd queſtions.” Candidus was 
not yet wearied in interrogating the good old 
man : he wanted to know how they prayed to 
God in Eldorado. *%* We never pray at all,” 
faid the good refpetable ſage; we have no- 
thing to aſk of him; he has given us all we 

need, and we incefſantly return him thanks.“ 
Candidus 


Candidus had a curioſity to ſee their prieſts, 
and bid Cacambo aſk, where they were. This 
made the old gentleman ſmile. My friends,” 
faid be, we are all of us prieſts; the King, 
and the heads of every family, ſing their ſolemn 
ſongs of thankſgiving every morning, accompa- 
nied by five or fix thouſand muſicians.“ What !”? 
ſaid Cacambo, ** have you no monks to preach, 
to diſpute, to tyrannize, to ſet people together 
by the ears, and get thoſe burnt who are not of 
the ſame ſentiments as themſelves ? ¶ We mult 
be very great ſools indeed if we had,” ſaid the 
old gen:leman; ** we are all of us of the ſame 
opinion here, and we don't underſtand what you 
mean by your monks.“ 

Candidus was in ecſtaſy during all this diſ- 
courſe, and faid to himſelf, This place is valtly 
different from Weſtphalia, and my Lord the 
Baron's caſile. If our friend Pangloſs had ſeen 
Eldorado, he would never have maintained, that 
nothing upon earth could ſurpaſs the caſtle of 
Thunder ten-tronckh. It is plain every body 
ſhould travel.“ ET 

After this long converſation was fniſhed, the 
good old man ordered a coach and fix theep to 
be got ready, and twelve of his domeſtics to 
conduct the travellers to the court. ** Excuſe 
me,“ ſays he to them, if my age deprives me 
of the konour of attending you. The King will 
receive you in a manner that you will not be 
diſpleaſed with; and you will, I doubt nor, 
make allowance for the cuſtoms of the country, 

ik 


72 CANDIDUS. 


if you ſhould meet with any thing that you diſ- 
approve of.” 

Candidus and Cacambo got into the coach 3 
the fix ſheep flew, and in leſs than four hours 
they reached the King's palace, which was fitu- 
ated at one end of the metropolis. The gate 
was two hundred and twenty feet high, and 
one hundred broad: it is impoſlible to de- 
ſcribe the materials it was compoſed of. But 
one may eaſily gueſs, that it muſt have prodi- 
giouſly ſurpaſſed thoſe ſtones and the ſand which 
we call gold and jewels. 

Candidus and Cacambo, on their alightiog 
from the coach, were received by twenty maids 
of honour, of exquilite beauty, who conduct · 
ed them to the baths, and preſented them with 
robes made of the down of bumming-bicds 3 
after which the great officers and their ladies in- 
troduced them into his Majeſty's apartment, be · 
tween two rows of muſicians, conſiſting of a 
thouſand in each, according to the cuſtom of 
the country. 

W hen they approached the foot of the throne, 
Cacambo aſked one of the great officers, in what 
manner they were to behave when they went to 
pay their reſpeCts to his Majeſty, whether they 
were to fall down on their knees or their bellies ; 
whether they were to put their hands upon their 
backfides ; whether they were to lick up the duſt 
of the room; and, in a word, what the cere- 
mony was? The cuſtom is,” faid the great 
officer, to embrace the King, and kiſs him on 

both ſides.” Candidus and Cacambo according- 


CANDIDUS. 73 


ly claſped his Majeſty round the neck, who re · 
ceived them in the moſt polite manner imagin - 
able, and very genteelly invited them to ſup 
with him. 
In the interim, they ſhewed them the city, 
the public edifices, that reach almoſt as high as 
the clouds, the market places embelliſhed with a 
thouſand columns ; fountains of pure water, be- 
ſides others of roſe-water, and the liquors that 
are extracted from the ſugar canes, which play. 
ed inceſſantly in the ſquares, which were paved 
with a kind of precious ſtones, that diffuſed a 
fragrance like that of clores or cinnamon. Cau- 
didus aſked them to ſhew them one of their 
courts of juſtice, and their parliament-houſe ; they 
told him they had none, and that they were 
ſtrangers to law-ſuite. He then enquired if they 
had any priſons, and was told they bad not. 
W hat ſurpriſed him moſt, and gave him the 
greateſt pleaſure, was the palace of ſciences, in 
which he ſaw a gallery of two thouſand paces, 
full of inſtruments for making experiments in 
philoſophy. 

After baving gone over about a thouſandth 
part of the city in the afterncon, they were re- 
eonducted ro the palace. Candidus ſeated him- 
ſelf at table with his Majefiy, his valet Cacambo, 
and a great many ladies. Never was there a 
better entertainment ſeen; and never was more 
wit ſhewn at a table, than what his Majeſty dif 
played. Cacambo interpreted the King's re- 
partees to Candidus; and though they were 
tranſlated, they appeared rapartces ſtill: A thing 
D ' which 


74 CANDIDUS. 


which ſurpriſed Candidus more than any thing 
elſe. 

They ſpent a whole month in this hoſpitable 
manner. Candidus was continually faying to 
Cacambo, I muſt fay it again and again, my 
friend, that the caſtle where I was born was no- 
thing in comparifon of this country where we ate 
now; but yet Miſs Cunegonda is not here; 
and, without doubt, you have left a ſweetheart 
behind you in Europe. If we ſtay where ve 
are, we ſhall be looked upon only like other 
foiks ; whereas if we return to our own world 
only with twelve ſheep loaded with the pebbles 
of Eldorado, we ſhall bc richer than all the 
kings put together; we ſhall have no necd to be 
afraid of the W 1 ; and we may calily re- 
cover Miſs Cunegonda.” 

bis propoſal was extremely agreeable to Ca- 
cambo; ſo fond are we of running abcut, of 
making a figure among our countrymen, and of 
waking orations on what we have ſeen in our 
travels, that theſe two happy men teſolved to be 
no longer to, and accordingly aſked his Majeſty's 
leave to depart. | 

% You are guilty of a very great weakneſs,” 
- ſaid his Majeſty to them: * 1 am not ignorant 
that my countiy is a trifling place; but providing 
it be but paſſable, you had better ſtay in it. 1 
mult indeed conſeſs, that | have no right to de- 
tain people of another nation; it is a degree of 
tyranny inconſiſtent wich our cuſloms and laws 3 
all men are free: ycu may go when you pleaſe; 
but you ought fit to be in101med, that you can» 

or 


"EANFDEILDUS. 775 


not leave us witheut ſome def ty. it ig im- 
peſſible to go againſt the current up the r:pid 
river which runs under the rocks ; your paſſage hi- 
ther was a kind of miracle. The mountains 
which ſurround my kingdom are a thouſand feet 
high, and as ſtecp as a wall; they are at leaſt ten 
leagues over, and their deſcent is nothing but 
precipices. However, fince you ſeem deter- 
mined to leave us, I will give orders immediately 
to the conſtructors of my machines, to contrive 
one to tranſport you with the greateſt eaſe. When 
they hate conveyed you to the other fide of the 
mountains, no one muſt attend you ; becauſe my 
ſubjects have made a vow never to paſs beyond 
them, and are too wiſe to break it There is 
nothing elſe you can aſk of me, which ſhall not 
be granted.” We aſk your Majeſty,” ſaid Ca - 
cambo, very eagerly, only for a few ſheep load- 
ed with proviſions, together with ſome of the 
common ſtones and dirt of your country,” 
be King ſmiled heartily : I cannot,” ſaid 
he, ** conceive what pleaſure you Europeans 
find in our yellow clay; but you are welcome to 
take as much ot it as you pleale, and much good 
may it do you = 
He gave immediate orders to his engineers to 
conſtruct a machine to hoiſt up and tranſport 
theſe two extraordinary perſons out of his king- 
dom. Three thouſand able mechanics ſet to 
work; and iu a fortnight's time the machine was 


compleated, which coſt no more than twenty 


millions Sterling of their currency. 
Candidus and Cacambo were both placed in 
D 2 the 


76 CANDIDUS. 


the machine, together with two large red ſheep 
bridled and fadcled for them to ride on, when 
they were got clear of the mountains; twenty 
theep of burden loaded with proviſions ; thirty 
with the greateſt curioſities of the country, by 
way of preſent; and fifty with gold, precious 
ſtones, and diamonds. ihe King took his leave 
of our two ESSE + with the greateſt * of 
affection. 

It was a very fine appearance to ſee them de- 
part, and the ingenious manner in which they 
and the ſheep were flung over the mountains. 
The philoſophers took their leave of them, after 
having got ſafe over; and now Candidus had 
no other deſire, no other aim, than to go to 
preſent his ſheep to Mifs Cunegonda. We 
have now got enough,” faid he, to pay for the 
ranſom of M:ſs Cunegonda, if the governor of 
Buenos- Ayres will bur part with her. Let ug 
march towards Cayenne, there take ſhipping, 
and then we will Icok out ior ſome luug king- 
dom that we can purchaſe.” 


CHAP. 


AN DID US. 77 


CHAP. XIX. 


What befel them at Surinam, an1 how Candidu: 
became acquainted with Martin, 


THE firſt day's journey of our two travel- 
lers was very pleaſant, being elated with 
the idea of finding themſelves m aſters of more © 
riches than Afia, Europe, or Africa could 
ſerape together. Candidus was fo delighted, 
that he cut out the name of Cunegond: upon al- 
moſt every tree that he came to. The ſecond 
day two of their ſheep ſunk in a morals, and 
were loſt, with all they carried: two others 
died of fatigue a few days after, feven or eight 
died at once for want in à deſart; and a few 
days after others fell down a precipice. To be 
ſhort, after a march of one hundred days, their 
Whole ſtock amounted to no more than two 


Says Candidus, then, to Cacambo, My 
| friend, you fee how periſhable the riches of 
this world are y there is nothing durable, nothing 
to be depended on but virtue, and the bap- 
pineſs of once more feeing. Miſs Cunegonda.” 

4% grant ity” faid Cacambo; but we have till 

two ſheep left, befides more treaſure than ever 
the King of Spain was malter of; and I fee a 
town a good way off that I take to be vyurinam, 
belonging io the Dutch. We aic at the end 
|  $ | of 


78 CANDIDUS. 


of our troubles, and at the beginning of our 
happineſs ” | 
As they drew nigh to the city, they ſaw a 
negro ſtretched on the ground, with only one 
half of his habit, that is to ſay, having only a 
a Pair of drawers of blue cloth; the poor fellow 
had lott his left leg and his right hand. Good 
God!“ ſaid Candidus to him in Dutch, ** fri-nd, 
what do you do here, in this terrible conditi- 
on 2” 1 am waiting for my maſter Mynheer 
Vanderdendur, the great merchant,” replied the 
negro. ** And was it Mynheer Vanderdendur 
that uſe:} you in this manner ?” ſaid Candidus. 
* Yes, Sir,” ſaid the negro, ** it is the cuſtom of 
this country, They give us a pair of linen: draw» 
ers fur our whole cloathing twice a vear. If we 
| Gould chance to have one of our fingers caught 
in the mill, as we are working in the ſugar hou- 
fes, they cut off our hand; if we offer to run a- 
way, they cut off one of cur legs; and I have 
had the misfortune to be found guilty of both 
theſe charges. Such. are the conditions on 
which you cat ſugar in Europe! Yet, when my 
mother ſeld me for ten crowns of Patagon on the 
coaſt of Guinea, ſhe faid to me, my dear boy, 
bleſs our benefaQtors, be always dutiful to them, 
they will make you live happily : you have the 
honour to be aflave to our lords the whites, and. 
will by that means be in a way of making 
the fortunes both of your father and mother. 
Alas! I do not know whether I have made their 
fortunes, but I am ſure they have not made mine. 
The dogs, monkeys, and parrots, area thouſand. 


CAN DID US. 79 


times leſs wretched than we. The Dutch miſ- 
fGonaries who converted me, told me every Sun- 
day, that we are all ſons of Adam, both blacks 
and whites. I am not a genealogift myſelf ; but 
if theſe preachers ſpeak the truth, we are all 
couſin-germans; and then you muſt own, that 
it is a ſhocking thing for them to uſe their 
relations in this barbarous manner.” 

„% Ah! Panglois,” cried Candidus, ** you 
never dreamed of ſuch an abominable piece of 
 villany ! there is an end of the matter; I fee I 
muſt at laſt renounce your optimiſm.” What 
do you mean by optimiſm ?” ſaid Cacambo. 
« Why, ” ſaid Candidus, ** it is the folly of 
momn_—— that every thing is right, when 
it 1s wrong.” He then looked upon the negro - 
with tears in his eyes, and in that condition en- 

tered into Suriname 

| The firſt thing they did here was, to inquire 
whether there was any veffel in the harbour that 
might be hired for Buenos-Ayres. The perfon 
they applied themſelves to was no other than a 
Spaniſh commander, who offered to make an 
honourable bargain with them. He appointed 
to mect them at, an inn, whithec Candidus-and 
the faithful Cactmbo. went to wait for him with 
their two ſheep. 

Candidus, who had bis mind in his tongue, 
told the Spaniard all his adventures, aud confef- 
fed to him that he was determined to run away 
with Miſs Cunegonda. I ſhall take care how 
I carry 2 to Buenos- Ayres, if that is the 
932 the captain ; for I would be banged, 
24 and 


90 CANDIDUS. 


and ſo would you, The fair Cunegonda is my 
Lord's favourite miſtreſs.” 

This was a thunder clap to Candidus ; he 
wept a long time; but at laſt, drawing Cacam- 
bo aſide, I will tell you, my dear friend,” 
ſays he, what I would have you do. We have 
each of us about five or fix millions of diamonds 
in cur pockets: and as you are a much cleverer 
ſeilow than I am, I would have you ga and fetch 
Miſs Cunegonda from Buenos- Ayres. If the 
Governor ſhould make any difficulties, give him 
a million of them ; if that do not ſucceed, give 
him two. As you did not murder the inquiſitor, 
they will have no ſuſpicion cf you: in the mean 
time I will fit out another veſſel, and go and 
wait for you at Venice that is a fafe place, and 
] need not be afraid there of the Bulgarians, 
Abares, Jews, or inquiſitors.“ Cacambo cried 
up the wiſdom of this propotal. He was indeed 
under great concern to leave fo good a maſter, 
who uſed him like a familiar friend ; but the 
pleaſure of being ſerviceable to him ſoon got the 
bettet of the ſorrow he felt in parting with | 
bim. 

They took leave of each other with tears z 
Candidus recommending to. him at the ſame 
time not to forget the good old woman. The 
ſame day Cacambo ſet fail. This . was 
z very honeſt fellow. 

Candidus ſtaĩd ſome days at * waiting 
for another veſſel to carry him and the two ſheep 
which remained to Italy. He bired. ſervants, 
and purchaſed every thing nece ſſary for a long 
voyage; 


C ANDIDd U S. 81 


voyage; at laſt Mynheer Vanderdendur, the 
maſter of a large veſſel, came and offered his 
ſervice. ** What will you have,” faid he to our 
Dutchman, for carrying me, my family, goods, 
and theſe two ſheep you fee here, directly to 
Venice? The maſter of the veſſel aſked ten 
thouſand piaſtres 3 Candidus made no words. 

*© Oh, ob,” ſaid the crafty Vanderdendur to 
himſelf, after baving left him, “if this ſtranger 
can give ten thouſand piaſttes, without making 
any words, he mult be immenſely rich.“ Return- 
ing 2 few minutes after, he let him know, that 
he could not go for leſs than twenty thouſand. 
© Well, you hall have them then,” ſaid Candi- 
dus. 

« Odſo!“ ſaid the captain with a low voice, 
© this man makes no more of twenty thouſand 
piaſtres than he did of ten!” He then returned a 
ſecond time, and ſaid that he could not carry him 
to Venice for leſs than thirty thouſand piaſtres. 
« You ſhall have thirty thoufand then,” replied 
Candidus. 

* Oh, oh, faid the Dutch trader again to 
himſelf, © this man makes nothing of thirty 
thouſand piaſtres, no doubt but the two ſheep 
are loaded with immenſe treaſures; let us ſtand 
out no longer; let us however finger the thirty 
thouſand piaſtres firſt, and then we ſhall ſee. 

Candidus fold two ſmall diamonds, the lea't - 
of which was more than what the captain had 
aſked, He advanced him the money. Tae 
two ſheep were put on board the veſſel. Candi - 
dus followed in a ſmall wherry, intending to join 

| D 5 the 


82 CAN DID US. 


the refſel in the road. Bur the captain eatehed 
his o6-pporiunity, unfurled his ſails unmoored, 
and met with a {avourable gale Candidus, dif- 
tracted and out of his wits, ſoon loſt Gght of 


bim Ab ' eried he, this is a trick wor- 


thy of the old wo ld.“ He te- urned on ſhore o- 
ver whelmed with forrow , for he had certainly 
loſt more than would ſet up a ſcore of kings. 

He ran immediately to the Dutch judge; 
and a+ he was not quite maſter of himſelf, knock- 
ed very loud at the door; he went in, told his 
caſe, and raiſed his voice a little louder than be- 
came him The judge began with making bim 
pav ten thouſand piaſtres for the noiſe he had 
made. After which he heard him very patient- 
ly, and promiſed to examine into the affair as 
toon as ever the trader ſhould return, at the tame 
time making him pay ten thouſand piaſtres as 
t e expeuce of the hearing. 

l his proceeding made Candidus ſtark 1 
He had indeed experienced misfortunes a thou ;- 
ſand times more affecting; but the coolneſs of 
the judge, and the knaviſh trick of the maſter of 
the veſſel who had robbed him, fired his ſpirits, 
and plunged him into a profound melancholy. 
'The villany of mankind preſented iiſelf to his 
mind in all its deformity, and he dwelt upon 
nothing but the moſt 4iſmal ideas. At la't, a 
French veſſel being ready to fail for Bous deaux, 
as he had no ſheep loaded with diamonds to 
catry with him, be paid the common price as 2 
cabin paſſenger, and ordered the crier to give no- 
tice all over the city, that he would pay for the 
paſfage 


CAN DID US. 93 


paſſage and diet of any honeſt man that would 
go t e voyage with him, and he would give him 
two thouſand piaſtres befides ; on condition that 
be would make it appear thar- he wa» the moſt 
diſſatisſied with his circumſtances and the moſt 
unfortunate perſon in that province. 

A vaſt multitude of candidates preſented 
themſelves, enough to have manned a fleet. 
Candidus, deſirous to pick from among the belt, . 
marked out twenty, who ſeemed to him to have 
the beſt pretenſions, and to be the moſt ſociable. 
But as every one of them thought the preference 
due to himſelf, he invited them all to his inn, 
and gave them a ſupper, on condition that each 
of them ſhould take an oath, that he would re- 
late bis adventures faithfully, promiſing to chufe 
that perſon who ſeemed to be tne greateit object 
of pity, and had the greateſt reaſon to be ditia» 


tisfied with his lot, and to give a ſmall preſent to 


the reſt, as a gratification for their trouble. 

The afſembly continued till four the next 
morning As Candidus was employed in hears 
ing their adventures, he could not help recol- 
lecting what the old woman had told him in their 
voyage towards Buenos- Ayres, and the bargain 
ſhe had made in caſe he met with a finyle per- 
| fon in the ſhip; that did noteſt-em himfelf moſt © 

miſerable. He thought upon Pangloſs at every 
incident that was telated. That -Panglo(s,” 
fard he, would be hard put to it to detend this 
ſyſtem. I wiſh ne was but here. Indeed, if 
every thing is ordered for the beſt, it mutt be at 
Eldorado, but no wheie elſe upon earth.” At 
* Last, 


84 CANDIDUS. 


laſt, he determined in favour of a poor ſcholars 
who had wrote teri years for the bookſellers at 
Amſterdam. For he thought there could not be 
a more difagrceable employment on the face of 
the earth. 

This ſcholar, though in other reſpects a good 

ſort of a man, had been robbed by his wife, beat 
by his ſon, abandoned by his daughter, who got 
a Portugueſe to run away with her : had been 
firipped of a ſmall employment, which was all 
he had to ſubſiſt on; and was perſecuted by the 
prieſts at Surinam, becauſe they took him for a 
Socinian. 
It muſt indeed be conf: ſed, that ſome of the 
other candidates were at leaſt as unhappy as he; 
but he got the preference, becauſe Candidus 
thought that a ſcholar would be the fitteſt perſon 
to divert him during the voyage. All his com- 
petitors thought that Candidus did them a great 
piece of injuſtice; but he ſoon convinced them 
to the contrary, by beliowing upon them a hun- 
dred piaſtres a- piece. 


What beſel Candidus and Martin at fea. 


HE ſcholar, whoſe name was Martin, im- 
barked for Bourdeaux along with Candidus. 
They bad both of them ſeen and ſuffered a great 
deal; and if the veſſel had been to fail from Su- 
rinam-to Japan, by the way of the Cape of Good 


Hepe, 


CAN DID US. 295 


Hope, they would have found enough to have en- 
tertained them on the ſubject of — and mo- 
ral evil during the voyage. 

Candidus had one great advantage, however, 
over Martin, which was, that he (till hoped to 
fee Miſs Cunegonda again; but as” for Martin, 
he had nothing to hope for : to which we may 
add, that Candidus had both gold and diamonds: 
and though he had loſt an hundred large red ſheep 
loaded with the greateſt treaſure that the earth 
could produce, though the knavery of the Dutch. 
captain was always uppermoſt in his thoughts; 
yet when he reflected upon what he had leſt in 
bis pockets, and when he talked of Cunegonda, 
eſpecially towards the latrer end of a hearty meal, 
he inclined to Pangloſs's hypotheſis. 

But you, Mr. Martin,” ſaid he to the ſcho- 
lar, © what is your opinion ? what is your no- 
tion of moral and phyfical evil?“ * Sir, replied. 
Martin, the prieſts have accuſed me of being a 
Socinian ; but the truth is, I am a Manichean.” 
© You are in jeſt ſure,” ſaid Candidus ; there is 
not one Manichean in the world!“ „I am one 
though,” ſaid Martin ; I cannot well account for 
it, but yet I am not able to think otherwiſe.” 
The devil muſt be in you then,” ſaid Candidus. 
« He concerns himſelf ſo much in the affairs of 
this world,” faid Martin, © that he may poſſibly 
be in me, as well as any where elſe; but I muſt 
profeſs, that when I caſt my eyes upon this globe, 
or rather upon this globule, I cannot belp think · 
ing, that the Deity has abandoned it to ſome 
malignant being ; I always except Eldorado. I 
never 


88 AN DID US. 


never met with a. eity that did not wiſh the det 
truction of its neighbour-city, nor one family 
that did not defive to extirminate another family. 
All over the world the poor curte the rich, to 
whom they are obliged to cringe z aud the rich 
treat them like ſo many. ſheep, whoſe wool and 
fleſh is ſold to the belt bidder. A-thouſan'i aſs 
faſſins formed into regiments, running about 
from one extremity of Europe to another, prac» 
tiſe murder and rapine according to diſcipline 
for their bread, becauſe it is the moſt honouras 
ble p:ofcfſion in the world; and in thole cities 
which ſeem to enjoy the ſweets of peace, and 
where the arts are cultivated, mankind are de» 
voured. with greater envy, care, and diiquie- 
tudes, than a city meets with troubles when it 
is be ſieged. Private torments are itill more in- 
ſuppurtable than publick calamitics. In a wards 
I have ſeen and experienced ſo much, that I am 
become a Manichean ” 
There's ſame good for all that,” replied : 
Candidus. That may be, ſaid Martin, but 
I do nat know whee to find it.“ 

In the middle of this diſpute, they heard tho 
report of cannon. The noiſe inc:cafiag every 
moineut, each - perſon took out his glais. uy 
this means they efpi d two veſſels engaging each 
other, ab ut three miles diſtant. The wind 
brought the combatants fo near the French veſſel, 
that they had the pleaiuce of ſeeing the fight ve» 
ry cably At length, one of the veſſels gave 
the other a bi.adude between wind aid water, 
which lunk it to the bottom. Candidus and 
| Martin 


EAN DID Us. 87 
Martin plainly perceived about a hundred men 
upon the deck ofthe ſhip that was faking, lifting 
up their hands towards heaven, and making the 
molt diſmal Jamentations; and in an inſtant they 
were all ſwallowed up by the ſea. 

% Well,” faid Martin, © ſee how mankind 
treat one another. It is true,” ſaid Candidus, 
© there's ſomething diabclical in it.“ As he 
was faying fo, he perccived ſomething red and 
glittering ſwimming near his ſhip. They im- 
mediately ſent out the long boat to ſee what it 
could be; when it proved to br one of his ſheep. 
Candidus felt more joy at the recovery of this 
ſheep than he had trouble at the l/ ſs of a hundred 
loaded with the largeſt diamonds of Eldorado. 

The French captain ſoon found, that the cap= 
tain of the cv: quering veſſel was a Spaniard, 
and that the commander ot the veſſe] which was 
ſunk was a Dutch pirate, and the very ſame-who 
had robbed Candidus. The immenſe riches 
which the villain had amaſſed, were buried in 
the ſea along with him, and there wss only a 
ſingle ſheep ſaved. 

Adu ſec,” ſaid Candidus to Martin, that 
wickedneſs ſometimes meets with condign pu- 
uviſhment ; that raſcal the Dutch commander, 
has met with the fate he mernited.” © Yes,” 
faid Martin; © but why ſhould the paſſengers 
on board his ſhip alſo periſh together with him ? 
God indeed has puniſhed the villain, but the de» 
vil has drowned the reſt.” 

In the mean time, the Frenchman and the 
Spaniard continued their courſe, and Candidus 

his 


\ 


L CANDIBUS. 


his debates with Martin. They diſputed fifteen 
days without intermiſhon ; and, at the end of 
the ſifreen days, they were no farther advanced 
than when they began. But they chatted, they 
communicated their ideas to each other, and 
eomforted each other reciprocally. Candidus 
careſſing his ſheep, ſaid, ** Since I have found 
you, I have ſome hopes of recovering Cunegons 
| da.” | 


CHAP. XXI. 


Candidus and Martin approach the co:, of France, 
and diſpute. 


HEY at length deſcried the coaſt of France. 

% Have you ever been at Francz, Mr Ma- 
tin ?” ſaid Candidus. © Yes,” rephed Martin, 
have run over ſeveral of its provinces. In ſome, 
one half ofthe inhabitants are mere idiots ; in o- 
rhers they are too cunning : in others either ve- 
ry good natured or very brutiſh; in others they 
affect to be wirs; and in allof them, their ruling 
paſſion is love, the next lying, and the third to 
talk nonſenſe.” But, Mr Martin, have you ever 
been at Paris ? Tes, I have been at Patris: 
there are all theſe forts there ; it is a mere 


chaos: a croud in which every one is in ſearch 
after pleaſure, but no one finds it, as far as I have 
been able to diſcover. I ſpent a few days there; 
and, at my arrival, was robbed of all I had by 
fome ſharpers, at the fair of ot. Germain, Nay, 

1 


CANDIDUS. 929 


I myſelf was taken up for a robber, and was eight 
days in priſon; after which I turned correQtor 
of the preſs, to get a ſmall matter to carry me 
on foot to Holland. I know the whole tribe of 
ſcribblers, with malecontents, and fanaticks. 
They fay the people are very polite in that city; 
I with 1 could believe them.” 

For my part, I have no curioſity to ſee 
France,” faid Candidus ; you may eaſly fancy, 
that when a perſon has once ſpent a month at 
Eldorada, he is very indifferent whether he ſeen 
any thing elfe upon earth, except Miſs Cunegon- 
da. I am going to wait for ber at Venice; we 
will go through France in our way tewards Italy. 
Won't you bear me company?“ « With all my 
heart,” ſaid Martin; they fay that Venice 
is not fit for any but Noble Venetians ; but, 
for all tha, they receive ſtrangers very well, 
provided they hase a good deal of money. I 
have none: you have; therefore PII follow you 
all the world over. Now I think of it,” faid 
Candidus, do you imagine that the earth was 
originally notbing but water, as is aſſerted in the 
great book belonging to the Captain * I don't 
believe a word. of it,“ ſaid Martin, no more 
than I do of all the reveries that have been pa- 

bliſhed for ſome time. But far what end was 
the world created then? ſaid Candidus. To 
make one mad,” replied Martin. Was nat 
you vaſtly ſurpriſed,” continued Candidus, 1 
the paſſion which the two girls in the country 
of the Oteillons bad for theſe two apes, whoſe 
1 I related to you 2” an laid Mar- 


95 CANDIDUS. 


tin; 1 ſee nothing ſtrange in that paſſion 3 for 1 
have ſeen ſo many ſtrange things already, that 1 
can look upon nothing as extraordinary. Do 
you believe,” ſaid Candidus, that mankind al- 
ways cut one another's throats; that they were 
always liars, knaves, treacherous, and ungrateful; 
always thieves, ſharpers, highwaymen, lazy, en 
vious, and gluttone ; always drunkards, miſers, 
ambitious, and blood-thirſty ; always backbiters, 
debauchees, fanaticks, hypocrites, and fools 7 
4% Do you not believe, faid Martin, that 
hawks bave always preyed upon pigeons, where 
they could light upon them ? Certainly,” repli- 
ed Candidus. Well then,” ſaid Martin, ** if 
the hawks have always had the ſame nature, what 
reaſon can you give why mankind thould have 
changed theirs?” © Aye,” aid Candidus, it 
is very different, becauſe free wil} %% 

In the midſt of this diſpute, they arrived at 


cCHA P. XIII. 
What befel Candidus and Martin in France. 


Andidus remained no longer at Bourdeauz 
than till he could difpoſe of ſome of the 
pebbles of Eldorado, and furniſh himſelf with a 
poſt- chaiſe large enough to hold: two perſons ; 
for he could not part with his philoſopher Mar- 
tin. He was indeed very ſorry to part with bis” 
theep, which he left at the academy of ſciences 
at Bourdeaux ; who. propoſed for the ſubject of 


* 


CANDIDUS. 91 


this year's prize, the reaſon why this ſheep's 
wool was red; and the prize was adjudged to a 
learned man in the North, who demonſtrated by 
A plus B minus C divided by Z, that the ſheep 
mult be red, and die of the tot. | 

In the mean time, all the travellers whom 
Candidus met in the inns on the road, telling 
bim they were going to Paris, this general eager- 
veſs to ſee the capital, inſpired him at length 
with the ſame defire, as it was not much out of 
the way in his journey towards Venice. 

He entered Paris by the. ſuburb of St Margeau, 
aud fancied himſelf to be in the dutiell village 
tn Weltphalia. 

| Candidus was ſcarce gat to bis inn, when he 
was ſeized by a flight indiſpofition, cauſed by his 
fatigues. As he had a very large diamond on 
bis finger, and the people bad taken notice of a 
pretty heavy box among his baggage, in a mo- 
ment's time he had no leſs than two phyſicians to 
attend him, who did not ftay to be ſent for; a 
few intimate friends, that never left bim, fat up 
with him, together with a couple of female friends 
that took care to have bis broths warmed. 
Martin, I remember that when I was fick at, 
Paris, in my ficſt journey, I was very low in 
pocket, and could meet neither with friends, nur» 
ſes, nor phyſicians ; but I recovered.” 

In the mean while, what by medicines and. 
bleedings, Candidus's diſorder beginning togrow 
a ſerious affair, the clerk of the parith came, 
- with great modeſty, to aſk a bill for the other 
world, payable to the bearcr, Candidus refuſing 


92 CANDIDUS. 


to accept it, the nurſes aſſured bim that it was a 
new faſhion. Candidus replied, that he was re- 
ſolved not to follow the faſhion. Martin was 
going to throw the prieſt out of the window, 
The clerk ſwore that Candidus ſhould not be bus 
ried. Martin ſwore that he would bury the 
elerk, if he continued to be troubleſome. The 
quarrel grew high, and Martin took the prieſt 
by the ſhoulders,. and puſhed him out of doors. 

This occaſioned a great deal of ſcandal, an action 
was commenced againſt him. 

Cangidus recovered ; and all the while he 
was upon the mending hand, had the beſt of 
company to ſup with him. They gamed high ; 
and Candidus was very much ſurpriſed that he 
never could throw an ace; but Martin was not 
ſurpriſed at all. 

Among thoſe who did him the honours of the 
town, was a little abbe of Perigord, one of thoſe 
people that are always buſy, always alert, always 
ready to do one fervice, forward, fawning, and 
accommodating themſelves to every one's hu- 
mour ; who watch for ſtrangers on their jour» 
ney, tell them the fcandalons biſtory of the 
town, and offer them pleaſures at all prices. This 
man carried Candidus and Martin to the plays. 
houſe, where a new tragedy was to be acted. 
Candidus found himſelf ſeated near fome critics ; 
but this did not keep him from crying at fome 
ſcenes that were well ated. One of thefe cri-. 
tic, who flood at his elbow, ſaid to him be- 
tween the acts, You was in the wrong to 
ſhed tears; that's a 2 actreſs, the actor 

who. 


CANDIDUS. 03 


who plays with her is worſe than ſhe, and the 
piece is ſtill worſe than the actors. The author 
does not underſtand a fingle word of Arabic, 
and yet the ſcene lies in Arabia : but beſides, he 
is a man who does not believe that our ideas are 
innate ; I'll bring you twenty pamphlets againſt 
him by to-morrow morning.” Sir,“ faid the 
abbe of Perigord, did you take notice of that 
young man with the lively countenance and fine 
ſhap< ? he will not coſt you more than ten thous 
fand francks per month, and fifty thouſand 
crowns in diamonds.” I have not above a day 
or two to ſpare,” replied Candidus, ** becauſe I 
have one to meet at Venice, which hurrics me.“ 
In the evening, aſter ſupper was over, the 
inſinuating Perigourdin redoubled his compli- 
ments of ſervice, and his oſſiciouſneſs. You 
ate then, Sir,” ſaid he, under an engagement 
to go to Venice?“ © Yes, Mr Abbe,” ſaid Can- 
didus, I am under a neceſſity to go to meet 
Miſs Cunegonda.” Being then invited with the 
pleaſure of ſpeaking about the object he loved, 
be related, according to cuſtom, a part of his 
adventures with that illuſtrious Weſtphalian. 
fancy.“ ſaid the Abbe, that Miſs Cune- 
gonda is a lady of very great parts, and that ſhe 
writes charming letters :?? © I never received 
any from ber,” ſaid Candidus: ** for figure to yours 
ſelf, that being driven out of the caltle on ac- 
count of my pathon for her, I could not write 
to her; that ſoon aſter I heard the was dead; 
that afterwards I found her, and loſt her; and 
that 1 have now ſent an expreſs to her about two 
thouſand 


94 CAN DID US. 
thouſand five hundred leagues from hence, and 
wait for an anſwer,” 

The Abbe heard bim with great attention, 
and appeared to be a little thought ul. tle ſoon 
took leave of the two ſtrangers, after a moſt af- 
fectionate embrace. [he next day, as ſoon as 
Candidus awaked, he received a letter, couched 
in the following terms. 

Sir, my deareſt love, I have been Ul theſe 
eight days in this town, and have learned thar 
you are here. I would fly to your arms, if I 
were able to ftir. I knew of your paſſage to 
Bourdeaux, where I have left the faithful Cacam- 
bo and the old woman, who are to follow me ve- 
ry ſoon. The governor of Buenos- Ayres has 
taken all from me, but your heart is (till left me. 
Come and fee me; for your preſence will either 
reſtore me to life, or kill me with pleaſure.” 

This charming, this uncxpeQte letter, tranſ- 
ported Candidus with an inezpreſſible joy; and 
the indiſpofition of his dear Cunegonda over- 
whelmed him with forrow. Diſtracted between 
theſe two paſſions, he took his gold and diamonds, 
and got ſomebody to conduct him and Martin 
to the houſe where Miſs Cunegonda was lodg- 
ed. 

On his entrance he trembled every limb, his 
heart beat quick, and his voice was choaked up 
with ſighs; he was going to open the curtains of 
the bed, and bid them bring him a light. „ Take 
care, Sit,“ ſaid the nurſe, * the can't bear light 
for the world, it would overpower her; and 


immediately ſhe drew the curtains cloſe again. 
+4 My 


SAN DID US. N 


« My dear Cunegonda,” ſaid Candidus diſſolved 
in tears, bow do you find yourſelf ? though 
you can't ſee me, you may ſpeak to me at Jeait.” 
s She can't ſpeak,” ſaid the maid. The lady 
then put a plump hand out of the bed, which 
Candidus for fome time bathed wirh his tears, 
and afterwards filled with diamonds, —,⁵LV a 
bag ſull of gold upon the caſy chair. 

In the middle of his tranſports, came in a 
lifeguard- man, followed by the Abbe Perigour- 
din and a file cf ſoldiers. L here,” ſaid he, 
6« are the two ſuſpected foreigners.” He cauſed 
them to be immediately ſeized, and ordered his 
men to drag them to priſon. * Ic is not thus 
they treat travellers at Eldorado,” faid Candidus. 
« | am more a Manichean than ever,” ſaid Mar- 
tin. * But, pray, Sir, where are you going to 
carry us?” ſaid Candidus. Fo a hole in the 
dungeon,” ſaid the life-guardman. . 

Matin now finding his blood grow ſomewhat 
cool, fancied that the laſs who pretended to be 
Cunegonda, was a cheat; that the Abbe Peri- 
gourdin was a ſharper, who had taken advantage 
of Candidus's ſimplicity; and that the lifeguard- 
man was another ſharper, whom they might eaſi- 
ly get clear of. 

Rather than expoſe bimſelf befere a court of 
juſtice, Candidus, ſwayed by his advice, and be- 
fides very impatient to fee the real Cunegonda, 
offered the life guardman three ſmall diamonds, 
worth about three thouſand piſtoles each. Ah, 
Sir,“ ſaid the man with the ivory baton, ** though 
you had committed all the crimes that can be 


imagine, 


96 CAN DID US. 


imagined, this would make me think you are the 
honefteſt gentleman” in the world ! Three dia- 
monds ! worth 3000 piſtoles apiece ! Sit, in- 
ſtead of putting you in a dungeon, I would loſe 
my life for you: All ſtrangers are arreſted here, 
_ but let me alone for that; I have a brother at 
Dieppe in Normandy ; Pll conduct you thither 3 
and if you have any diamond to give him, he 
will take as much care of you as | myſelf.” 
And why do you put all ſtrangers under 
arreſt?” ſajd Candidus. The Abbe Perigourdin 
then put in his word: Becauſe,” faid he, 4 
beggar of Atrebatia liſtened ro ſome fooliſh ſto- 
ries, which made him guilty of a parricide, not 
ke that in May 1610, but like that in Decem- 
ber 1594 ; and juſt like thoſe that a great ma ; 
ny other beggars have been guilty of, in other 
months and other years, after liſtening to _ 
ſtories.” 

The life-guardman then gave him a more par- 
ticular account of their crimes. * Oh the mon- 
ſters!“ cried Candidus; are there then ſuch ter- 
rible crimes among pecple that can dance and 
fing? Can I not immediately get out of this 
country, where monkeys provoke tygers ? I have 
ſeen bears in my own country, but I never met 
with men except at Eldorado. In the name 
of God, Me Officer, conduct me to Venice, 
where I am to wait for Miſs Cunegonda.“ 1 
can conduct you no where except to Lower Nor- 
mandy, faid our mock officer. Immediately he 


ordered his irons to be ſtruck off, faid he was 


ander a miſtake, 22 bis men, conducted 
Candidus 


CANDIDUS. "7 


Candidus and Martin to Dieppe, and left them 
in the hands of his brother. 

There was then a (mall Holland Trader in 
the harbour. The Norman, by means of three 
more diamonds, become the molt ſerviceable man 
in the univerſe, put Candidus and his attendants 
fafe on board the veſſel, which was ready to fail 
for Portſmouth in England. 

This was not indeed the way to Venice; 
but Candidus thought he had eſcaped from hell, 
and reſolved to reſume his voyage towards Venice 
the firſt opportunity that offered. 


CHAP. XXIII. 


Candidus and Martin go to the Engliſh coaft, and 
what they ſaw there. 


os H! Pangloſs! Pangloſs! ah! Martin! 
Martin! ah | my dear Cunegonda! 
what a world is this !“ faid Candidus on board 
the Dutch ſhip. © A very foolith and abomina- 
ble one indeed,“ replied Martin. You are 
acquainted with England,” faid Candidus to him; 
« are they as great fools as the French?“ “ They 
have a different kind of folly,” faid Martin;“ you 
know that theſe two nations are at war about 
a few acres of ſnow towards Canada, and that they 
have ſpent a great deal more upon this fine war, 
than all. Canada is worth. To tell you with pre- 
'cifion whether there are more people fit to ſend 
to a madhouſe in one country than in another, is 

E more 


93 e AN DIDVs. 


more than my weak capaeity is able to perform. 
I only know in general, that the p-ople we are 
going to ſee are very melancholic.” 

As they were talking in this manner, they 
arrived at Portſmouth. The ſhore was covered 
with a multitude of people, who were looking 
very attentively at a pretty luſty man who vas 
knecling, with ſomething tied before his eyes, 
on the deck of one of the men of war; four ſol- 
diers, that were placed oppoſite to him, lodged 
three balis apiece in his head, with the greateſt 
eoolneſs imaginable, and the whole aſſembly went 
away very well ſatisfied. % What is the meaning 
of this?“ ſaid Candidus; and what demon 
is it that exerciſes his dominion all over the 
globe?” | 

He inquired who the luſty gentleman was that 

was killed with ſo much ceremony. He is an 
admiral*,” replied ſome of them. And why 
was this admiral killed ?” “* Becauſe,” faid they, 
* he did not kill men enough himſelf. He en- 
gaged the French admiral, and was found guilty 
of not being near enough to him.” © But then,” 
ſaid Candidus, was not the French admiral as 
far off from the Engliſh admiral, as he was from 
him ?“ That is what cannot be doubted,” re- 
plied they. But in this country it is of very 
great ſervice to execute an admiral now and then, 
in ordet to make the reſt fight the better.“ 


Candi- 


* The author alludes to the caſe of Adm. Byng, 
who was thot on board the Monarque man of war at 
Portſmouth, March 14, 1757. 


C AN DID US. 99 


Candidus was fo aſtoniſhed and ſhocked at 
what he had ſeen and heard, that he would not 
fet foot on ſhore, but agreed with the maſter 
of the Dutch veſſel (though he was ſure to be 
robbed by him, as well as by his countryman at 
Surinam) to carry him directly to Venice. 

The maſter was ready in two days. They 
coaſted it all along France. Paſſing within ſight 
of Liſbon, Candidus gave a very deep groan. 
They paſſed the Streights, made the Mediterra- 
nean, and at laſt arrived at Venice. 

„The Lord be praifed,” ſaid Candidus, em- 

bracing Martin, it is here that I ſhall ſee the 
fair Cunegonda again! I have as good an opi- 
nion of Cacambo, as of myſelf. t very thing is 


right, every thing is well, every thing is the beſt 
in the world,” 


CHAP. xv. 
Concerning Paquetta, and Father Girofflce, 


O ſooner were they arrived at Venice, than 
he cauſed Cacambo to be ſearched for in all 
the inns, in all the coffee-houſes, and among all 
the ladies of pleaſure, but could not find him. 
He ſent daily to all the ſhips and batques 
that arrived; but no news of Cacambo, 
« Well!“ ſaid he to Martin, I have had time 
enough to go from S utinam to Bourdeaux, from 
Bourdeaux to Paris, from Paris to Il'ieppe, from 
Dieppe to Portſmouth : aſter that I have coaſted 
E 2 along 


106 CANDIDUS. 


along Portugal and Spain, and traverſed the 
Mediterranean, and have now been ſome months 
at Venice, and yet, for all that, the lovely 
Cunegonda is not come Inſtead of her, I have 
only met with a bite, and an abbe of Perigord. 
Cunegonda is certainly dead; and 1 have no 
more to co but die too Ah! it would have 
been far better for me to have ſtaid in that para- 
diſe, Dorado, than to have returned again to tb is 
curled Furope. You are certainly right, my 
dear Martin: all is illußon and 2 
bete. 

He fell into a deep melancholy ; and never 
ſrequented the opera, or the other diverſions of 
the carnival ; nay he was proof againſt all the 
charms of the fair fex. Martin faid to bim, 
% You are very fimple indeed, to fancy that a 
-mongrel valet, with five or fix millions in his 
pocket, would go to the end of the world in 
queſt of your miſtreſs, and bring her to Venice. 
If he meets with ber, he'll keep-her for bimſelf; 

if he cannot find her, he'll get ſomebody ele. 
Let me adviſe you to forget both your valet Ca- 
cambo and your miſtreſs Cunegonda.” Martin 
was a moſt wretched comforter. The melancha- 
ly of Candidus increafed ; and Martin never 
ceaſed preaching that there was but very little 
virtue and as little happineſs to be found on 
earth, excepting, perhaps, at Eldorado, where 
it was almoſt impoſſible for any one to go. 

As they were diſputing on this im portant ſub- 
ject, and waiting ſor S Candidus per- 


45 ceived 


. 


E 


eeived a young Theatin + in the place g of St. 
Mark, holding a girl under his arm. The The . 
atin friar looked freſh, plump, and full of vigour : 
his eyes were ſparkling, his air bold, his mien 
lofty, and his gait firm.. This girl was tolerably 
handſome, and was ſinging a ſong : ſhe ogled 
her Theatin friar with a great deal of paſſion, 
and now and then would give his fat cheeks a 

pinch. | 
At leaſt you will grant me,” ſaid Candidus 
to Martin, “that theſe folks are happy. I have 
never found any but unhappy wretches till now 
all over this habitable giobe, excepting at Eldo- 
rado; but as for the girl and the Theatin, I 
will lay any wager that they are as happy as hap- 
py can be.” 1 will lay they are not,“ faid 
Martin, * Only let us invite them te dinner,” 
ſaid Candidus, and then you ſhall fee if l am 
miſtaken or not.” 
He immediately accoſted them, made them a 
bow, and invited them to his inn to eat macaro- 
ni, pariridges of Lombardy, and caviare, and to 
drink montepulciano, lachryma Chriſti, Cyprus, 
and damos wine. The girl bluſhed; the The- 
atin accepted of the invitation, and the girl fol- 
lowed him, looking at Candidus with eyes of 
ſurpriſe and confuſion, from which the tears 
trickled. Scarce was ſhe entered into Candidus's 
room, when ſhe ſaid to him, What! does 
not Mr Candidus know his old friend Paquetta 
E 3 again ?“ 


+- An order of religious. 
4 Place is the ſame as our ſquares. 


102 CANDIDUS. 


again?“ At theſe words, Candidus, who had 
not yet looked at her with any degree of atten- 
tion, becauſe - Cunegondo ingroffed all his 
thoughts, ſaid to her, Ah! my poor girl. is 
it you who reduced Dr Pangloſs te the fine 
plight in which I ſaw him?“ 

« Ah, dit! tis I myſelf,” ſaid Paquetta; 1 
find you know the whole ſtory , and IL have been 
informed of all the terrible diſaſters which have 
happened to my Lady the Baroneſs, and the fair 
Cunegonda. My fate, I affure you, has not 
been leſs melancholy. I was very innocent when 
you knew me. A cordelier, who was my con» 
feſſor, eaſily ſeduced me. The effects of it were 

terrible: I was obliged to leave the caſtle ſome 
time after the Baron kicked your backſide out of 
the door. If a celebrated quack had not taken 
pity on me, Iſhculd have periſhed. I was the 
quack's miſtreſs for ſome time, by way of recom» 
pence. His wife, who was as jealous as the de- 
vil, beat meevery day moſt unmercifully ; ſhe was 
a very fiend of hell. The doctor was one of the 
uglieſt fellows I ever ſaw in my life, and I one 
of the moſt wretched creatures that ever exiſted, 
to be beat every day for the ſake of a man I hat- 
ed. You know how dangerous it is for a ſcold- 
ing woman to be married to a doctor. Being 


quite exaiperated with his wife's behaviour, he 
gave her one day ſo efficacious a remedy to cure 
her of a flight cold ſhe had, that ſhe died two. 
hours after in the moſt horrid convulſions. My 

milſtreſs's relations entered a criminal action a» 
gainſt wy maſter; be took to his heels, and I 


CAN DID U S8. 103 


was carried to jail, My innocence would never 
have ſaved me, if I had not been pretty hand- 
fome The judge acquitted me, on condition 
of his ſucceeding the detor. I was ſoon after- 
wards ſupplanted by a rival, driven out of doors 
without any recompence, and obliged to continue 
this abominable occupation. which appears fo 
pleaſant to you men, while it is to us women the 
very abyſs of miſery. Iam come to practiſe my 
protefhon at Verice. Ab, Sir, if you could i- 
magine what it is to be obliged to careſs indiffe- 
rently an old merchant, a counſellor, a monk, a 
gondolier, or an abbe; to be expoſed to all ſorts 
of inſults and outrages; to be often reduced to 
borrow a petticoat, to have it lifted up by a diſ- 
agreeable raſcal ; to be robbed by one gallant of 
what one has got from another ; to be ranſomed 
by the peace officer, and to have nothing elle in 
proſpect but a frightful old age, an hoſpital, or a 
dunghill; you would confcſs that I am one of the 
moſt unfortunate ci eatures in the world.” 
Paquetta opened her mind in this manner to 
the good Candidus, in his cloſet, in the preſence 
of Martin; who faid to Candidus, ** You ſee 
I bave won one half of the wager already.” 
Brother: Girofflee waited in the dining-room, 
and drank a glaſs or two while he was waiting for 
dinner. But,” faid Candidus to Paquetta, 
« you had an air ſo gay, ſo content, when | firſt 
met you, you ſung, and cateſſed the Theatin, 
with ſo much warmth, that you ſeemed to me as 
happy then as you pretend to be miſerable now.” 
2 Ab, Sir,” replied Paquetta, ** this is one of the 
E 4 miſeries 


Do 


104 CANDIDUS: 


miſeries of the trade. Yeſterday I was robbed 
and beaten by an officer, and to-day Iam obliged 
to appear in good humour to pleaſe a monk.“ 
Candidus wanted no more to be fatisfied, and 
owned that Martin was in the right, They fat 
down to table with Paquetta and the Theatin 3 
the repaſt was very entertaining, and, towards 
the end, they began to ſpeak to each other, with 
ſome degree of confidence. ** My father,” faid 
Candidus to the monk, you ſeem to enjoy a 
Nate that all the world might look on with envy. 
The flower of health bloſſoms on your counte» 
nance, and your phyſtognomy ſpeaks nothing 
but bappineſs ; you have a very pretty girl to di- 
vert you, and you feem to be well fatisficd with 
your ſtation as a Theatin monk.” 

« Faith, Sir,” ſaid Brother Gitoſſlee, I with 
that all the Lheatins were at the bottom of the 
ſea. I have been tempted a bundred times to 
ſet fire to the convent, and to go and turn Turk. 
My parents forced me, at the age of fiiteen, to 
put on this curſed habit, to encreaſe the fortune 
of an elder brother of mine, whom God confound. 
Jealouſy, diſcord, and fury refide in the con» 
vent, It is true indeed, I have preached a few 
paultry ſermons, which brought me a little mo; 
ney ; one part of which the prior robs me of, the 
remainder ſerves me to ſpend upon the ladies; 
but every evening when I enter the monaſtery, I 
am ready to daſh out my brains againſt the wall 
of the E and all the brotherhood are in 
the ſame caſe.” 

Martin turning towards Candidus, with his u- 

ſual 


c AN DID US. 10; 


ſual coolneſs, ** Well,“ ſaid he to him, „ have 
not I won the whole wager now ?” Candidus 
gave two thouſand piaftres to Paquetta, and one 
thouſand to Brother Girofflee I'll anſwer for 
it,” ſaid he, this will make them happy.” 1 
don't believe a word on't, ſaid Martin; “ you 
may perhaps make them a gr-at deal more miſe» 
rable with your piaſtres.” ** Be that as it may,” 
faid Candidus : but one thing comforts me, I 
ſee that one often finds thoſe perſons whom one 
never expected to find any more; and as I have 
found my red ſheep and Paquetta agzin, it may 
be I may find Cunegonda again too.“ © I wiſh,” 
ſaid Martin, * that ſhe may one day make you 
happy; but it is what 1 very much queſtion.” 
% You are very incre/ul»us,” ſaid Candidus. 
% That is what I always was,” ſaid Martin, 

« But only look on thoſe gondoliers,” ſaid 
Candidus; are they not perpetually Gnging ?” 
4% You don't ſee them at home, with their wives, 
and their monkeys of children,” ſaid Martin. 
« [The Joge has his inquietudes, and the gondo- 
liers have theirs. Indeed, generally ſpeaking, the 
condition of a gondolier is preferable to that of a 
doge ; but I believe that the difference is ſo 
ſmall, that it is not worth the trouble of examin- 
ing into.“ 

People talk,” ſaid Candidus, * of Seignior 
Procurante, who lives in that fine palace upon 
the Brenta; and who entertains ſtrangers in the 
moſt polite manner. They pretend that this 
man never felt any uneaſineſs.“ * I ſhould be 
very glad to [ce fo extraordinary a phænomenon, 
| E 5 faid 


106 CAN DID US. 

faid Martin. On which Candidus immediately 
ſent to Seignior Frocurante, to get permiſſion to 
viſt him the day following. 


C HAP. XXV. 


The viſit to Seignior Pocecurante, the Noble Ve- 
netian. 


Andidus and Martin went in a gondola on 
the Brenta, and arrived at the palace of the 
Noble Pococurante. His gardens were very ſpa- 
cious, and ornamented with fine ſtatues of marble, 
and the palace itſclf was a piece of excellent 
architecture. The maſter of the houſe, a very 
wealthy man, about threeſcore, received our two 
inquiſitives very gentcelly, but with very little 
heartineſs ; which, though it confuſed Candidus, 
did not in the leaſt make Martin uneaſy. | 
Two young girls, handſome, and very neatly 
dreſſed, ſerved them at firſt with chocolate, which 
was frothed extremely well. Candidus could not 
help dropping them a compliment on their beau- 
ty, their politeneſs, and their addreſs. ** The 
creatures are well enough,” ſaid the ſenator Po- 
cocurantez ** ] ſometimes make them lie in my 
bed, tor I am quite tired of the gicls of the town, 
of their coquetry, their jealouſies, quarrels, hu- 
mours, monkey tricks, pride, follies, and the ſon- 
nets one is obliged to make, or hire others to make 
for them; but, after all, theſe two girls begin to 
grow tirclome to me.“ 


After 


CAN DID US. 107 

Aſter breakfaſt, Candidus taking a walk in his 
long gallery, was charmed with the beauty of the 
pictures. He aſked by what maſter were the two 
firſt. © They are by Raphael,” ſaid the Senator; 
« I bought them at a very high price, merely out 
of vanity, ſome years ago. They are ſaid to be 
the fineſt paintings in Italy: but they do not 
pleaſe me at all; the colours are dead, the fi - 
gures not finiſhed, and do not appear with relief 
enough; the drapery is very bad. In ſhort, let 
people ſay what they will, I do not find there a 
true imitation of nature. I do not like a piece 
unleſs it makes me think I ſee nature itſelf ; bus 
there are no ſuch pieoes to be met with. I have, 
indeed, a great many pictures, but I do not value 
them at all.” 

While they were waiting for dinner, Poco» 
curante entertained them with a concert; Can» 
didus was quite charmed with the muſic This 
noiſe,” ſaid Pococurante, might divert one for 
half an hour, or ſo; but if it were to laſt any 
longer, it would grow tireſome to every body, 
though no ſoul durit own it. Muſic is, now a 
days, nothing elſe but the art of executing dif- 
ficulties; and what has nothing but difficulty to 
recommend it, docs not pleaſe at the long-run. 

I might perhaps take more pleaſure in the o- 
pera, if they had nat found cut the ſecret to make 
ſuch a monſter of it as ſhocks me. Let thoſe go 
that will to ſee wretched tragedies ſet to muſic, 
where the ſcenes are compoſed for no other end 
than to lug in by the head and ears two or three: 
ridiculous ſongs, in order to tet off the pipe of 
E. 6 a 


108 AN DID us. 


an actreſs. Let who will, or who can die away 
with pleaſure, at hearing a eunuch trilling out the 
part of Cæſar and Cato, and ſtrutting upon the 
ſtage wiih a ridiculous and affected air. For my 
part, I tave long ago bid adieu to thoſe paltry en - 
tertainments, which conſtitute the glory of Italy, 
and are purchaſed by crowned heads fo extrava- 
gantly dezr.” Candidus diſputed the point a lit- 
tle, but with great di'icietion. Martin was en- 
tirely of the ſame ſentiments with the Senator. 
They ſat down to table, and, after an excellent 
dinner, went into the library. Candidus calting 
bis eyes upon a Homer very handſomely bound, 
praiſed his High Mightineſs for the goodneſs of 
his taſte. „ There,” laid he, is a book that 
was the favourite of the grea: Pangloſs, the belt 
philoſopher in Germany.” It is none of mine,” 
ſaid Pococurante, with great indifference; © I 
was made to believe formerly that I took a plea» 
ſure in reading him. But that continued repeti- 
tion of battles that reſemble each other ; his gods, 
who are always very bufy, without bringing any 
thing to a decifion; his Helen, who is the fub- 
ject of the war, and has ſcarce any thing to do in 
the whole piece; that Troy, which is beſieged, 
but never taken; I ſay, all theſe defects give me 
the greateſt diſguſt. 1 have aſked ſome learned 
men, if they peruſed him with as little pleaſure 
as I did? Thoſe who were ingenuous profefi-d to 
me, that they could not keep the book in their 
hands ; but they were obliged to give it a place 
in their libraries, as a monument of antiquity, and 

| 45 


CAN DID US. 109 


as they do old 1 medals which are of no uſe 
in commerce.” 

« Your F xcellenee does not entertain the ſame 
opinion of Virgil ?“ ſaid Candicus I confeſs,” 
replicd Pococurante, the ſecond, the ſourth, and 
the ſixth books of his ZMneid are excellent; but 

as for his pious ZEacas, his brave Cloanthus, his 
friend Achates, the little Aſcanius, the infirm 
King Latirus, the burgeſs Amata, and the in- 
fpid Lavinia, I do not think any thing can be 
mere frigid, or more diſagreeable; I prefer Taſſo 
and Arioſto*s ſoporiferous tales far before him.” 

« Shall I p:cſume to alk you, vir,” faid Can» 
didus, ** whether you do not enj y a great deal of 
ple aſure in peruſing Horace?“ There are ſome 
maxims,” ſaid Pococurante, which may be of 
ſome iervice to a man who knows the world, and 
being delivered in expreſſive numbers are imprint- 
ed more eaſily on the memory. But | have lit. 
tle value for his voyage to Brunduſium, his deſ- 
cription of his bad dinner, and the Billingſgate 
ſquabble between one Pupillus, whoſe ſpeech he 
ſaid was full of filthy ſtuff, and another whoſe 
words were as ſharp as vinegar. I never could 
read without great diſguſt his indelicate lines a- 

gainſt the old woman and witches; and I cannot 
| ſee any merit in his telling his friend Mzcenas, 
that if he ſhould be ranked by him amongft the 
lyric poets, he ſhould knock the itars with his lof- 
ty brow. dome fools admire every thing in an 
author of reputation; for my part, I read only 
for myſelt; I approve nothing but what ſuits my 
own talte.” Candidus, * been taught to 


judge 


110 EAN DID Us. 


judge of nothing for himſelf, was very much fur» 
priſed at what he heard 3 but Martin looked up- 
on the ſentiment of Pococurante as very | ra- 
tional. | 

« Oh, here's a Cicero,” ſaid Candidus, © here 
is the great man whom I fancy. you are never 
tired of reading 1 never read him at all, 
replied the Venetian. ** What 1s it to me, whe- 
the he pleads for Rabir ius or Cluentius? I have 
trials enow of my own. I might indeed have 
been a greater friend to his philoſophical works, 
but when I found he doubted of every thing, 1 
concluded I knew. as much as he, and that I had 
no need of a tutor to learn ignorance. 

«© Well! here are four and twenty volumes of 
the academy of ſciences,” cried Martin; it is 
poſſible there may be ſomething valuable in them.“ 
% There might,” ſaid Pococurante,. if but one 
of the authors of this hodge-podge had been on- 
ly the inventor of the art of making pins ; but 
there is nothing in all thoſe volumes but chime- 
rical ſyſtems, and ſcarce a fingle article of real 
uſe. 7 | 

% What a „** number of theatrical 
pieces you have got here,” ſaid Candidus, in 
Italian, Spaniſh, and French!“ „ Yes,” faid the 
Senator, there are about thre: thouſand, and 
not three dozen good ones among them all.. As 
for that collection of fermons, which altogether 
are not worth one page of Seneca, and all thoſe 
huge volumes of divinity, you muſt think. that 
they are never opened either by me or any body; 
elle.” 


C ANDID US. 17» 


Martin perceiving ſome of the ſhelves filled 
with Englifh books; I fancy,” ſaid he, a2 te- 
Publican, as you are, muſt generally be pleaſed 
with compoſitions that are writ with ſo great a de- 
gree of freedom. Yes,” ſaid Pococurante, © it 
is commendable to write what one think“; it is 
the privilege of man. But all over our Italy they 
write nothing but what they don't think. Thoſe 
who now inhabit the country of the Cæſars and 
Antonines, dare not have a fingle idea, without 
taking out a licence from a Jacobin. I would 
be very well faticfied with the freedom that 
breathes in the Engliſh writers, if paſſion and the 
ſpirit of party did not corrupt all that was valua- 
ble io it.” | 
Candidus diſcovering a Milton, aſked him, if he 
did not look upon that author as a great genius Þ 
% What!“ ſaid Pococurante, ** that blockhead, 
that made a long commentary in ten buoks, of 
rough verſe, on the firſt chapter of Genefs : that 
groſs imitator of the Greeks, who has disfigured 
the creation, and who, when Moſes has repreſent- 
ed the Eternal producing the world by a word, 
makes the Meſſiah take a large pair of compaſſes 
from the armory of God, to mark out his works 
How can I have any eſteem for one who has ſpoil- 
ed the heli and devils of [-o; who turns Lucie 
fer ſometimes into a toad, and ſometimes into a 
pigmy ; makes him deliver the ſame ſpeech a 
hundred times over; repreſents him diſputing 
in divinity ; and who, by a ſerious imitation of 
Atioſto's comic invention of fice arms, repreſents 
the devils letting off theic cannon in heaven? Nei- 


ther 


112 CAN DID U 8. 


ther I, nor any one elſe in Italy, has it in his 
power to be pleaſed at theſe outrages againſt com · 
mon ſenſe: but the marriage of Sin and Death, 
and the ſnakes that proceed from her womb, are 
enough to make every perſon of the lealt deli- 
cacy of taſte vomit. This obicure, fantaſtical, 
and diſguſting poem was deſpiſed at its firit pub- 
lication : and I only treat the author now in the 
ſame manner as he was treated in his own coun» 
try by his cotemporariess By the bye, I ſpeak. 
what I think; and I give myſelf no unealinefs, 
whether or not other 705700 think as | do,” 
Candidus was vexed at this diſcourſe: for he 
reſpected iiomer, and was fond of Milton.“ Ah!“ 
ſaid be, whiſpering to Martin, “I am very much 
afraid, that this man here has a ſovereign contempt 
for our German poets,” “ there would be no 
great harm in that,” ſaid Martin, Oh what an 
extraordinary man!“ faid Candidus, muttering 
to himſelf: “ what a great genius is this Poco - 
eurante ! nothing can pleaſe him, 
After having thus taken a view of all the books, 
they went down into the garden Candidus ex- 
patiated upon all its beauties. I never knew 
any thing laid out in fo bad a taſte,“ ſaid the 
maſter ; ve have nothing but trifles here; but 
a day or two hence, I ſhall have one laid out up- 
on a more noble plan.“ 

When our two inquiſitives had taken their 
leave of his Excellency, No, ſure,” ſaid Can- 
didus to Martin, “ you will c:nfeis that he is 
one of the happieit men upon earth, for he is a- 
dove every thing that he has.” Do not you ſee,” 

ſaid 


CANDIDUS. 113 


faid Martin, “that he is diſguſted with every 
thing that be has? Plato has faid a long time ago, 
that the beſt ſtomachs are not thoſe which caſt up 
all ſorts of victuals.“ „ But,” faid Candidus, 
% 1s not there a pleaſure in eriticifing upon e- 
very thing? in perceiving defects where other 
people fancy they ſee beauties ?“ “ That is as. 
much as to ſay,” replied Martin, “there is a 
great pleaſure in having no pleaſure.” » If that 
1s the caſe,” reſumet Candice us, no perſon will 
be ſo happy as myſelf, wh-n I ſee Miſs Cunegone 
da again,” © We fliculd always bope for the 
| beit,” ſaid Martin | 
In the mean time days and weeks paſſed away 
but no Cacambo was to be found. And Candi- 
dus was ſo overwhelmed with grief, that he did 
not recollect, that Paquetta and brother Giroffliee 
never ſo much as once came to thank him, 


CANDIDUS. 


CHAP. XXVI. 


Of Candidus and Martin's ſupping with fix ftran- 
gers, and who they were. 


S Candidus, followed by Martin, was go- 
ing one night to ſeat himſelf at the table 
with ſome ſtrangers who lodged in the ſame inn, 
a man of a complexion as black ſoot, came behind 
him, and taking him by the arm, ſays to him, 
« Get yourſelf ready to go along with us; don't 
fail!” He turned his head, and ſaw Cacambo. 
Nothing but the fight of Cunegonda could have 
furpriſed or pleaſed him more. He was juſt ready 
to run mad for joy Embracing his dear friend, 
« Cunegonda is here,” faid he, without doubt; 
where is the ? Carry me to her, that I may die 
with joy in ber company !” © Cunegonda is not 
here,” ſaid Cacambo, * ſhe is at Conſtantinople.” 
« O heavens! at Conſtantinople ? But, if ſhe was 
at China, I would fly. thither ; let us be gone. 
We will go aſter ſupper,” replied Cacambo; I 
can tell you no more; I am a flave: my maſter 
expects me, and I muſt go and wait at table; ſay 
not a word; go to ſupper, and hold * in 
readineſs.” | 

Candidus, diſtracted between joy and grief, 
charmed at having ſeen his truſty agent, aſtoniſſ · 
ed * him a flave, full of the idea of 


finding 


e AN DID us. 115 


finding his miſtreſs again, his heart palpitating, 
and his underſtanding confuſed, fet himſelf down 
at the table with Martin, who ſaw all theſe ſcenes 
without the leaſt emotion, together with ſix ſtran- 
gers that were come to ſpend the carnival at Ve- 
nice. 
Cacambo, who poured out wine for one of the 
fix rangers, drew near to his maſter, towards 
the end of the repaſt, and whiſpered him in the 
ear, “dite, your Majeſty may ſet out when you 
think proper, the ſhip is ready.” On faying theſe 
words, he went out be gueſts ſurpriſed, looks 
ed at each other, without ſpeaking a word; when 
another ſervant approaching his maſter, ſaid to him, 
« Sire, your M:jeſty's chaiſe is at Padua, and the 
yatcht is ready.“ Ihe maſter gave a nod, and 
the domeſtic retired. All the gueſts ſtared at 
ane another again, and their common ſurpriſe was 
increaſed A third ſervant approaching likewiſe 
the third ſtranger, ſaid to him, Sire, believe me, 
your Majeſty muſt not ſtay here any longer; I am 
going to get every thing ready;“ and immediate - 
ly be cit. ppeared. 
Candidus and Martin began by this time to 
make no doubt but that this was a maſquerade 
af the carnival. A fourth domeſtic ſaid to the 
fourth maſter, ** Your Majeſty may depatt when» 
ever you pleaſe; and went out as the others had 
done. The fifth ſervant expreſſed himſelf in terms 
to the ſame effect as the fcurth ; but the ſixth ſer · 
vant ſpoke in a different manner to the fixth ſtran- 
ger, who fat near Candidus: Faith, Sir, ſaid 
he, no one will truſt your Majeſty any longer, 
nor 


116 e AN DI pus. 


nor myſelf neither; and we may both be ſent to 
Jail this very night; I ſhall however take care 
of myſeli. Adieu“ 

All the domeſtics having diſappeared, the fix 
ſtrangers, with Candidus and Martin, remained 
in a profcund fitence. At Jaſt Candidus broke 
it: Gentlemen taid he, this is ſomething very 
droll ; but why ſhould you be all of you Kings? 
For my part, I own to you, that neither I nor 
Martin are ” | 

Cacambo's maſter then anſwered very gravely 
in Italian, ſaying, ** I afſure you I am not in jeſt; 
F am Achmet III. I was Grand Sultan for ſe- 
veral years; I dethroned my brother; my ne- 
phew dethroned me; my viſirs were beheaded : 
I finiſh my days in the old ſeraglio. My nephew, 
| the Sultan Mahmoud, permits me take a voyage 
| ſometimes for the fake of my health, and I am 
come to paſs the carnival at Venice.” 

A young man who fat near Achmet, ſpoke 
next, and ſaid, * My name is Pan; I was Em- 
peror of all the iuſſas, I was dethroned in my. 
cradle, my father and mother was coufined ; IL 
was brought up in priſon. I have ſometimes. 
the perm: iſhon to travel, accompanied with two 
perſons as guards; I am alſo come to paſs the 
carnival at Venice. 

The third ſaid,“ I am Charles Edward, King 
of England: my father has ceded his rights to 
the throne to me I have fought ro ſupport 
them ; eight hundred of my adherents have had 
their hearts taken out alive, and their heads ſtruck 
off. I myſelf bave been in priſon ; I am going 

to 


* * 


God long preſerve; and I am come to paſs 


CANDIDUS. 


to Rome, to pay a viſit to my father, who has 


117 


deen dethroned as well as myſelf and my gran d- 
father ; and am come to Venice to celebrate the 


carnival.” 
The fourth then ſaid, I am King of Po- 


land; the fortune of war has deprived me 


of my hereditary dominions; my father ex- 


perienced the ſame reverſe; I reſign myſelf 


to providence, like the ſultan Achmet, the 
Emperor Ivan, and Charles Edward, whom 


the carnival at Venice.” 

The fifth ſaid, ** I am likewiſe the king of Po- 
land; I loſt my kingdom twice; but providence 
has given me another government, in which I have 
done more good, than all the kings of the darma- 
tians, put together, have been able to do on the 
banks of the Viſtula. I refign myſelf likewiſe to 
providence, and am come to paſs the carnival at 
Venice.” 

It was now the fixth monarch's turn to 
ſpeak. ** Gentlemen,” faid he, I am 
not ſo great a prince as any of you: but fcr 
all that 1 have been a king as well as the 
beſt of you. I am Theodore; I was elected 
king of Corſica; I was called Tour Mayefty, 
but at preſent am ſcarce allowed the title of 
Sir. I have cauſed money to be coined, 
but am not maſter at preſent of a far- 
thing. I have had two ſecretaries of ſtate, 
but now have ſcarce a fingle ſervant, I have 
ſeen myſelf on'a throne, and have for ſome 
time 


118 CAN DID US. 
time lain upon ſtraw in a common jail in Lon- 
don, I have been vaſtly afraid of meeting with 
the ſame treatment here, though I am come, 
like your M.jeſties, to ſpend the carnival at Ve- 
nice.” 

The five other kings beard this ſpeech with a 
noble compaſſion. Each of them gave king heo- 
dore twenty ſequins to buy him ſome cloaths and 
ſhirts, and Candidus made him a preſent of a dia- 
mond worth two thouſand ſequins more. ** Who,” 
faid the five kings, can this private perſon be, 
who is both able to give and really has given an 
hundred times as much as either of us ?” 

At the very inſtant they roſe from table, four 
Serene tlighnefſe:, who had likewiſe loſt their 
dominions by the fortune of war, and were come 
to paſs the carnival at Venice, came into the room: 
but Candidus took no notice of thoſe new comers, 
his thoughts being taken up with nothing but 
going in ſearch of his dear Cuncgonda at Con- 
ſtantinople. 


CHAP. 


2 


CANDIDUS. 


The voyage of Candidus to Conflantinople. 


FY Acambo had already prevailed on the Tur» 
kiſh captain, who was going to carry Sul- 
tan Achmet back again to Conſtantinople, to 
receive Candidus and Martin on board. They 
both of them imbarked, after they had proftrated 
themſelves before his miſerable Highneſs. As 
Candidus was on his way, he ſaid to Martin, 
There were fix dethroned kings that we ſupped 
with; and what is ſtill more, among theſe fix 
kings there was one that I gave alms to. Per- 
haps there may be a great many other princes 
more unfortunate ſtill. For my part, I have loſt 
only one hundred ſheep, and am going to fly in- 
to the arms of Cunegonda. My dear Martin, 
I muſt yet ſay, Pangloſs was in the right; all 
things are for the beſt.” I wiſh they were, 
ſaid Martin. But,” faid Candidus, the ad- 
venture we met with at Venice is ſomewhat ro- 
mantic. Such a thing was never heard of, 
that ſix dethroned kings ſhould ſup together at a 
common inn.“ his is not more extraordi- 
nary,” replied Martin, than the moſt of the 
things that have happened to us. It is a com- 
mon thing for kings to be dethroned ; and with 
reſpect to the honour that we had of ſupping 
with them, it is a mere trifle that does not me- 
tit our attentton. 


Scarce 


— »- 


120 CS ANDID US. 


Scarce bad Candidus got on board, when 
he leaped on the neck of his old ſervant and 
friend Cacambo. Well,“ faid he, * what 
news of Cunegonda? is ſhe ftill a miracle of 
beauty ? does ſhe love me till ? how does ſhe 
do? No doubt but you have bought a palace 
for her at Conſtantinople ?” 

« My dear maſter,” replied Cacambo, ** Cu- 
negonda waſhes diſhes on the banks of the Pro- 
pontis, in the houſe of a prince who has very 
few to waſh: ſhe is a flave in the houſe of an 
ancient ſovereign, named Ragotſky, to whom 
the Grand Turk allows three crowns a-day to 
ſupport him in his aſylum ; but what is worſe 
than all, ſhe has loſt her beauty, and is become 
ſhockingly ugly.“ Well, handſome or ugly,” 
replied Candidus, I am a man of honour, and 
it is my duty to love her ſtill. But how came 
ſhe to be reduced to fo abje a condition, with 
the five or fix millions that you carried her ?“ 
« And well,” ſaid Cacambo, ** was not I to give 
two millions to Signior Don Fernandes d' Iba- 
raa, y Figueoro, y Maſcarenes, y Lampourdos, 
y Souza, the governor of Buenos: Ayres, for the 
permiſſion of taking Miſs Cunegonda back a- 
gain? and did not a pirate bravely rob us of 
all the reſt? Did not this pirate carry us to 
Cape Matapan, to Milo, to Nicaria, ta Samos, 
to Dardanelles, to Marmora, to Scutari? Cu- 
negonda and the old woman are ſervants to the 
prince I told you of, and I am a flave to the de · 
throned Sultan.” * What a chain of ſhocking 
calamities ? {aid Candidus. But, after all, I 

have 


CAN DID U 8. 121 


have ſome diamonds, I hall eaſily purchaſe Cu- 
negonda's liberty lt is pity that the is grown 
ſo ugly.” 

Iden turning himfelf to Martin, © Who do 
you think,” ſays he, ** is moſt to be pitied, the 
Sultan Achmet, the Emperor Ivan, King Charles 
Edward. or myſelt ? I cannot tell,” (aid Mar - 
tin, © I muſt ſee into your hearts to be able to 


tell.“ © Ah!” faid Candidus, if Pangloſs 


were here, he would know and tell us.” 1 
know not,” replied Martin, in what fort of 
fcales your Pangloſs would weigh the misfor- 
tunes of mankind, and appraiſe their ſorrows, 
All that I can venture to ſay is, that there are 
millions of men upon earth a hundred times 
more to be pitied than King Charles £d- 
wands the Emperor Ivan, or Sultan Ach- 
met.” © That is very poſſible,” ſaid Candi- 


dus.“ 


In a few Fr they reached the Black ſea. 
Candidus began with ranſoming Cacambo at 


an extravagant price; and, without loſs of 


time, he got into a galley with his companions, 
to go to the banks of the Propontis, in ſearch 


of Cunegonda, — ber loſs of 
beauty 

Among the crew there were two ſlaves that 
rowed very ill, to whoſe bare ſhoulders the Le- 
vant trader would now and then apply a few 


ſtrokes with a bull's pizzle. Candidus, by a 


natural ſympathy, looked at them more atten- 


tively than at the reſt of the galley flaves, and 
went up to them with an heart full of pity. 
| F Some 


121 CANDIDUS. 


Some features of their faces, though very much 
disfigured, feemed to bear ſome reſemblance to 
thoſe of Pangloſs, and the unfortunate Jeſuit the 
Baron, the brother of Mils Cunegonda. This 
fancy affected him, and made him very dull. 
He looked at them again more attentively. 
% Really,” ſaid he ro Cacambo, if I had not 
{.en Mr Pangloſs hanged, and had not had 
the ,misfortune to kill the Baron myſelf, I 
ſhould think it was they that are rowing in this 
galley.” 

At the names of the Baron and Pangloſs, the 
two galley ſlaves gave a loud ſhriek, beld faſt by 
the ſeat, and let their oars drop, The matter of 
the Levanter ran up to them, and redoubled the 
laſhes of the bull's pizale upon them. © Hold! 
hold! Siznior,” cried Candidus, I will give 
you what money you pleate.” © Lord! it is 
Candidus,” ſaid one of the galley-flivesz © Uh! 


it is Cardidus!” faid the other. Do I 


dream?“ ſaid Candidus; (am I awake? am I 
in this galley? is that Maſter Baron whom [ 
killed? is that Maſter Pangloſs whom I ſaw 
banged?” 

„Jes, it is we! it is we!” replied they, 
« What! is that the great philoſopher ?“ ſaid 
Martin. © Harkee, Maſter Levant Captain,” ſaid 
Candidue, . what will you have for the ranſom 
of Maſter Ihunder-tcn-tronckh, one of the firſt 
Barons of the empire, together with Maſter Pan- 
glols, the moſt profound Metaphyſician of Ger- 
many?” © You Chriitian Dog,” ſaid the Le- 
vant captain, ©* ſince theſe two dogs of Chriſti- 


an 


CAN DID US. 123 


an ſlaves are barons and metaphyſicians, which, 
without doubt, is a great degree of dignity in 
their own country, you ſhall give me fiſty thou- 
| ſand ſequins,” Tou ſhall have them, dir; 
carry me back again like lightning, to Conſtan- 
rinople, and you ſhall be paid directly, But 
ſtop, carry me to Miſs Cunegonda firil.” The 
Levant captain, on the firſt offer of Candidus, had 
turned the head of the veſſel towards the city, 
and made the flaves row faſter than a bird cuts 
the air. | | 
Candidus embraced the Baron and Pangloſs 
a hundred times. How happened it, that I 
did not kill you, my dear Baron? and wy dear 
Pangloſs, how came you to life again, after be- 
ing hanged ? and how came you, both of you, 
to be gallcy flaves in Iurky 7“ ls it true that 
my dear fiſter is in this country,” faid the 
Baron. Yes,” replied Cacambo. Then 
1 fee my dear Candid us once more,” ſaid Pan- 
gloſs. 

Candidus preſented Martin and Cacambo to 
them; they embraced each other, and ſpoke all 
at the ſame time. The galley-flew like light- 
ning, and they were already in the port. A 
Jew was ſent for, to whom Candidus ſold a dia- 
mond for fiſty thouſands ſcquins, which was 
worth a hundred thouſand ; who notwithſtand- 
ing, ſwore by Abraham, that he could not give 
any more. He immediately paid the ranfom 
of the Baron and Pangloſs. Ihe latter threw 
bimſelf at the feet of his deliverer, and bathed 
them with his tears; as for the other, he thank- 

F 2 ed 


124 CAN DID US. 


ed with him a nod, and promiſed to repay him the 

money the firſt opportunity. «© But is it poſh- 
ble that my fiſter is in Turky ?” ſaid be. No- 
thing is more poſſible,” replied Cacambo; * for 
ihe ſcours the diſhes in the houſe of a prince of 
Tranſylvania!” Two more Jews are immediate - 
|; brought, to whom Candidus fold ſome more 
diamond; and they ſet out again all toge- 
ther in another galley, in order to deliver Cu- 
negonda. 


CHAP. XXVIII. 


What ne Candidus, Cunegonda, Panglaſt, Mar- 
tin, &Cs 


Once more beg pardon,” ſaid Candidus to 

the Baron. I beg you pardon, my 
Rev. Father, for having given you a thruſt with 

a ſword through the body. Don't let us ſay 
any more about it,” ſaid the Baron; I was a 
little roo haſty, I muſt confeſs. But ſince 
you defire to know by what fatality I came to be 
a galley-ſlave, I will inform you. After I was 
cured of my wound by a brother, who was apo- 
thecary to the coliege, I was attacked and carii- 
ed off by a party of Spaniards, who confined me 
in priſon at Buenos Ayres, at the very time my 
ſiſter was ſetting out from thence. I demanded 
leave to return to Rome to the Father general. 
I was nominated to go as almoner to Conſtan- 
_ tinople with the French ambaſlador. I had not 
| | beea 


CAN DID U 8. 


been eight days engaged in this employment, 
when one evening I met with a young well made 
icoglan. It was then very hot; the young man 
went to bathe himſelf, and I took this opportuni · 
ty to bathe myſelf too. I did not know that it 
was a Capital crime for a Chriſtian to be found 
naked with a young muſſelman. A cadi order- 
ed me to receive a hundted ſtrokes of the baſlli- 
nado on the foles of my feet, and condemned me 
to the galleys. I do not think there ever was a 
greater act of injuſtice. Bur I ſhould be glad to 
know, how it comes bout, that my filter is diſhe 
waſher in the kitchen of a Tranſslvanian prince, 
who is a refugee among the Turks.” 

„ But you my dear Pangloſs, how came Je- 
ver to ſet eyes on you again?“ lt is true in- 
deed,” ſaid Pangloſs, that you ſaw me hanged; 
I ought naturally to have been burnt; but you 
may remember, that it rained prodigiouſly when 
they were to roaſt me: the ſtorm was ſo violent, 
that they deſpaired of lighting the fice. I was 
therefore hanged, becauſe they could do no bet- 
ter. A ſurgeon bought my body, carried it home 
with him, and diſſected me. He firit made a 
crucial inciſion on me from the umbilicus to the 
clavicula. No one could have been more floven- 
ly hanged than I was. The ex:cucioner of the 
holy inquifition, who was a ſubdeacon beſides,” 
burnt people indeed to a miracle, but was not 
uſed to hanging. The cord being wet, did not 
flip properly, and the nooſe was badly tied: 
ſhort, I ſtill drew my breath. The crucial in- 
von made me give ſuch a dreadful ſhriek, that 

F 3 | my 


125 


226 CANDIDUS: 


my ſurgeon fell dewn backwards, and fancying 
he was diſſecting the devil, he run away, ready to 
die with the fright, and fell down a ſecond time 
on the ſtair-caſe, as he was making off. His 
wiſe run out of an adjacent cloſet, on hearing 
the noiſe, ſaw me extended on the table with my 
crucial inciſion, and being more frightened than 
her huſband, fled alſo, and tumbled over him. 
When they were come to themſelves a little, I 
heard the ſurgeon's wife ſay to him: My dear, 
how come you to beſo weak as to venture to diſ- 
ſet an heretic? Don't you know that the de- 
vil always takes poſſeſſion of the bodies of thoſe 
people ? I will go immediately and fetch a prieſt 
to exorciſe him. I ſhuddered at this propoſal, 
and muſtered up what little ſtrength I had left 
ro cry out, Oh! have pity upon me! At length 
the Portugueſe barber took courage, ſewed up 
my ſkin, and his wife nurſed me ſo well, that I 
was upon my feet again in about fifteen days, 
The barber got me a place, to be footman to a 
knight of Malta, who was going to Venice; but 
my maſter not being able to pay me my wages, 
I engaged in the ſervice of a Venetian mer- 
chant, and went along with bim to Conſtantino- 
file. 
„One day the maggot took me to go into a2 
moſque. There was nobody there but an old i- 


man and a young devotee, very handſome, ſay- 
ing her prayers. Her breaſt was uncovered; 
the had in her boſom a beautiful noſegay of tu- 
lips, roſes, anemonies, ranunculuſes, hyacinths, 
and auriculas ; ſhe let her noſegay fall; I took 

it 


1 4 


CANDIDUS. 125 


it up, and preſented it to her with the moſt pro- 
ſound reverence. However, I was fo long in 
giving her it again, that the iman fell into a paſ- 
fron, and ſeeing I was a Chriſtian, called out for 
help. They carried me to the cadi, who ordered 
me to receive a hundred baſtinadoes, and to be 
ſent to the galleys. I was chained to the very ſame 
galley and the ſame bench with the baron. There 
were on board this galley four young men from 
Marſeilles, five Neapolitan prieſls, and two monks 
of Corfu, who told us, that the lik: adventures 
happened every day. The Baron pretended that 
he had ſuffered more injuſtice than I; and I in- 
filled, that it was far more innocent to put a 
noſegay into a woman's boſom, than to be found 
ſtark naked with an icoglan. We wete perpetually 
cifputing, and we received twenty laſhes every 
day with a bulls pizzle, when the concatenation 
of events of this world brought you to our gal- 
ley, and you ranſomed us.“ 

« Well, my dear Pangloſs,” ſaid Candidus to 
him, ** when you was banged, diſſected, ſeverely 
beaten, and tugging at the oar in the galley, did 
you always think that things in this world were for the 
beſt ?” * am ſtill of my firſt opinion,” repli- 
ed Pangloſs; © for as I am a phbiloſopher, it 
would be inconſiſtent with my character to con- 
tradict myſelf ; eſpecially as Leibnitz could not 
be in the wrong; and his pre-eltab!iſhed harmo- 
ny is certainly the fineſt ſyitem in the world, as : 
well as his plenum and ſubtle matter.“ 


F 4 2 ; CHAP. 


122 CANDIDUS. 


CHAP. XXIX. 
ths ande d add an? te ol wor 


man again. 


HILE Candidus, the Baron, Pangloſe, 
Martin and Cacambo were telling theic 
adventures to each other, and diſputing about the 
contingent and noncontingent events of this world, 
and while they were arguing upon effects and 
cauſes, moral and phyſical evil, on liberty and 
neceſſity, and the comforts a perſon may experi- 
ence is the galleys in Turkey, they arrived on 
the banks of the Propontis, at the houſe of the 
prince of Tranſylvania. The firſt objects which 
preſented themſelves were Cunegonda and the 
old woman hanging out ſome table linen on the 
lines to dry. 

The Baron grew onde at this ſight. Even 
ne upon ſeeing his 
fair Cunegonda prodigioully tanned, with her 
eyelids reverſed, her neck withered, her checks 
wrinkled, her arms red and full of ſcales, ſeized 
with horror, jumped near two yards backwards, 
but afterwards advanced to her out of good man- 
ners She embraced Candidus and her brother, 
Who, each of them, embraced the old woman, 
and Candidus ranſomed them both. 
There was a little farm in the neighbourhood, 

which 


CAN DID US. 129 


which the old woman adviſed Candidus to hire, 
till they could meet with better accommodations 
for their whole company. &s Cunegonda did 
not know that ſhe was grown ugly, nobody 
having told her of it ; ſhe put Candidus in mind 
of his promiſe, in ſo peremptory a manner, that 
the good man durſt not refuſe her. He then in- 
timated to the Baron, that he intended to mar- 
ry his ſiſter. I will never ſuffer,” ſaid the Ba- 
ron, ** ſuch meanneſs on her ſide, nor ſuch inſo- 
lence on yours. With this infamy I never will 
be reproached. The children cf my ſiſter can 
never be enrolled in the chapters of Germany. 
No; my ſiſter ſhall never marry any but a Baron 
of the empire.” Cunegonda threw herſelf at his 
feet, and bathed them with her tears; but he re» 
mained inſenſible. You fooliſh puppy you,” 
ſaid Candidus to him, © I have delivered yon 
from the galleys; I have paid your ranſom; [ 
have alſo paid that of your filter ; ſhe was a ſcul- 
lion here, and is very ugly; I have the goodneſs 
to make her my wife, and you pretend (till to op- 
poſe it: I ſhould kill you again, if I ſhould con- 
ſult my paſhon.” * You may indeed kill me a- 
gain,” ſaid the Baron; “ but you ſhall never 
marry my ſiſter, while I have breath.“ 


' CANDIDUS. 


CHAP, XXX. 


The concluſion. 


Andidus was not very deſirous at the bot- 
tom of his heart, to marry Cunegonda. 
But the extreme impertinence of the Baron 
determined him to conclude the match, and Cu- 
negonda prefſed it fo earneſtly, that he could not 
retract. He advifed with Pangloſs, Martin, and 
the truſty Cacamto. Pangloſs drew up an ex- 
cellent memoir, in which he proved, that the Ba- 
ron had no right over bis fiſter, and that ſhe 
might, according to all the laws of the empire, 
marry Candidus with her left hand. Martin was 
ſor throwing the Baron into the fea: Cacam- 
bo was of opinion, that it would be beſt to ſend 
bim back again to the Levant captain, and make 
bim work at the galleys; after which they might 
fend him to Rome to the Fatber-gene- al, by the 
firſt ſhip, This advice was thought good; the 
old woman approved; and nothing was ſaid to 
his ſiſter about it. The ſcheme was put in exe- 
cution for a little money; and ſo they bad the 
| pleaſure of outwitting a Jeſuit, and puniſhing 
the pride of a German Baron, 

It is natural to imagine, that, after ſo many 
diſaſters, Candidus married his fweetheart, and 
living with the philoſopher Panglols, the philoſo- 


pher 


CAN DID U 8. 131 


pher Martin, the diſcreet Cacambo, and the old 
woman, and eſpecially as he had brought fo ma- 
ny diamonds from the country of the ancient In · 
cas, muſt live the moſt agreeable life of any man 
on the earth, But he was duped fo often by 
the Jews, that he had nothing left but the ſmall 
farm; and his wife growing ſtill more ugly, turn- 
ed peeviſh and inſupportable. The old woman 
was very infirm, and worſe humoured than Cu- 
negonda herſelf. Cacambo, who worked in the 
garden, and went to Conſtantinople to ſell its 
productions, was worn out with lab-ur, and cur- 
| ſed his fate. Pangloſs was ready to deſpair, be- 
cauſe he did not ſhine at the head cf ſome uni- 
verſity id Germany. As for Martin, as he was 
firmly perſuaded that all was equally bad through» 
out, he therefore bore things with patience. Can- 
didus, Martin, and Pangloſs diſputed ſometimes 
about metaphyſicks and ethics. They often faw 
paſſing under the windows of the farm houſe boats 
' full of effendis, baſhaws, and cadi«, who were - 
going into baniſhment to Lemnos, Mi:yle- - 
ne, and Erzerum. They obſerved that other ca- 
dis, other baſhaws, and other effendis, ſucceeded - 
in the poſts of thoſe who were exiled, and that 
they themſelves were baniſhed in their turns, 
They ſaw heads decently impaled, which were 
to be preſented to the Sublime Porte. - Theſe 
ſpectacles increaſed the number of their diſputa · 
tions; and when they did not diſpute, they were 
fo prodigiouſly uneaiy and unquiet in themſeſves, 
that the old woman tock the liberty to ſay to 
them, I want to know which is the work, _ 
F 6 £3 * 


132 CAN DID US. 


to be rav iſhed an hundred times by negro pirates, 
to have a buttock cut off, to run the gauntlet a- 
mong the Bulgarians, to be whipped and hang- 
ed at an auto-da-fe, to be diflected, to row in the 
Balleys; in one word, to have fuffered all the 
miſeties we have undergone, or to (lay bere, 
without doing any thing?“ That is a 
quell ion not eaſy to be determined,“ ſaid Candt- 
dus. 

This diſcourſe gave rife to new reflexions, and 
Martin concluded, upon the whole, that man- 
kind are born to live either in the diſtractions 
of inquietude, or in the lethargy of diſguſt. 
Candidus did not agree to that opinion, but re- 
mained in a ſtate of ſuſpenſe. Pangloſs confeſ- 
fed, that he had undergone terrible trials; but 
having once maintained, that all things went 
wonderfully well, he ſtill kept firm to his hypo- 
theſis, though quite oppoſite to his real ſenti- 


ments. 


What contributed to 88 Martin in his 
ſhocking principles, to make Candidus ſtagger 
more than ever, and to embarraſs Pangloio, was 
that one day they ſaw Paquetta and Brother Gi- 
roſflee, who were in the greateſt diſtreſs, at their 
farm. They ſoon ſquandered away their three thou» 
ſand piaſtres, had parted, were reconciled, quarreled 
again, had been confined in priſon, had made 
their eſcape, and Father Girofflee had at length 


turned Turk, Paquetta continued her trade, 
wherever ſhe went, but made nothing by it. 
could eafily foreſee,” ſaid Martin to Candidus, 
* + that your pteſents would ſoon be ſquandered 

Kays 


CAN DID US. 133 


away, and would render them more miſerable. 

You and Cacambo have ſwallowed millions of 
Piaſtres, and are not a bit happier than Brother 
Girofflee and Paquetta.” * Ha! ba!“ faid Pan- 
gloſs to Paquetta, has Providence brought you 
amongſt us again, my poor child? Do you 
know that you have colt me the tip of my noſe, 
one eye, and one of my ears, as you may fee 
you have? What a world is this!” This new 
adventure ſet them a philoſophifing more than e- 
ver 
There lived in the neighbourhood a very fa- 
mous derviſe, who pafſed for the greateſt philo- 
fopher in Turky. They went to conſult him. 
Pangloſs was choſen ſpeaker, and ſaid to him, 
« Maſter, we are come to defire you would tell 
us, why fo lirange an animal as man was creat- 
ed,” 

% What's that to you?“ ſaid the derviſe; * is 
it any buſineſs of thine ?? © But, my Reverend 
Father,” ſaid Candidus, there is a ſhocking 
.Gght of evil upon earth.” © What ſignifies,“ 
faid the derviſe, whether there be good or e- 
vil? When his ſublime Highneſs ſends a veſſel 
to Egypt, does it trouble him whether the mice 
on board are at their eaſe or not?” What 
would you have one do then?“ faid Pangloſs. 
« Hold your tongue,” faid the derviſe 1 
promiſed myſelf the pleaſure,” ſaid Pangloſs, of 
reaſoning with you upon effects and cauſes, the 
beſt of poſſible worlds, the origin of evil. the 
nature of the ſoul, and the pre-eſtabiiſhed har» 


mcny.” 


244 CANDIDUS: 


mony.” The derviſe, at theſe words, ſhut 
the door again(t them. Hy 

During this conference, news was brought 
that two vizirs, and a muſti were ſtrangled at 
Conſtantinople, and a great many of their friends 
impaled. bis cataſtrophe male a great noiſe 
for ſome hours. Pangloſe, Candidus, and Mar- 
tin, in their return to their little farm, met a 
good looking old man taking the air, at bis door, 
under an arbour of orange trees. Pangloſs who 
had as much curioſity as phil ſophy, aſked him 
the name of the mufti, who was lately ſtrangled. 
„ know nothing about it,” ſaid the good man 3 
«and what's more, [never kne the name of a ſingle 
vizir, in my liſe. Jam an entire ſtranger to 
the ſtory jou mention; and preſume, that, ge ; 
nerally ſpeaking, they who trouble their beads 
with ſtate affairs, ſometimes die ſhocking deaths, 
not without deſerving it : but I never trouble 
my head about what is doing at Conſtantinople; 
I content myſelf with ſcading my fruits thither, 
the produce of my garden, which I cultivate 
with my own hands?” Having faid theſe 
wards, he introduced the ſtrangers into his 
houſe : his two daughters and two ſons ſerved 
them with ſeveral kinds of ſherbet, which they 
made themielves, befides.caymac, enriched with 
the peels of candied citrons, oranges, lemons, 
ananas, Piſtachio nuts, and Mocao cuffee, una- 
dulterated with the bad coffee of Batavia and the 
iſles. Alter which, the two daughters of this 
good muſſulman perfumed the beards of Candi- 
dus, Pangiol:, and Martin. | 


Nou 


C AN DID US. 135 


Lou mult certainly,” faid Candidus to the 
Turk, © have a very large and very opulent e- 


Nate “ „ | have only twenty acres,” (aid the 


Turk. which I, with my children, cultivate, 


Labour keeps us free from three of the greateſt 
evils, tireſomeneſs, vice and want.” 

As Candidus returned towards his farm, he 
made deep teflections on the diſcoutſe of the Turk, 
Said he to Pangloſs and Martin, The conditi- 
on ot this good old man ſeems to be preferable to 
that of the ſix Kings with whom we had the ho- 
nour to ſup.” „The grandeurs of royalty,” (aid 
Pangloſs, are very precarious, in the opinion of 
all philoſophers. For, in ſhort, Eglon, King of 
the Moabites, was aſſaſſinated by Ehud; Abſalom 
was hung by the hair of his head, and pierced 
through with three darts; King Nadab, the fon 
of Jeroboam, was killed by Baaſha; King Elah by 
Z:imri; Ahaziah by Jehu;z Athaliah by Jeho- 
iadab ; the Kings Joachim, Jechonias, and Zede- 
kias, were carried into captivity. You know the 
fates of Crœſus, Aſtyages, Darius, Dionyſus of 
Syracuſe, Pyrrhus, Perſeus, Hannibal, Jugurtha, 
Ariovittus, Cæſar, Pompey, Nero, Otto, Vitellius, 
Domitian, Kichard II. Edward II. Henry VI. 
Richard III. Mary Stuart, and Charles I. of 
England the three Henrys of France, and the 
Emperor Henry IV. You know——” I know 


very well,” faid Candidus, © that we ought to 


look after our garden.” * You are in the right,” 
faid Pangloſs : for when man was placed in the 
garden of Eden, he was placed there, ut opera- 
ret ur eum, to cultivate it; which proves that man- 

| kind 


136 CANDIDUS. 
| Kind are not created to be idle. © Let us work,” 
faid Martin, without diſputing ; it js the only 
way to render life ſupportable 
All their little ſociety entered into this laud- 
able defign, according to their different abilities. 
Their little piece of ground produced a plentiful 
crop. Cunegonda ind-ed was very ug'y. but ſhe 
turned out an excellent paſtry cook. Paquetta 
_ worked at embroiderv, and the old woman took 
care of the linen. There was no idle perſon in 
company, not excepting even Brother Girofflee; 
he made a very good carpenter, and became too 
a very honeſt man, | 
Pangloſs would ſometimes ſay to Candidus : 
_ « All events are linked together in this beſt of all 
pcſhble worlds. For if you had not been dtiven 
_ with great blows on the backſide out of a very 
fane caſtle, on account of your paſſion for Miſs 
Cunegonda ; if you had not been thrown into the 
inquiſition; if you bad not rambled through A- 
merica on foot; if you had not given the Baron 
a hearty blow with your ſword ; if you had not 
Joſt all the ſheep that you brought from that good 
country Eldorado; you would not here have eat 
Preſerved citrons and piſtachio nuts That 
is well faid,” replied Candidus; but let us 
cultivatc our garden.“ 


Taz END os TRR Fiss T Paar. 


C A: N- 


82 N N end 5 
8 N Ned 

22 3 OPS ee 80 3 

dee 222 — . 


C AN DID US; 


OR, 


ALL FOR THE BEST. 


P A R T u. 


Can lk 
Hew Candidus parted from his company, and what 
life; riches are a burden to the poſſeſ . 


reſulted from it. 
M ſor; ambition, when ſated, leaves re- 


AN foon tires of every thing in this 
grets ; the ſweets of love loſe their pleaſure ; and 


Candidus, born to experience all the changes of 
fortune, was tired of cultivating his garden at laſt. 
Maſter Pangloſs, ſaid he, if we are in the beſt of 


2efible 


138 CAN DID Us. 


Soffible worlds, you muſt confeſs at leaſt that I do 
not enjoy a ſuitable proportion of #offible happi- 
neſs ſince I live unknown in a ſmall corner of 
the Propontis, having no other ſupport than that 
of my hands, which may ſoon loſe their ſtrength; 
no other delights than that which I have from 
Miſs Cunegonda, who is very ugly, and, what is 
worſt of all, ſhe is my wife ; no other company 
than yours, which often tires me: or that of Mar- 
tin, which makes me dull; or that of Girofl:e, 
who lately has turned good; or that of Paquet - 
ta, which, you know, is very dangerous; or that 
of the old woman with one buttock, who tells me 
a parcel of long ſpun ſtories. 

Then Pangloſs replied : philoſophy teaches us, 
that the monades, infinitely divifible, arrange theme» 
ſelves with a wonderſul intelligence to form the 
different bodies that we remark in nature. The 
heavenly bodies are what they ought to be; they. 
are placed where they ought to be placed; they 
deſcribe the circles that they ought to deſcribe 
man follows the inclination that he ought to fol- 
low, he is what he ought to be, be does what he 
ought to do. You are caſt down and complain, 
O Candidue, becauſe the monade of your ſoul is 
weary : but this wearineſs is a modification of the 
ſoul, and is no argument againſt every thing being 
for the beſt with reſpect to yourſelf and others. 
When you ſaw me over-run with ulcers, I ſtood 
firm to my opinion; for it Miſs Paquetta had not 
given mea reliſh for the pleaſures of love, and its 
poiſon, I ſhould not have met with you in Hol- 
land; 1 ſhould not have given an occaſion to 

| James 


CAN DLIDdU 8. 139 


James the A nabaptiſt to do a meritorious action; 
I ſhould not have been banged at | iſbon for the 
edification of our neighbour; I ſhould not be 
here to comfort you with my advices, to live and 
die in the opinion of Leibnitz. Yes! my dear 
Candidus, the whole is a concatenation, every 
thing is neceſſary in the beſt of poſſible worlds. 
There is an abſolute neceſſity for the burgeſs of 
Montauban to inſtruct kings, and the worm of 
Quimper- Corentin to criticiſe, criticife, criticiſe. 
The impeacher of philoſophers is neceſſitated to 
be cruciſed in St. Denis's ſtreet ; and the fame 
nect ffity obliges the flogging pendant of the Re- 
coll.ts and the archdean of dt. Malo to diſtil gall 
and calumny from tbeir Chriſtian Journals. Philo- 
ſophy lies under the neceſſity to be impeached 
at the tribunal of Melpomene. Philoſophers are 
obliged to continue to enligbten mankind, not- 
withſtanding the ſnarling envious brutes that gro- 


vel in the mud of literature. And were you to 
be kicked from the fineſt of caſtles, and under the 


neceſſity of learning again the Eulgarian exerciſe, 


run the gauntlet, ſuffer once more the effects of 


a Dutch ſiow, and be ſent back to i iſban to be 
cruelly ſcourged by order of the holy inquiſition, 
to undergo the fame dangers among the PADREs, 
the OnEII.LOxS, and the FRENCH; if you were 
in ſhort, to bear all poſſible calamities, and though 


you did not underſtand Leibnitz better than I do 


myſelf, you would always maintain that every 
thing is right, and for the beſt; that the plenum, 


and the materia ſubtilis,the pre-eſtabliſbed harmony, 


and the monades, are the fr<ttieft things in the 
_ world; 


140 CANDIDUS. 


world; and that Leibnitz isa great man, even to 
thoſe who do not underſtand him. 

To this fine diſcourſe, Candidus, the mildeſt of 
all the beings of nature, though indeed he had 
killed three men, two of whom were prieſts, did 
not give an anſwer, but being weary of the Doc- 
tor and his company, he ſet out, the next morn- 
ing by break of day, with a white ſtick in his 
hand, not knowing whither he was going, in 
fearch of a place devoid of wearineſs, and where 
men ſhould not be men, as in the good country 
of Eldorado. | 

Can-{idus, leſs unhappy ſince he no longer was 
in love with Mits Cunegonda, got his ſubliftence 
from the liberality of different people, who were 
not Chriſt:ans, but were charitable. He arrived, 
after a very tedious and painful march, at Tauris, 
a city on the frontiers of Perſia, famous for the 
_ cruehties exerciſed there alternately by Turks and 
Perfians. 

Candidus being quite ſpent with fatigue, ha- 
ing ſcarcely as many eloaths as could cover the 
Sifinguiſhing mark of man, and what man calls 
bis /bame, was beginning to doubt whether he 
ſhould believe Pangloſs, when a Perfian made up 
to him in a very polite manner, and intreated him 
to ennoble his houſe by his preſence. You joke, 
ſurely, faid Candidus; lam a poor devil, who have 
left a wretched babitation that I had at the Pro- 
pontis, becauſe I married Miſs Cunegonda, who is 
become very ugly, and becauſe I was weary. I 
am not indeed fit to eunoble any one's houſe 1 
— WT WO be to God; if I had 

the 


CAN DID Us. 141 


the honour to be fo, the Honourable Baron of 
Thunder-ten-tronckh ſhould have paid very dear- 
ly for the kicks on the breech he thought proper 
to give me, or | ſhould have died ior ſhame, which 
would have been too philoſophical. Beſides, I 
was ſcourged very ignomimiouſly by the ex2cution- 
ers of the holy inquiſition, and by two thouſand 
heroes, whoſe pay is three pence three farthings 
a day, Give me what-ever you pleaſe, but do not 
inſult me in my diſtreſs by banters that would de- 
preriate the merit of your favours. My Lord, 
replied che Perſian, you may be a heggar, and that 
is pretty viſible you are ſo but my religion o- 
bliges me to be hoſpitable. You area fellow-creas 
ture, and in want, theretore the apple of my eye 
ſhall be your path. Deign to ennoble my houſe 
by your radiant prefence. I ſhall do as you pleaſe, 
replied Candidus. Step in, ſaid the Perſian. 
They walk in; and Candidus, full of admiration, 
was quite altoniſhed at the reſpect that his land- 
lord thewed him. Lhe flives anticipated all his 
defiress The whole houſe ſeemed intent to pro- 
cute him full ſatisfaction. Provided this continues, 
ſaid Candidus, matters are not io bad in this coun- 
try. [Thrice days had paſſed, and the Perſian 
generofity ſtill laſted as uſual. Candidus begins 
to exclaim, O Maſter Pangloſs, I ſuſpected always 
that you was in the right; for you are a great 
philoſopher | 


CHAP. 


CAN DID US. 


— 
CHAP. IL 


What befel Candidus in this houſe, and how he left 
it. 


Andidus well fed, well clothed, and in high 
0 ſpirits, quickly became again as ruddy. as 
freth, and as pretty, as when he was in Weltpha- 
lia, This change gave a great deal of pleaſure 
to Iſhmael Rahab, his landlord. This man, 
who was fix feet high, had two ſmall red ſparkling 
eyes; and his pimpled noſe, of a pretty large ſize, 
was a ſufficient indication that he infringed the 
law of Mahomet. His whiſkers were renowned 
in the province, and mothers were earneſtly pray» 
ing that their ſons might have the like muſtaches. 
Rahab had wives, becauſe he was rich: but he was 
of an opinion that prevails but too commonly in 
the kt aft, and in fome colleges of Europe Your 
excellence is more beautiful than the ſtars, ſaid 
the artful Perfian, one day, to our unſuſpecting 
hero, gently ſtroking him under the chin; your 
charms mult have captivated many hearts; you 
were born to give and to enjoy happineſs. Alas! 


replied Candidus, I was but half happy behind the 


ſcreen, for I was far from being at my eaſe. Cune- 
gonda was then handſlome——Cunegon:ia poor 


innocent! Follow me, my Lord, fa; d the Perfian; 


and Candidus followed him. 


They 


{ 
| 
' 
| 
: 


CAN DID US. 143 


They came to a moſt inchanting incloſure at 
the bottom of a wood, where filence and volup- 
tuouſneſs ſeemed to reign. 'I here Iſhamel Rahab 
tenderly embracing Candiqus, in few words de- 
clared a paſhon for him, like that which the beau» 
titul Alexis ſo feelingly deſcribes in the Bucolics 
of Virgil. Candidus was unable to recover from 
lis aſtoniſnment. No, cried he, I will never 
ſudmit to fuch infamy! What a ſtrange cauſe, and 
what a ſhocking effect! I had rather ſuffer death, 
Thou ſhalt die then, ſaid the furious Iſhmael. 
How ! Chriſtian dog, becauſe I very politely 
meant to give thee pleaſure !—— Reſolve to ſa · 
tisfy me, cr to endure the moſt cruel death. Can» 
did us did not long befitate. The Perfian's power 
ful arguments were lufficient to make hm trem- 
ble; but he feared death like a philoſopher, 

Cuſtom ſoon reconciles us to any thing. Can» 
didus, well fed, well inſtructed, though confined, 
was not abſolutely diſſatisfied, with his ſituation. 
Good living, and the various entertainments ex- 
kibited by the flaves of Iſhmael, gave ſome inter- 
miſhon to his grief; he was unhappy only when 
he reflected; and ſo are the gteateſt part of man- 
kind. 

About this time one of the chief ſupports of 
the church militant of Perſia, the moſt learned of 
all the Mahometan dectors, who underitood * ra- 
bic at his fingers ends, and even the Greek which 
is at this day ſpoken in the country of De- 
moſthenes and Sophocles, the Rev. Ed Ivan Baal- 
Denk returned from Conſtantinople, where he had 
b:en diſputing with the Rev. Mamoud- Abram, 

| on 


144 CANDIDUS. 


on a very delicate point of doQtrine, namely, 
Whether the prophet had plucked the quiil with 
which he wrote the Alcoran, out of the wing of 
the angel Gabriel, or whether Gabriel had preſent- 
ed it to him ? They had diſputed, during three 
days and three nights, with a zeal worthy ot the 
ages moſt renowned for controverſy, when the 
Doctor returned perſuaded, like all the diſciples 
of Ali, that Mahomet had plucked the quill ; and 
Mamoud- Abram remained convinced like the reſt 
of the ſect of Omar, that the prophet was inca- 
pable of ſuch a piece of rudeneſs, and that the an · 
gel preſented it to him with the molt becoming 
grace imaginable, 

It was a report, that there had been, at Con- 
ſtantinople, a kind of free thinker, who had in- 
ſin uated, that it was proper to enquire into the 
truth of the Alcoran's having been actually written 
with a quiil taken irom the angel Gabriel; but 
he was ſtoned. | 

Candidus's arrival made a great noiſe in Tauris; 
ſeveral perſons who had heard of contingent eſſects, 
and effects not contingent, began to doubt of his 
being a philoſopher They mentioned it to the 
Rev. Ed-Ivan Baal-Denk; he was curious to fee 
him; and Rahab, who could not refuſe a perſon 
of his conſideration, ordered Candidus into his re» 
ſence. He ſeemed entired ſatisfied with Candi- 
dus's manner of reaioning on phyfical and moral 
evil, on things active and paſſive. I vaderitand 
you are a philoſopher, and that is ſuficient, ſaid 

the Venerable Zenobite ; it is very 1mproper that 
| fo great a man a5 jou are ſhould be treated un- 
2 


I 
Ce A— — 2 


CAN DID USV. 145 


worthily, which I am told is the caſe. Tou are 
a ſiranger, Iſhmael Rahab has no right over you. 
I will cake you to court, where you will meet with 
a favourable reception : the Sophi is fond of the 
ſciences. Iſhmael, deliver this young philoſopher 
into my hands, or you will incur the diſpleaſure of 
your prince, and draw upon you the vengeance 
of heaven, but more eſpecially ot its miniſters, 
Theſe laſt words terrified the intrepid Petſian; 
he conſented to every thing; and Candidus, bleſ - 
Gng heaven and the prieſthood, departed from 
Tauris that very day with the Mabometan Doc- 
tor. They took the road to Iſpahan, where they 
arrived amidit the bleſſings and — of 
the people. 
CHAP. III. 

Candidus's reception at court, and what followed. 


He Rev. Ed. lvan- Baal-Denk delayed not 
to preſent Candidus to the King. His 


Majeſty took a particular pleaſure in liſtening to 
his diſcourſe, and placed him among the learned 


men of his court; but theſe learned men treated 
him as an ignorant fool, and an idiot, which very 
much contributed to perfwade his M. jeſty 


that he was a great man. Becauſe, faid he to 


them, you cannot comprehend Candidus's argu+ 
ments, you affront him; but, for my part, tho 
I underitand them no better than you, I aſſure 
* that he is a great philoſopher ; I ſwear jt by 

G my 


146 CANDIDUS. 


my whiſkers. Theſe words impoſed ſilence on 
the learned. 

Candidus was lodged i in the palace, and allow- 
ed ſlaves for his ſervice; he was cloathed in a 
magnificent ſuit, and the Sophi commanded, 
that, let him ſay what he would, no one fhould 
care to prove him in the wrong. His majeſty 
did not ſtcp here. The venerable prieſt ceaſed 
not to importune him in favour of Candidus ;z and 
be reſolved, at Jaſt, to rank him with his mold 
intimate favourites. 

God be praiſed and our holy prophet, faid 
the Iman, addreſſing Candidus, I have brought 
you a molt agreeab' piece of intelligence. How 
happy are you, my dear Candidus! How will 
you be envied! You will ſwim in opulence ; 
you may aſpire to the moſt illuſtrious employ» 
ments of the empire Forget me not, however, 
my dear friend; remember that you are obliged 
to me for the favours with which you will ſoon 
be honoured. The King wil! beſtow upon you 
2a kindneſs which is greatly elieemed, and you 
will ſhortly exhibit an entertiinment which the 
court has not enjoyed this two years. And, 
Pray, what are the honours deſigned me by the 
prince ? ſaid Candidus. This very day, replied 
the prieſt, quite delighted, you will receive fifty 
ſtrokes upon the ſoles of your feet, with a bull's 
pizzle, in the preſence of his Majeſty. The eu- 
nuche, who are to perfume you, will be here im- 
mediately ; prepare to ſupport, with beccmihg 
_ reſolution, this little trial, and make yourtelt wor- 
thy of the king of kings. Let the king of kings 
** ; T | keep 


CANDIDUS 7 


keep his ſavours, cried Candidus, if, to deſerve 
them, I muſt receive fifty Rrokes with a bull's 
pizzle It is his cuſtom, rephe the doctor cold- 
ly, with thoſe on whom he would beftow hi; fa- 
vours ; I efteem you too much to report vour le- 
JuQance, and I will make you happy in ſpite 1 
yourſelt. 

They had ſcarce 8 when the eu- 
nuchs ente red, preceded by the executor of his 
Majeſty's minute pleaſures, who was one of the 
talleſt and molt robuit lords of the court, Can- 
didus would rather have been excuſed, but, in 
ſpite of all he could ſay or do, they peifumed 
his legs and feet according to cuſtom. F-ur 
eunuchs conducted him to the place app i ned 
ſor the ceremony, in the midſt of a double rank 
of ſoldiers, to the ſound of muſical inſtruments, 
cannon, and the ringing of bells. The Sophi 
was already there, attended by bis principal offi- 
cers, and the moſt intelligent of his courtiers. 
Candidus was (ſtretched in a moment on a gilded 
bench, and the executor of the minute pleaſures 


was preparing to enter upon his office. O Pan» 


gloſs, Pangloſs, if you were heie !——faid Can- 
didus, crying and weeping with all his might; 
which would have been thought very indecent, 
if the prieſt had not aſſerted, that his favourite 
behaved in this manner only to give his Majeſty 
more entertainment. In truth, this great king 
laughed moſt im moderately; he was ſo pleaſed 
with the ſight, that, when the fifty ſtrokes were 
given, he ordered fifty more. But his prime mi- 

niſter having repreſented, with uncommon boid- 
G 2 neſs, 


149 CANDIDUS. 


neſs, that this favour, conferred on a ſtranger, 
might alienate the hearts cf bis ſubjects, he te- 
_ voked his order, and Candidus was remanded 
back to his apartment. . 

bey put him to bed, having bathed his feet 
with vinegar | he nobility came one after a- 
nother to congratulate him; even the Sophi ho- 
noured him with his preſence ; he not only ſuf- 
ſered him to kiſs his hand, but gave him a devil- 
iſü knock in the jaws with his fiſt, Ihe poli- 
ticians conjeured from this that his fortune was 
made; and what is more extraordinary, though 
' Politicians, they were not miſtaken. 


CHAP. 1V. 


Candidus receives new favours. His elevation. 


O ſooner was our hero recovered, than 
he was preſented to the King in order to 
expreſ> bis gratitude for the favours with which 
he had been honoured, I be monarch received 
bim graciouſly ; moreover he deigned to give 
him two or thee flaps in the face during the 
converſation ; and when he took his leave, con- 
deſcended to kick his backſide as he went along, 
even as far as the guardroom ; the courtiers were 
all ready to die with enry. Since the time bis 
Majeſty bad firſt begun to bruiſe his ſpecial ſa- 
vourites, no one ever bad the honour to be fo 
thoroughly. bruiſed as Candidus. | 
Three days after this audience, our philoſo - 
pher, 


CANDIDUS. 149 


pher, who was ready to go mad at the favours 
he had received, and beyan to think that things 
went very ill, was named governor of Chuiiitan, 
with deſpotic power. tie was decorated with a 
fur cap, which in Perſia is a mark of high diſ- 
tinction. tHlaving taken leave of the 5ophi, who 
honoured him with the repetition of ſome favours, 
he ſet out for Sus, the capital of the province. 
From the moment Candidus had appeared at 
court, the grandees of the empire con{pired his 
deftruction. Lhe exceſhve favours which the 
Sophi had fo laviſhly beſtowed on him, ſerved 
only to encreaſe the ſtorm which was ready to 
burſt over bis head. Nevertheleſs, he rejoiced 
in his good fortune, and eſpecially in his re- 
mote ſituation: his ideas anticipated the plez- 
ſures of ſupremacy, and he faid from the bottom. 
of his heart, 


Thrice happy they who from their ſovereign dwell 
Far diftant ! —— 


ö 

l Scarce had he travelled twenty miles from Iſ- 
paban, when, on a ſudden, a body of five hun- 
, dred cavalry ſaluted him with a fucious diſcharge 
- of their caibines, Candidus thought at firſt it 
A was intended as a compliment; but a ball which 


1 ſhattered his leg to pieces, ſoon convinced him 
* of his miſtake. His people threw down their 
_- arms, and Candidus, almoit dead, was carried to 
4 2 defolate caſtle. His baggage, his camels, his 
0 | flaves, his white eunuchs, ' his black eunuchs, 
and thirty-fix wives which the Sophi had given 
T | 


G 3 him 


150 C AN DID US. 


bim for his own uſe, all became the ſpoil of the 
conquerors. I bey cut off the leg of our hero to 
prevent a mortification, and endeavoured to pre- 
ſerve his life to the intent that he might ſuffer a 
more cruel death. | 
O Pangloſs, Pangloſs! what would become 
of your optimiſm, if you now beheld me, with 
only one leg, in the hands of my cruel enemies? 
When I had juſt entered the path of felicity ; 
juſt made governor, or rather king, of one of 
the moſt conſiderable provinces of the empire of 
ancient Media; when I became poſſeſſed of 
camels, ſlaves, white eunuchs and black eunuchs, 
and thirty fix wires for my own uſe, and of which 
I bad yet made no uſe—— [ſhus Candidus ſpoke 
when he was able to ſpeak. 
But whilſt he thus bewailed his miſery, for- 
tune ſtcod his friend. The prime miniſter. be- 
ing informed of the violence which had been 
committed, had diſpatched a ſufficient body of 
veterars in purſuit of the rebels; and the prieſt 
Ed-Ivan Baal- Denk had publiſhed, by means of 
other prieſts, that Candidus being favoured by 
the ptieſls was conſequently a favourite with 
God. Beſides, thoſe who were acquainted with 
the conſpiracy, were the more . impatient to dif- 
cover it, fince the miniſters of religion had de- 
clared in the name of Mahomet, that if any one 
had eaten ſwine's fleſh, drank wine, paſſed ſeve- 
ral days without bathing, or viſited a woman at 
an improper time, contrary to the expreſs com · 
mands of the Alcoran, ſhould upon declazing 
ol what he knew of the conſpiracy, be ip/o facto 
| abſolved, 


| 
J 
1 
ö 


CAN DID US. 151 


abſolved. Candidus's priſon was ſoon diſcover* 


ed: it was inſtantly torced open, and, as religion 
was concerned, tke vanquiſhed were, according 
to rule, exterminated. Candidus walked over 
heaps of dead bodies, triumphed over the great» 
eſt danger he had ever yet experienced, and, toge - 
ther with his attendants, continued his route to- 
wards his government; where he was received as 
a peculiar favourite who had been honoured with 
the baſtinado in the preſence ot the king of 


kings. 
C H A P. V. 
As how Candidus was a great prince, but not ſa· 
tified. 


Hiloſophy inſpires men with the love of their 

fellow creatures: Paſcal is almoſt the ſole 
philoſopher who ſeems endeavouring to make us 
hate them. Happily Candidus had never read 


Paſcal : he loved poor humanity with all his ſoul. 


Honeſt men perceived his diſpoſition; they bad 
hitherto been kept at a diſtance from the Mifſe 
Deminici of Perſia ; but it was not difficult for 


them to aſſemble in the preſence of Candidus, 


and to aid him with their counſel. He made 
many wile regulations for the enccuragement of 


agriculture, population, commerce, and the arts. 


He rewarded thoſe who had made uſeful cxperi- 
ments; and even thoſe who bad only written 
books, were encouraged. When all my ſub» 


G 4 jecte 


152 CAN DID US. 


jects are contented, (ſaid Candidus to himfelf 
with the moſt charming candour imaginable} 
then poſſibly I may be happy. He was but little 
acquainted with human nature. His reputation 
was attacked in ſeditious libels, and he was ca- 
lumniated in a work called P Ani des hommes. 
He found, that, by endeavouring to make men 
bappy he did but excite their ingratitude. O, 
eried Candidus, how difficult it is to govern 
theſe unfledged animals which vegetate on the 
face of the earth ! Why did I not remain on my 
little farm, in the company of Maſter Pangloſs, 
Cunegonda, the daughter of Pope Urban X. who 

bas but one buttock, Friar GircMlee, and the 
luxurious Paquetta | 


CHAP. VI. 
Candidus's pleaſures. 


Andidus wrote a moſt pathetic letter to the 
* Right Reverend Ed. Ivan-Baal-Denk, in 
the extremity of his grief; who was ſo extremely 
affected with the ſad pictu e of his miſery, that 
he adviſed the Sophi to diſmiſs Candidus from 
his employment. His Majeſty, in recompence 
for his ſervices, granted him a very conſiderable 
penſion. Thus caſed of the weight of grandeur, 
pur philoſopher ſought the optimiſm of Pangloſs 
in the pleaſures of private life. Hitherto he ſeem- 
ed to have lived for others, and to have forgot 
that 3 He now recollected this 
circumſtance 


CANDIDUS rg; 


circumſtance with that emotion which the very 
idea of a feraglio inſpires. Let all things be 
prepared, faid he to his prime eunuch, for my 
entrance among my wives, My Lord, replied 
the ſqueaking gentleman, it is now that your 
Excellence deſerves the name of wiſe. Men, 
for whom you have done fo much, were un- 
worthy: of your attention; but women Ir 

may be fo, ſaid Candidus very modeſtly. 
In the centre of a garden, in which nature 
was aſſiſted by art to develope her charms, ſtood 
a ſmall fabric whoſe ſtructure was ſimple, yet e- 
legant, and therefore quite different ſrom thoſe 
which are ſeen in the ſuburbs of the moſt mag- 
nificent cities in Europe. Candidus approachs 
ed this temple, but not without a bluſh The 
foft air ſpread a delicious fragrance round the 
peaceſul manſion. The flowers amorouſly en- 
twined, ſeemed guided by the inſtinck of plea» 
ſure; nor were they only the flowers of a day; 
the roſe never loſt its vermillion. The remote 
view of a ſhaggy rock, whence fell a rapid tor- 
rent, ſeemed calculated to invite the ſoul to that 
ſweet melancholy which precedes enjoyment. 
Candidus trembling, entered the ſaloon, where 
taſte and magnificence were elegantly diſplayed; 
a ſecret charm thrilled through every ſenſe. tle 
beholds, breathing upon the eanvas, the youth» 
ful Telemachus in the midſt of the nymphs of 
Calypſo's court. He then turns his eyes to a 
half naked Diana flying into the arms of Endy- 
mion. But his agitation increaſed, when he 
beheld a Venus faithfully copied from that of 
G 5 | Medicis. 


* 4 
A dl 4 wt x . 1 
FT be”, ay . het — 2 i ö 1 * ry > ; 
1 * * - 


154 CANDIDUS 


Medicis. All at once.he is ſtruck with the 
ſound of divine muſic; a number of young 
Circaſſian women appeared covered with theic 
veils; they form around him a dance agreea- 
bly imagined, and more veritable than thoſe 
which are exibited upon the ſtage after the death 
of your Cæſats and your Pompeys. 

At a certain fignal their veils dropt: their 
expreſſive features add new life to the entertain» 
ment: they ptactiſe every bewitching attitude, 
but without any apparent defign : one by her 
leering eyes expreffed a boundleſs paſſion ; ano- 
ther in a ſoft langucr ſeemed to expect pleaſure 
without ſeeking it; a third bends forward, but 
raiſed herſelf immediately fo as to afford a tran» 
fient glance at thoſe raviſhing charms, which at 
Paris the fair ſcx ſo profuſely diſplay ; a fourth 
carelefsly throws back the ſkirt of her robe, and 
. difcovers a leg, which of itſelf was ſufficient to 
flame a man of delicacy. The dance ceaſes, 
and the beauties ſtand motionleſs. 

The filence that reigned recalls Candidus to 
himſelf; the fury of love ruſhes into his heart : 
his inſatiable looks wander on all fides ; he kiſ · 

fes the inflaming lips and moiſtened eyes ; he 

puts his hands on balls whiter than alabaſter; 
their heaving and elaftic motion makes the hand 
reccil; he admires the due proportions ; he ob- 
ſerves the ruddy tips, like the buds of the new 
ſpringing roſe, that do not blow till recreated 
by the beneficent rays of the ſun; he kiſſes 
them with ecſlacy, and his mouth ſlicks cloſe 
to them, 


CANDIDUS. 185 


Our philoſopher contemplates with attention 
one of a more delicate ſhape and majeſtic de- 
portment than the reſt ; but throws his handker- 
chief to a young nymph whole languiſhing eyes 
ſeemed peculiarly to court his affection, and 
whoſe beauty was improved by her bluſhes. 
The eunuch inſtantly. epened the door of an a- 
partment which was conſecrated to the mylteries 
of love. The lovers entered, and the eunuch 

* faid to his maſter, You are now going to be. 
happy» Ob, replied Candidus, I hope fam. 
| The cieling and the walls of this delightful 
chamber were covered with micrors, and in the 
middle ſtood a couch of black fattin. Here he. 
ſeated the fair Circaſſian, and began to undreſs 
her wich wnconceivable alertneſs. Ihe good. 
creature did not interrupt him, except to expreſs 
her affection by her kiſſes. O, my Lord, ſaid 
ſhe, like a true Mahometan, how happy you have 
made your flave! How you honour her by your 
tranſports ! Thefe few words charmed ou: phi- 
loſopher, he was loſt in ecſtacy, and every thing 
he beheld was entirely new to him. What 
difference between Cunegonda grown ugly, and 
violated by Bulgarian heroes, and a young Cir» 
caſſtan of eighteen, who was never ravithed ! 
This was the firſt time that poor Candidus had 
taſted pleaſure. - ſhe objects which he devour- 
ed, were repeated in the glaſs. Which way. 
ſoever he turned his eyes, he ſas the black ſatin . 
contraſted with the whiteſt (kin in the un: verſe. 
He beheld— —but I am obliged to comply with . 
the falſe delicacy of our language. Let it ſuf * 
8 G 6 fies 


N 0 1 * 
that FR * N 7 
m 9 : ” 
- 
* 


CAN DID US. 


fice to ſay, that our philoſopher was completely 
happy. | 
O moſter, my dear Maſter Pangloſs! eried Can- 
didus quite tranſported, all is full as well here 
as in Eldorado; nothing but a fine woman can 
fatisfy the defiies of man. I am as happy as it is 
poſſible to be. Leibnitz is in the right, and you 
are a great philoſopher ;z for inſtance, I make no 
doubt but you, my lovely angel, are inclined to- 
wards optimiſm, as you have always becn happy. 
Alas! replied the Circafhan, I know not what 
you mean by optimiſm; but your flave was ne- 
ver bappy before to day. If my lord will deign 
to hear me, I will convince bim of this by a con- 
ciſe relation of my adventures. With all my 
heart, ſaid Candidus: I am in a proper ſtate of 
tranquillity to hſten to a tale: and ſo the lovely 
angel began her ſtory as follows. 


156 


C HA. vn. 
The hiftory of Zirza. 


Y father was a Chrifiian, and I alſo am a 

Chriſtian, as he informed me. He dwelt 
in a ſmall hermitage in the neighbourhood of Co- 
tatis, where he attracted the veneration of the 
faithful, by his fervent devotion, and auſterity of 
manners, which was ſhocking to haman nature. 
The women came in crouds to pay him homage, 
and took a ſingular delight in kiſſing his backſide, 
which was every day gored with ſtripes of dif- 
cipline, 


CATUuIDUS 9 


cipline, I certainly owe my being to one of the 
moſt devout of them I was brought up in 2 
ſubterraneous cave near my faiher's cell. I was 
twelve vears old, without having once (fied from 
this tomb, 2s | may call it, when the eth trem- 
bled, with a terrible noife : the vault where I lay 
ſunk down, and | was with difficulty taken from 
under the rubbiſh. I was half dead, when, for 
the firi) time in my life, my eyes were ſtruck with 
the light of day. My father tovk me into his 
hermitage as a predeſtined child: the whole affair 
appeared ſtrange to the people. My father cried 
out a miracle, and the people joined in the cry, 

| was called Zirza. which, in the Perſian lan- 
guage, ſignifies child of Providence. It was not 
long before the beauty of your poor flare excited 
the curiolity of the public The women began 
to viſit the hermitage leis frequently, and the men 
much oſtner. One of them ſaid he loved me, 
Wicked wretch, cried my father, art thou quali- 
fied to love her? She is a treaſure which God 
hath committed to my care: he appeared to me 
hſt night in the figure of a yenerabic hermit, and 
commanded oe not to part with her for leſs than 
two thouſand crowns. Be gone, vile beggar, leſt 
thy impure breath thould contaminate her charms. 
I confeſs, anſwered the youth, that 1 have only 
a heart to offer her; but, monſter, art thou not 
aſham ed to proſtitute the name of the Deity to 
thy avarice ? With what face, wretch as thou art, 
doit thou dare to 4ff-rt that God ſpoke to thee ? 
It is degrading the Almighty to repreſent him con- 
verſing with men like thee, O blaſphemy! etied 


158 CANDIDUS: 


my father in a violent paſſion: God himſelf com- 
manded that blaſphemers ſhould be ſtoned. Say- 
ing theſe words, he murdered my unhappy lover, 
and his blood ſpurted in my face. Now, though 
I was yet unacquainted with love, I found myſe!F 
ſo far intereſted in the fate of my lover, that the 
ſigbit of my father became inſupportable to me. I 
reſolved to leave him: he perceived my deſign. 
Ungrateful girl, ſaid he, it is to me thou art in- 
debted for thy being; thou art my daughter, and 
yet thou hateſt me! but thou ſhalt no longer hate 
me without cauſe. He kept his word but too re» 
Iigiouſly, Uuring five ſad years which | paſſed 
in tears and groans, neither my youth nor faded 
beauty had power to relax his ſeverity. Some» 
times he would thruſt a thoutand pins into every 
pait ot my body; then with his diicipiine he would 
cover my backſde with blood. That gave you 
leſs pain tban the pins, ſaid Candidus. True, 
my Lord, replied Z. za. At laſt, however, I 
found means to eſcape , and not daring to confide 
in any man, I hid myſeli in the woods. Uhree 
days I ipent without food, and thould certainly 
have died of hunger, but tor-a tyg-r to whom I 
had the good fortune to be ag ceable, aud who was 
kind enough. to divide bis prey wich me But I 
was olten dreadfully frightened by this terrible 
animal, the brute had ance like to have raviſhed 
from me the flower, the plucking of which has 
given your Locdihip fo much p in and pleaiure. 
My food gave me the ſcurvy : but I was no ſoon - 
er cured than I tcl; wed a flave merchant who 
was travelling to Teflis, where the plague then 

raged, 


CAN DI. p U 8. 159 


rage d, and I ſoon became infected. Theſe mis - 
fortunes, however, had ſo little affected my charms, 
that the purveyor of the court thought fit to pur - 
chaſe me for your uſe. It is now three months 
that I have languiſhed among the reſt of your 
wives: we all began to imagine ourſelves deſpiſ- 
ed. O, Sir, if you did but know how diſagree- 
ble and impreper theſe eunuchs are to conſole 
neglettedgirls. In ſhort, | have not yet lived eighs 
teen years, twelve of which I paſſed in a dungeon; 
I have felt an earthquake; I was ſprinkled with 
the blood of the firſt amiable man I had ſeen; 
during five whole years I endured the moit cruel 
torture; I have had the ſcurvy and the plague. 
Pin:ng in the midſt of a company of black and 
white monſters, ſtill preſerving that which I bad 
ſaved from the fury of a tyger, and curfing my 
deſtiny. I ſpent three long months in this ſerag - 
lio and ſhould moſt certainly have died of the 
green lickuefs, it your t.xcellence bad not honours 
ed me with your embraces. 

O heavens ! ſaid Car:didus, is it poſſible at your 
age to bare experienced ſuch fad miztortunes ? 
What would Fanglois ſay if he could hear your 
ſtory? but your misfortunes as well as mine are 
at an end. Things are not now io bad; do you 
think they are? aying theſe words he renewed 
his careſſes, and became more and more confu med 
in the opinions of I anyloſs, 


CHAP. 


CANDIDUS. 


CH AP. VIII. 


Candidus's diſguſt. A meeting which be did nat 
| expect. 


UR philoſopher, in the midſt of his ſeraglio, 
diſtribuced his favours with tolerable im- 
partiality : he enjoyed the pleaſure of variety, and 
returned with freſh ardour to the fair ſlave. But 
this did not continue long. He now began to fecl 
violent pains in his Joins, and was alſo frequently 
alited with the cholic. In being happy he be- 
came emaciated. Zirza's neck appeared neither 
ſio white nor ſo admirably turned; her ſhape Joſt 
kalf its delicacy ; her eyes, in the eyes of Candi- 
dus, feemed leſs ſparkling z her complexion ap- 
| peared leſs beautiful, and the raviſhing vermilion 
of her lips ſcemed quite faded. He perceived 
that ſhe did not walk well, and was not entirely 
fatisfed with her breath. He alſo diſcovered a 
mole where he bad conceived no blemiſh The 
3mpetuoſity of her paſſion became troubleſome. In 
| his other wives he coolly obſerved many defects, 
which, during his firſt tranſpor ts, had eſcaped his 
notice: their lewdneſs grew offenſive. He was 
aſhamed to have followed the example of the 
_ wiſeſt of all men, ef invenit amariorem morte 

Candidus, ſtill firm in his Chriſtian ſentiments, 
ſauntered for want of employment in the ſtreets 
of dus; where, to his great ſurprize, a gentle- 


CANDIDUS, 161 


man richly dreſſed, caught him in his arms, cal- 
ling him by bis name. Is it poſſible, faid Can» 
didus, bleſs my ſpirit! It cannot be Let 
there is ſo ſtriking a reſemblance—— Abbe Peri- 
gourdin——[t is even fo, replied Perigourdin. 
Candidus ſtept back three paces, and ingenuouſly 
ſaid, But are you happy, my dear dit? A fine 
queſtion truly, anſwercd Perigourdin : the liitle 
trick which I put upon you at Paris, ferved only 
to eitabliſh my credit The police employed me 
a while, but diſagreeing with them at laſt, I threw 
off the eccleſiaſtical habit, which was of uſe no 
longer to me, and went over to England, where 
thoſe of my proteſſion are better paid. I revealed 
all that I knew, and all that I did not know, of 
the ſtrength and weakneſs of the country I had 
quitted. I ſwore that the French were a raſcally 
people, and that London was the only magazine 
of good ſenſe; in ſhort, I made a confderable 
fortune, and am come hither to negotiate a trea- 
ty at the court of Perſia, in which the Sopbi is 
bound to exterminate every European who ſhall 
enter his dominions in ſearch of cotton or filk, to 
the prejudice of the Engliſh. U be object of you 
embaſſy, laid our philotopher, is doub:le's very 
commendable ; but, dir, you are a great raſcal z 
I do not like villany, and I bave ſome intereſt at 
court: tremble, therefore, for your proſperity is 
at an end; you will ſoon feel the puniſhment 
due to your crimes. U Moſt Nobie Lord Can- 
didus, ſaid Perigourd in, falling on his knees, 


| have mercy on me: I am driven to wickedneſs 


by an irteſiſtible impulſe, in the ſame manner as 
you 


16 CAN DID US. 


you are impelled to virtue. I perceived this fa> 
tal inclination the moment I was acquainted with 
Mr Walſp, and became a writer in the Feuller 
® Feulles, cries Candidus, what are thoſe ? 
they ate, replied Perigourdin, certain pamphlets 
of ſeventy pages, in which the public are p riodi- 
cally entertained with ſcandal, fatire, and Billing- 
ſgate. It is an honeſt man, who having learned 
to read and write, and not being able to continue 
| Jeſuit ſo long as he could have wiſhed, ſet about 
this pretty little performance, in order to buy lace 
for his wife, and bring up his children in the 
fear of God. There are alſo a ſet of hone/t gen» 
tlemen who for a few pence, and now and then a 
gill of bad wine, aſſiſt the other honeſt man in 
carrying on his work. This Monſieur Walſp is 

a member of an extraordinary club, whoſe chief 
amuſement is to make a few drunken people deny 
their God : or to aſſiſt ſome poor fool in ſpend- 
ing his fortune, break his furniture, and then ſend 
bim a challenge: theſe are no more than little 
gentilities, which theſe gentlemen call miftificatt- 
eng, and which nevertheleſs merit the notice of the 

| police. 


This is one of the thirty or forty periodical 
papers printed at Paris. It is only known in France, 
where it meets with ſucceſs among alt ranks. But 
theſe looſe ſheets of ſeventy two pages mult not be 
confounded with others, compriſed under the fame 
number of pages, wherein the author is indulgent 
to himſelf, and theſe papers, however, are much eſ- 
teemed by philoſophers, 


e AN DID us. 163 


police. In ſhort, this very honeſt Monſieur Walſp, 
who denies his ever having been fent to the galleys, 
is blefſed with a lethargy which renders bim in- 
ſenſible to the ſevereſt truth ; and it is impoſſible 
to rouſe him but by certain violent means, which 
he endures with a magnanimity and reſignation | 
| beyond all belief. I laboured ſome time under 
' this celebrated author; I became famous in my 
turn, and had ju left Monfieur Walſp, with an 
intention to begin for myſelf, when I had the ho- 
nour to pay my reſpects to you at Paris Lou 
are a vile rogue, ſaid Candidus; but your ſinceri- 
ty moves me, Go directly to court, and preſent 
yourſelfto the Right Reverend Ed Ivan-Baal- Denkt 
I will write to him in your favour, on condition 
that you promiſe to become an honeſt man, and 
that you do not inſiſt on having thouſands of peo- 
ple killed, for the take of a little fiik and cotton. 
Perigourdin promiſed all that Candidus defired 
of him, and they parted friends. 


CHAP. 


164 c AN DID us. 


CHAP. IX 
Candidus's diſgrace, travels, and adventures. 


No ſooner was Perigourdin arrived at court, 
than he uſed all his art to gain the mini 
ter, and ruin his benefaftor. He reported that 
Candidus was a traitor, and that he had fpok-n 
diſreſpectfully of the ſacred whiſkers of the king 
of kings. It was the general opinion of the cour- 
tiers, that he ought te be roaſted at a flow fire; 
but the Sophi, with more humanity, was graciouſ- 
ly pleaſed to condemr. him only to perpetual ba- 
niſhment, after having kifſed the ſoles of his ac- 
cuſer's feet, according to the cuſtom of Perfia, 
Perigourdin ſet out in order to put this fentence 
in execution ; he found our philoſopher in tole- 
rable health, and almoſt di:poſed to renew his hap» 
pineſs My dear friend, faid the Engliſh ambaſ- 
fador, with the utmoſt regret I come to acquaint 
you, that you muſt quit this kingdom with all 
poſſible haſte, and alſo that you muſt kiſs the ſoles 
of my feet with ſincere contrition, for the enor- 
mous crimes of which you have been guil'y — 
Kiſs the ſoles of your feet! cried Candidus; upon my 
word, Mr Abbe, you carry your jokes too far: I do 
nct comprehend you. He had ſcarce ſpoken, be- 
fore the mutes, which attended Perigourdin, en- 
tered the room, and immediately took off his ſhoes. 
He was then told, that he muſt either ſubmit to 
this humiliation, or be impaled, Candidus, in 
£ | virtue 


CANDIDUS. - 165 


virtue of his free agency, kiſſed the Abbe's feet. 
They clothed him in a robe of coarſe canvas, and 
the hangman drove him out of the city, crving 
aloud, — He is a traitor ! he has ſpoken diſreſpect- 
fully of the Sophi's whiſkers, even of the whiſk- 
ers of the great king! 

But what was the officious Cenobite doing 
 _ whilit his favourite was thus diſgraced ? I really 

cannot tell. Peſſibly he was grown weary of 
patroniſing Candidus. Who can depend on prieſts 
or princes ! | 

In the mean time our hero trudged forrowfully 
along. I never in my life, ſaid he to himſelf, 
ſpoke of the king of Perſia's whiſkers. I am fal- 
len at once from the pinacle of fortune into the 
abyſs of miſery. becauſe I am accuſed, by a wretch, 
who has violated all laws, of a crime which I ne» 
ver committed ; and this fellow, this perſecutot 
of virtue, is happy. 

Candidus, after ſeveral days march, found him- 
ſelf on the borders of Turky He directed bis 
ſteps towards Propontis, being determined to fix 
| there once more, and to ſpend the remainder of 
his life in cultivating his garden. In paſſing 
through a ſmall town, he obſerved a multitude of 
people gathered together. He enquired the cauſe 
of this effect. Tis a very odd affair, anſwered 
an old man: you mult know, that, ſome time as 
go, the rich Mehemet obtained in marriage the 
daughter of the Janilary Zamoud: he found her 
not a virgin, and very naturally, according to law, 
cut off her noſe, and ſent her back to her father, 
Zamoud, enraged at the affront, as was quite na- 
| — tural, 


166 CANDIDUS. 


tural, in the firſt tranſport of his fury, cut off the 
head of his di: figured daughter, at one ſtroke of 
his fcimitar. His eldeſt ſon, who had a great 
affection for his fitter, which you know is natural 
enough, in the violence of his paſhon, very na- 
turally plunged a dagger in his father's breaſt; 

- then like a lion, whoſe rage increaſes at the fight 
of his own blood, the young Zamoud flew to the 
houſe of Mehemet, and having killed half a dozen 
flaves who oppoſed his entrance, he murdered 
Mehemet, his wives, and two chiliren in the 
cradle; after which be put an end to his own life 
with the dagger, yet recking with the blood of his 
father, and of his enemies, which, you know, 
was alſo quite natural ——O horrible! cried 
_ Candidus. O Maſter Pangloſs! if theſe barbari- 
ties are natural, would you not confeſs that na- 
ture is corrupted, and that all things are not ?— 
— No, replied the old man; the pre-eſtabliſhed 
harmony O heavens! cried Candidus, am 
I deceived ? Are you not Pangloſs himſelf ? * Tis 
even fo, ſaid the old man; I knew you at firſt, 
but I had a mind to penetrate into your ſenti- 
meats before I diſcovered myſelt. Come, let us 
reaſon a little upon contingent effects: let me ſee 
P bat progreſs you have made in the ſchool of 
wiſdom. TIruly, Mailer Pangloſs, ſaid Candidus, 
you time it very ill: inform me rather what is 
become of Cunegonda, and where is Friar Girof- 
flee, P:quetta, and the daughter of Pope Urban. 
J know nothing of the matter, replicd Panglofs ; 
"tis now two years ſince I left our habitation in 
ſearch of you. I have travelled over all Turky, 
and 


e AN DID VUsSV. 167 


and was now going to the court of Perſia, where, 
as I was informed, you had made your ſortune. 1 
remained in this town among theſe good people, 
only to recover a little ſtrength in order to purſue 
my journey. What do 1 ſee! faid Candidus in 
aſtoniſhment, You bare loſt an arm, my dear 
Panglois. That's nothing at all, replied Pan- 
gloſs; there is nothing more common than to 
ſee people with but one eye and one arm in this 
beſt of worlds. The accident happened in my 
journey to Mecca, Our caravan was attacked by 
a troop of Arabs; and as our eſcoit made refi- 
ſtance, the Arabs being the ſtrongeſt, according 
to the laws of war, maſſacred us ail. 

About five hundred people were killed in this 
affair, among whom were about a dozen women 
with child. For my part, I eſcaped with only a 
cloven {kull, and with the Jo's of an rm You 
ſee 1 am flill living, and have always found that 
every thing was for tte beſt. But you yourſelf, 
my dear Candidus, how happens it that you 
| have a wooden leg? Candidus then related his 
adventures. Out philoſophers then retu:ned to 
Propontis, amuſing themſelves as they went a- 
long with reaſcning on phyſical and nm oral evil, on 
free will and predeſtination, un menades and pre- 
eſtabliſhed harmony. 


CHAP. 


CANDIDUS. 


CHAP. X. 


The arrival of Candidus and Panglo/s in Propon- 
tis, what they ſaw there, and what became of 
them. 


- 


HY 'did you grow weary of cultivating 
your garden, my dear Candidus? faid 
Panglofs. Why could we not be content with 
our preſerved citron and piſtachio nuts? Why, 


were you tired of being happy ? Why, becauſe 


all things are neceffary in the beſt of worlds, it 
was therefore requiſite that you ſhould undergo 
the baſtinado in the preſence of the king of Per- 
ſia ; that you ſhould have your leg cut off to make 
the Suſians happy, to try the ingratitude of man- 


kind, and to draw down puniſhment on the 


heads of ſome villains who deſerved to ſuffer. 
Thus converfing, they came to their old dwelling. 
The firſt objects which ſtruck their eyes were 
Martin and Paquetta, in the habit of flaves. 
Whence comes this ſtrange change? ſaid Can» 
didus, tenderly embracing them. Alas! they 
replied fighing, You bave no longer a place of 
abode ; another is intruſted with the cultivation 
of your garden; he eats your preſerved citron 


and piſtachio nuts, and uſes us like negroes. 


Who is this other? ſaid Candidus, *Lis, faid 
they. 


CANDIDUS. 169 


they, the general of the marine, the leaſt humane 
of all human beings. The Sultan, willing to 
reward his ſervices, without being at any expence, 
confiſcated all your poſſeſſions, under pretence 
that you were gone over to his enemy, and con- 
demned us to ſlavery. Believe me, Candidus, 
added Martin, and proceed on your journey. I 
| have always told you, that every thing is for the 
worſt ; the ſum of evil greatly exceeds the ſum 
of good ; depart, I do not deſpair of your becom- 
ing a Manichean, if you are not one alteady. 
Pangloſs was going to argue in form ; but Can- 
didus interrupted him by enquiring after Cune- 
gonda, the old woman, Friar G:roffl-e, and of 
Cacam bo. Cacambo is here, teplied Martin; be 
is buſy in cleaning the common ſewer. [Ihe 
old woman is dead of a kick on the breaſt which 
was given her by an eunuch. Friar Cirofflee is 
entered among the Janiſaries. Madam Cune- 
gonda is grown fat again, and has recovered her 
former beauty; ſhe is in our maſter's ſeraglio. 
What a ſtring of unhappy wretches ! ſaid Can- 
didus. Was it neceſſary that Cunegonda ſh uld 
recover her beauty to make me a cuckold ? It is 
of little importance, faid Pangloſs, whether Ma- 
dam Cunegonda be handſome or ugly; whether 
ſhe is in your arms, or in tho'e-of another; it 
makes no difference in the general ſeſtem: for 
my part, I with her a numerous poſterity, Phi- 
lotophers never concern themſelves by whom 
women have children, provided they have them 
at all, Popul tion— Alas, faid Martin, philoſo- 
Phers had mu deter employ themſelves in contri» 
Yo H buting 


ER. 


175 AN DTD US. 


buting to the bappin-ſe of a ſew individuale, 
tha" un dertake to multiply the ſuffering ſoecies. 
y were ſpeaking, they bear d a 
great noiſe. was the general who had orders 
ed a dezen flaves to be fgged for his amuſe- 
ment Pangloſs and Candidus terrified, left their 
friend, with tears in their eyes, and _— took 
the road to Conttantinople, 

Here they found every body in an uproar: 
the fire began in the ſuburbs of Pera; it had al- 
reale comumed five or fx hundred houſes, ard 
two or tree thouſand people had perifhed in the 
flames What a ſhocking difaſter! cried Can- 
didus. ul for the beſt, ſaid Pangio's : theſe 
little accidents happen every year. It is very 
n2tu:ral that fire ſhould catch wooden houſes, and 
that thoſe houſes ſhould burn, Befites, it deli- 
vers many honeſt people from a miſerable exiſ- 
tence—— What do I bear? ſaid one of the of- 
cers of the Sublime Port How, wrerch! dareſt 
thou ſay it is all for the beſt, when half Conſtan- 
tinople is on fire? Go, dog, curſe prophet, go 
receive the puniſhment due to thy preſumption. 
In iaying theſe words, he took Pangloſs by the 
middle, and threw him beadlong inta the flames, 
Candidus, half dead with fear, crept, as weil as 
he could, inio a neighbouring quzrter, where 
things were more quiet; and what became ot him 
we mall fee in the next chapter. 


CANDIDUS. 171 
— — —— 
E 


Candidus continues his jaurnev ; and in what ca- 
pacity. | 


TFT Have now no other courſe to take, ſaid our 


philoſopher, than to (ell mvſelfa flave, or turn 
Turk. Happineſs has abindoned me for ever. 
A turban would corrupt all my pleaſures I feel 
myſelf incapable of enjoying peace of mind in a 
religion full of impoſture, and which I ſhould 
never embrace but from the baſe motive of inte- 
reſt. No, I ſhall never be content i! I ceaſe to 
be an honeſt man; I will therefore become a ſlave. 


No ſooner had Candidus taken this reſolution, 


than he determined to put it in practice. He 
fixed upon an Armenian merchant for his maſter ; 
his character was very good, and he was reputed 
to have as much virtue as an Armenian ccu!d 
poſſibly have. This irmenian was ready to fail 
for Norway: he took Candidus with him, hope 
ing that a philoſopher might be ſerviceable to 
him in his trade, They imbarked, and the wind 
was fo favourable to them, that they made their 


| paſſage in half the time which is generally requir= 


ed. {hey had no occeſion to purchaſe a wind 
of the Lapland mag'iciane, and theref:re thought 
it ſufficienr to give them ſome trifle, that they 
might not interrupt their good toctune by their 
| Ts H 2 witchciaſt ; 


- 


172 CAN DID US. 


witchcraft; which ſometimes happens, if one 
may belie vr Moreri's dictionary. 

As ſoon as they were landed, the Armenian 
made his market of whale blubber, and ordered 
our philoſopher to traverſe the country in ſearch 
of dry fiſh, He acquitted himſclf of his commiſ- 
fon as well as he could, and was returning with 
a number of rein-deer loaded with this commodi- 
ty, refleQtirg deeply on the amazing difference 
which he diſcovered between the Laplanders and 
other men, when he was accoſted by an extreme lit- 
tle Laponeſe. Hei head was rather larger than the 
reit of her body, her eyes red and fiery, her noſe 
flat, and her mouth reached from ear to er : ſhe 
bid him gvod morrow, with the moſt engaging 
air imaginable, My dear little Lord, ſaid this 
animal, who herſelf was but one foot ten inches 
bigh, you are exceedingly charming ; be ſo kind 
as to love me a little. So ſaying, ſhe threw her 
arms about his neck Candidus puſhed her trom 
him with inexpreſſible horror. She cried out; 
her buſband advanced, accompanied by a number 
of his countrymen. What is the meaning of 
this noiſe ? ſaid they. *Tis, ſaid the little ani- 
mal, only this ſtranger alas ! I cannot ſpeak 
for grief; he deſpiſes me. I underiiand you, 
ſaid the huſband. Impolite, uncivil, brutal, in- 
famous, cowardly raical, thou hatt brought ſhame 
upon my houſe ; thou haſt done me the greatc(t 
injury; thou haſt refuſed to lie with my wite. 
Is the man mad ? faid our hero What would 
jou have ſaid, bad I lain with her ? I ſhould have 
wiſhed you all manner of proſperity, ſaid the an- 


877 


CAN DID US. 173 


gry Laplander ; but thou deſerveſt my utmoſt in» 
dignation. 80 ſaying, he exerciſed his ſtick up- 
on the ſhoulders of Candidus without mercy. 
The tein-deer were ſeized by the relations of the 
affronted huſband z and Candidus, fearing worſe 
treatment, was obliged to betake himſelf to his 
heels, and evermore to renounce his good maſ- 
ter; for he durſt not appear before him 
without money, without fiſh, and without rein- 
deer. 


CHAP. XII. 


Candidut continues his jaurney. Neu advent 


ure. 


Andidus wandered a long time, without e- 
ven knowing whither he would go: he de- 
termined, at laſt, to make the beſt of his way to 
Denmark, where, he had heard, things went well. 
He found himſelf poſſeſſed of a little money, 
which the Armenian had given him; and, with 
this weak ſupport, be hoped to accompliſh his 
journey. This hope kept up his ſpirits, and he 
ſtill enjoyed ſome happy moments. He chan- 
ced, one day, to meet, in an inn, with three tra- 
vellers, who were talking with earneſtneſs of a 
plenum and materia: ſubtilis. Right, faid Can- 
didus to himlelf, theſe are philoſophers. Gen- 
tlemen; faid he, as to the plenum, it is inconte 

H 3 ible 


174 CAN DID Us. 


ible: there is no vacuum in nature, and the ma- 
teria ſubtilis is well imagined Then you are 
a Carteſian, ſaid the travellers, Yes, ſaid Can- 
didus ; and, what is ſtill more, I am a Leibnitz- 
jan. So much the worſe for yourſelf, replied 
the philoſophers. - Deſcartes and Leibnitz had 
not common ſenſe, As for us, we are Newtoni« 
ans, and we glory in the diſtinction; if we dif 
pute, it is only to ſtrengthen our own ſentiments, 
for we dre all of the ſame mind. We ſeck the 
truth upon Newtonian principles, becauſe we 
ate convinced that enten is a great man. 
And fo is Defcartes, fo is Leibnitz, fo is Pan- 
gloſs, ſaid Candidus : theſe are great men worth 
all che others. Tou are very impertinent. friend, 
replied the philoſophers. Are you acquainted 
with the Jaws of refrangibility, of attraction, and 


ef motion? Have you read Doctor Clarke's refu- 


tation of your Leibniz? Do you now what is 
meant by the centrifugal and petal force ? 
Do you know that colours are formed by denſity ? 
Have jou any notion of the theory of light, and 
of gravitation ? ie you ignorant of the period 
of 25,920 years, which unfortunately does not 
agree with chronology ? No; I warrant, your i- 
deas of all theſe things are falſe and imperfeQ; 
learn to keep ſilence therefore, for a pitiful 
Monade as you are; and be careful how you 
affront gentlemen by comparing them with pig - 
mies. Gentlemen, ſaid Candidus, if Pangloſs 
was here, he would teach you furpriſing things, 
for he is a great philoſopher : he has an abſo- 


Jute contempt for your Newton, and, as I am bis 


diſciple, 


' ov a DD. oi _a_ N 


CAWnDIDUS 76 


diſeiple, Newton is no great favourite of mine. 
The philoſophers, quite enraged, fel} upon Can- 
didus, and cur poor hero was erubbed moit phi- 
loſophically. r 

Their wrath appeaſing, they begged d the hero 
pardon jor their raihnets ; then one of them began 
to ipeak, aud ma''e a very beauiliui diſcoutſe on 
mzildneſs and maderatian. 

During this converiation there happened to 
paſs by a very pompous funeral, whei.ce cur 
phil-ſophers took uccafion to comment on the 
ridiculous vanity of mankind. Would it not, 
ſays one of them, be much more rational for the 
relations and friends of the deceaſed to carty, 
without pomp, the corpſe upon their own ſhoul- 
ders? Would not the muurniul employment 
more effectually excite the idea of death, and 
produce the moſt ialutary and philoſophical ei- 
fea? Would not this reflection naturally ariſe? 
his body which I carry is that of my friend, 
6 my relation; he is no more; and, like bun, 
« I muſt ceaſe to exiit ?” Might not ſuch a cu- 
ſtom, in ſome meaſure, dimintiih the crimes com- 
mitted in this unhappy world, and reclaim be- 
ings which believe in the ſuul's immortality ? 
Maukind are but too willing to keep the thought 
of death at a diſtance, that we ſhould be atiaid 
ot reminding them of their mortality too ctten. 
Why are not the weeping mother or husband 
at this ſolemnity? the plaintive accents of na- 


ture, the piercing cries oi deſpair, would do 


more honour to the aihes of the cead, than all 


thoſe ſable mutes, and that itring of Clergy, jo» 


H 4 | vially 


* 


176 CAN DID US. 
vially Gnging pſalms which they do not under 


ſtand. - -It is well ſaid, replied Candidus: if 
you did but always talk in this manner, without 
beating people, you would be a great philoſopher. 

Our travellers ſeparated with marks of mutual 
confidence and friendſhip. - Candidus, ſteering 
his courſe towards Denmark, foon found him- 
ſelf in the middle of a wood : in ruminating on 
the misfortunes which had befallen him in this 
beſt of worlds, he loſt his way. The day had 
confiderably declined when he perceived his 
miſtake. His courage failed, and ſorrowfully 
lifting up his eyes to heaven, our hero, leaning 
againſt a tree, expreſſed himſelf in the following 
words: I have traverſed half this globe; I have 
ſeen fraud and calumny triumphant ; my ſole 
intention has been to be ſerviceable to mankind, 
yet I have been conſtantly perſecuted. A great 
king honours me with his favour and the baſti- 
nado. I am ſent to a delighttul province, but 
with a wooden leg; there | taſted pleaſure after 
my misfortunes. An abbe arrives, and I pro- 
tect him: by my means he infinuates himſelf 
at court, and I am obliged to kiſs the ſoles of 
his feet. I meet my poor Pangloſs again, only 
to fee him burnt. I ſtumble upon a company 
of philoſophets, a ſpecies of animals, the mildeſt 
and moſt ſociable of any that are ſpread upon 
the lace of the earth, and they beat me moſt un- 
mercifully. Yet all muſt be right, becauſe 
Panglaſs ſaid ſo; nevertheleſs I am the moſt mi- 
ſerable of all poſſible be ings. 

His meditations were ſuddenly interrupted 


by 


CC 


c AN DI DUS. 157 


by piercing cries, which ſeemed not far eff. 


His curioſity led him on He beheld a young 


woman tearing her hair in the moſt violent agi- 
tation of deſpair. Whoſoever you are, faid ſhe, 
if you have a heart, follow me. He followed 
her, and the firſt object he heheld was a man 
and a woman extended on the graſs; their a- 
ſpect beſpoke the elevation of their minds and 
their diſtinguiſhed origin; their features, 
though disfigured by grief, expr-M:4 ſome+ 
thing ſo intereſting that Candidus ſympa- 
thiſed in their ſorrows, and could not help ea- 
gerly inquiring the cauſe of theic misfortunes. 
Theſe, ſaid the young woman, are my parents; 
yes, they are the authors of my unheppy being, 
continued ſhe, th:owing herſelt into their arms. 
They were forced to fly to avoid the rigour of 
an unjuſt ſentence: I attended them in theit 
flight, and was contented to ſhare their misfor- 


tunes, in hopes that I might be of ſome ſervice 


in procuring nourithment for them in the deſart, 
we were going to enter. We ttopt here to re- 
poſe a while, and unhappily diſcovering that 
tree, I was deceived in its fruit. O Sir! Iam 
a molt horrid criminal ! Arm yourſelf in defence - 


| of viftue, and puniſh me as I deſerve. Strike !? 


—— [hat -fruit——1 gave it to my parents; 
they eat of it with pleaſure : I rejoiced that 1 


had relieved them from the torment of thirſt. 
VUnbappilly, I preſented them with death: the 


fruit is poiſon. 

Candidus ſhook with horror ; - his hair Rood i 
upright ; a cold ſweat covered his whole body. 
Hs | He. 


- 


178 CAN DID Us. 


He immediately did all in his power to aſſiſt this 
wretched family; but the poifon had already 
made ſo much progreſs, that the beſt antidote 
weul l now have been ineffetual Dear, dear 
child, our only hope ana comfort! ſaid the ex- 
piring parents, forgive thyſelf; we ſincerely for · 
give thee; it was thy cx deſſive tenderneſs which 
deprives us of life——U generous ltrang-r, be 
Careful of our daughter: her heart is noble and 
formed for virtue; it is a treaſure which we 
commit to thy care, infinitely more precious 
than cur paſt ſortune. ideare!t Zenoide, re» 
ceive our laſt embraces; mix thy tears with ours. 
O heaven, what dclightful moments are theſe ! 
Thou haſt opened to us the door of the comforts 
Jeſs dungeon, in which we have lived forty te- 
dious years. We bleis thee with out laſt breath, 
Praying that thou mavſt never forget the leſſons 
which our prudence dictated; and that they 
may preſerve thee from the danger to which 
thou wilt neceflarily be expoſe dl 

Prunourcing thete worde, they expired. Cans 
didus had great difficulty to bring Z-uoide to 
herſelf. The ſolitude of the place, and the pale 
light of the moon, rendered the melancholy 
ſcene ſtill more affecting. Lhe day began to 
dawn befcre Zenvide recovered the uſe of her 
ſenſes. She no ſooner opened her eyes than 
ſhe deſired Candidus te dig a hole to inter the 
bodies: even the berſelt aſſiſted with aſtoniſhing 
reſolution. This duty being difcharged, ſhe 
gave vent to her tears. Our philoſopher per- 
tuaded her to quit this fatal ſpot z and they walk- 
mo 


ed along for ſome time, without knowing whi- 
ther they went. At length they perceived a 
little cortage, which was inhabited by an old 
man and his wife, who, in the midſt of this de- 
ſart, were always ready to render all the ſervice 
in their power to their diſtreſſed brethren. This 
couple were, in fact, what Philemon and Baucis 
are ſaid to have been. They had enjoved the 
ſweets of Hymen forty years, without one bitter 
draught. Conilant health, the pioduce of tem- 
perance and tranquillity z a pleaſing limplicity of 
manners; an exhauſtleſs fund of candour in their 
diſpoſition; all the virtues for which man is in- 
debted to himſelf alone, compoſed the happy 
lot which heaven had been pleaſed to grant 
them. They were held in great veneration in 
the neighbouring hamlets, whole inhabitants, 
happy in their ruſticity, might have paſſed for 
very honeſt people, if they had been Catholicks. 
They conſidered it as their duty to ſupport Aga- 
ton and Suname (ſuch wete the natnes of this 
old couple) and they now extended their charity 
to the two ſtrangers. Alas! ſaid Candidus, 
what pity is it that you, my poor Pangloſs, were 
burnt: I knew zou were quite right; but it 
was not in thoſe parts of Europe and + ſia, 
which we traverſed together, that all is forthe 
beit: it is in elidorado, which it is impoſſible to 
reach: and in a little cottage, ſituated in the 
coldeſt, the moſt barren, and the moit diſmal 
country in the whole univerſe. What pleature 
ſhould | have had to hear you, in this cabin, talk. 

H 6 o. 


180 CAN DID US. 


of pre-eftabliſhed harmony and monades! I ſhould 
like to ſpend the reſt of my days among theſe 
honeſt Lutherans z but it would oblige me to 
renounce going to maſs, and expoſe me to the 
laſh of the Journal Cretien. 

Candidus was very deſirous to know the ad- 
ventures of Zenoide Modeſty hindered him 
ſrom it quiring. She obſerved him, and ſatisſi- 
ed his anxiety by the following recital. 


C HAP. XIII. 


The flory Zenoide. How Candidus became 
in love with her, and the conſequences. 


Am deſcended from one of the moſt ancient 
houſes of Denmark; one of my anceſtors 
periſhed in that place where the cruel Chriſtiern 
cauſed ſuch a number of ſenators to be killed. The 
accumulated riches and honours of my family 
ſerved only to render their misfortunes more il- 
 luftrious. My father had the boldneſs to diſo- 
blige a man in power, by ſpeaking the truth ; 
he ſuborned falſe accuſcrs, who charged him 
with ſeveral imaginary crimes. The judges 
were deceived; Alas! what judge can always 
avoid the ſnares which calumny ſpreads for in · 
nocence? My father was condemned to be be- 
headed on a ſcaffold. Flight only could preſerve 
him, and he took refuge with a friend, one 
whom he thought worthy ot this amiable appel- 
lation. We continued ſome time concealed in 
N > 


CANDIDd US. 181 


a caſtle on the ſea-ſhore which belonged to him; 
and here we might have been ſtill ſecure, if the 
cruel wretch, taking advantage of our deplorable 
fituation, had not exaCted a price for his friends 
ſhip, which made us conſider him with deteſia- 
tion. The infamous creature had conceived a2 
violent paſſion for my mother and me: he made 
an attempt on our virtue by methods unworthy 
of a gentleman, and, to avoid the effects of his 
brutality, we were obliged to expoſe ourſelves to 
the moſt frightiul dangers ; we betook ourſelves 
to flight a ſecond time, and you know the reſt. 
Here Zenoide finiſhed her relation, and ſhe be- 
gan to weep afreſh. Candidus dried up her 
tears, and ſaid in order to comfort her: It is all 
for the beſt, my dear Miſs ; for, if your father 
had not been poiſoned, he would, molt infalli- 
bly, have been diſcovered, and they would have 
cut his head off: your mother would have died 
of grief, perhaps; and we ſhould not now be in 
this poor cottage, where all things are much 
better, than in the moit charming caſtte imagi- 
nable. Alas! Sir, replied Zenoide, my father 
never told me that all was for the beſt. We 
all belong to one Cod, who loves us; but he 
will not ex:-mpt us from the devouring cares, the 
cruel diſtempers, the innumerable evils to which 
buman nature is liable. In America, poiſon, 
and the bak grow cloſe to each other. The 
bappieſt of mortals has thed tears. A mixture 
of pleaſures and pain couſtitutes what we call 
life, ha: is to ſay, a determined ſpace of time 
(always too long in the opinion of wiſdom) 
| which 


192 CAN DID US. 


which ought to be employed in the being uſe- 
ful to the ſociety of which we ate members, to 
rej>:ce in the works of the Almighty ;z without 
fooiithly enquiring into their cauſes; to regu- 
late our conduct upon the teſtimony of our con- 
ſcience, and above all, to refpect our religion: 
happy it we could always obſerve its pre- 
cepts ! | 
In this manner have I heard my honoured 
father frequently ſpeak What preſumptuous 
wretches, would he ſay, are thoſe rab ſcribblers 
who ſeck to penetrate into the ſecrets of the Al- 
mighty? Un the principle that God expects to 
be hunvured by the numberleſs atoms to whom 
he Fas given exiſtence, mankind have united 
ridiculous chimeras, with the moſt reſpectable 
truths. The Derviſe among the Turks, the 
Bramin in Perſia, the Bonze in China, the Ta- 
lapoin in India, all worſhip the Deity in a dit- 
ferent manner; nevertheleſs they enjoy peace of 
mind, though bewildered in obſcurity 3 thofe 
who would endeavour to diſpel the miſt, would 
da them no ſervice; he cannot be ſaid to love 
mankind, who would remove their prejudices. 
You ſpeak like a philoſopher, ſaid Canuidus: 
may I preſume to aſk you, my deareſt young lady, 
of wiat religion you ate. I was brought up a 
Luth-cran, replied Z-noide ; it is the teligion of 
my country. Every thing you ſay, continued 
Candidus, is a ray of light which peneirates my 
ſoul ; you fill me with eſteem and admiration. 


— tow is it poſſible that ſo much ſenſe thould 
inhabit ſo fair a body? Indeed, my dear Miis, 
| I 


/ 4 


CANDIDUS. 183 


I love and admire you to ſuch a degree Can- 
didus ſtammeted out ſomething more; but Ze- 
noide, obſerving his contuſGon, retired . from 
that moment ſhe avoided all occahtions ot being 
alone with him, and Candidus tought every op- 
portunity of being either alone with her or entire- 
ly by himſelf, te was feized with a melancho- 
ly, which, however, was nor unpicaſing: he was 
violently enamuured with Zenbide, yet endea- 
voured to diiſ-wuble bis paſſion; but his looks 
berrayed the tecret of his heart. Alas! faid he, 
it Pangloſs was here, he would give me good 
advice, tor he was a great philoſopher, 


CHAP. XIV. 


Continuation of Candidus's amour. 


Andidus was obliged to be content with 
0 the poor conſolation of converſing 
with the charming Zenoide in the preſence 
of the old man and his wife. And was 
it poſſible, ſaid he one Gay, to the miſtreſs of bis 
heart, that the king whom you were allowed to 
approach, couid permit ſuch a fiagrant act of in- 
juſtice to your family? You have great reaſon to 
hate him Alas ! replicd Zenoide, who can 
hate their king ? | 

W ho can avoid loving him who is intruſted 
with the glittering blade ol the law ? Kings are 
the 


1% AN DID us. 


the viſible images of the deity : we ovght never 
to condemn their conduct : obedience and re- 
ſpect ate the duties of good ſubjects. I admire 
you more and more, anſwered Candidus; pray, 
Miſs, are you acquainted with the great Leib- 
nitz, and the great Pangloſs, who was burnt, af- 
ter having eſcaped hanging ? Do you know the 
monades, the materia ſubtilis, and the vortices? 
No, Sir, faid Zenoide; my father never men - 
tioned any of theſe things : he gave me only a 
flight notion of experimental philoſophy, and 
taught me to deſpiſe every kind of philoſophy 
which did not ditectly tend to promote the hap- 
pineſs of mankind : which inſpires him with 
falſe notions of his duty towards his neighbour : 
which does not teach him how to regulate his 
manners; which ſerves only to fiil his mind 
with unintelligible words, and raſh conjectures ; . 
which cannot give a clearer idea of the author 
of our being, than that which we form from his 

wor ks, and the miracles which are daily perform> 
ed before our eyes. Upon my word, NM:fs, ſaid 
Candidus, I admire you beyond expreſſiou: I am 
inchanted ; I am raviſhed ; you a:e certainly an 
angel ſent from heaven to con ute the f phiims 
of Maſter Pangloſs. Ignorant animal that I 
was! After having endued a prodigious num 
ber of kicks on the backfide, of firipes acroſs my 
ſhoulde:s, of (trckes with a bulPs pizzle n the 
ſoles of my feet; after having felt an earthquake; 
after having heen pretent at the hanging of Doc - 
tor Pangloſs, and lately ſeen him burnt alive; 
after having been iguominiouſly uſed by a vile 
1 Perſian; 


e AN DID VUsVs. 135 


Perſian z after having been plundered by order 
of the divan, and drubbed by a company of phi- 
loſophers ; notwithſtanding all this, I believed 
that all was for the beſt ; but I am now entirely 
undeceived. Nevertheleſs, nature never appear» 
ed to me ſo beautiful as fince I have beheld you. 
The rural concerts of birds ſtrike my ears with 
a harmony, to which, till now, I was quite in- 
ſenfible. All nature blooms, and the beauty 
of your ſentiments ſeems to animate every ob- 
jet I feel none of that voluptuous languor 
which I experienced in my garden at Sus; the 
paſhon you inſpire is quite different. Forbear, 
ſaid Zenoide, leſt you offend that delicacy which 
you ought to reſpect. I will be filent then, 
ſaid Candidus, but that will only augment my 
paſſion. He looked earneſtly at Zenoide, as he 
pronounced theſe words; he perceived that ſhe 
bluſhed, and thence, like a man of experience, 
he conceived the moſt flattering hopes. 

The young Dane continued for ſome time 
to ſhun ber lover. One day as he was walking 
baſtily in the garden, he cried out in a tranſport 
of love, O that I had but my tldoradonian ſheep! 
Why am I not able to buy a little kingdom 
What would you make me? ſaid a voice that 
ſhot through the heart of our philoſopher. Is 
it ycu, charming Zenoide ? ſaid he, falling up- 
on his knees at her feet, I thought myſelf alone. 
The few words you ſpoke ſeemed to flatter my 
hopes. I ſhall never be a king, and poſſibly 
never ſhall be rich; but if I were beloved by 
you—— O do not turn away thoſe charming 


EJESg 


186 CANDIDUS. 


eyes, but let me read in them a con eſſion which 
alone can make me happy. Beautiful Ze noi le, 
F adore you : for heaven's fake be merciful — 
Ah! what do I ſee? You werp. Gods, I 
am too happy. Yes, ſaid Zenoide, you are bhap- 
py 3 nothing obliges me to conceal my ſenfbi- 
lity from a perſon who deſerves it. ititherto 
you have been attached to my deſtiny by the 
ties of humanity only: it is now time to 
trengthen our union with more holy bonds. I 
have deliberately eonſulted my own heart; do 
you alſo maturely reflect, and abore all things 
remember, that by marrying me you engage 10 
become my protector ; to ſoften and participate 
the miferies which fate may ſlill have reterved 
for me. Marry you? ſaid Candidus; theſe 
words have at once opened my eyes, and ſhewn 
me the imprudence of my conduct. Alas! 
ſweet lady, I am unworthy of your goodneſs : 
Cunegonda is yet living. Cunegonda, who 
is ſhe? my wife, replied Candidus, with his ue 
fual ingenuity. 
Our lovers ſtood filent for fome moments; 

they would have ſpoken, but the words expired 
upon their lips: their eyes ſwam in tears. 
Candidus held both her hands in his: he preſſed 
them to bis heart; he devoured them with k:iTes, 
He had the courage to touch her heaving breatt, 


and found that fhe breathed with difficulty. 
His ſoul rofe up to his lips, which by preſhag 
thoſe of Zenoide, brought her to herſelf. Can» 
didus thought he ſaw his p-1don written in her 
1 Dear Candidus, faid ſhe, my diſpleaſure 
would 


e AN DID us. 187 


would but ill repay thoſe tranſports which my 
heart in ſpite of me approves. Yet hold; you 
will ruin me in the opinion of mankind, and 
you will ceaſe to love me when I am become 
the object of their contempt. Stop then, and 
reſpect my weakneſs. What! ſaid Candidus, 
becauſe ihe ſtupid vulgar ſay that a girl is diſ- 
honoured in making her lover happy in follows 
ing the generous dictates of nature, which in 
the early ages ot the world 

We ſhall not relate all this intereſting conver» 
ſation ; we ſhall content ourſelves with ſaying 
that Candidus's eloquence, embellithed by the 
expreſſions of love, had all the effect that he 
could expect, on a young and tender hearted 
le male philoſopher. 

Our lovers, who had 3 paſſed their 
time in ditquietude and affliction, were now 
continually intoxicated with pleaſure, I he fi- 
lence of the foreſt, the mountains covered with 
| brambles and ſurrounded with precipices ; the 
frozen waters, and the barren fields with which 
they were ſurrounded, ſerved but to perſuade 
them ot the neceſſity of love: they reſolved ne» 
ver to leave this frightful ſolitude ; but deitiny 
was not yet weary of her perſecutions, as we all 
ſee in the next chapter. 


CHAP, 


* 
1 


% 8 CANDIDUS. 


CHAP. IV. 
The arrival of Volhall. Journey to Copenhagen. 


C 


Andidus and Zenoide amuſed themſelves 
with reaſoning on the works of the Creator, 
on the worſhip due to him from mankind, on the 
duties of ſociety, more eſpecially on charity, 
which, of all other virtues, is the moſt uſeful of 
our fellow-creatures. They were not content 
with vain declamations : Candidus taught youth 
to reſpe@ the facred reſtriftions of the law, and 
Zenoide inſtructed young maidens in their duty 
to their parents; they united their endeavour: to 
fow the prolific ſeeds of religion in juvenile 
minds, One day as they were employed in this 
pious buſineſs, Suname acquainted Zenoide, that 
an old gentleman, with ſeveral attendants, was 
juſt come, and inquired for a perfon who, ſhe was 
convinced by his deſcription, could be no other 
than the beautiful Zenoĩde. The gentleman who 
followed her cloſe, entered almott at the ſame in- 
lane. 
2noide fainted away as ſoon as ſhe ſaw him; 
but Volhall, unmoved at this affecting fight, took 
her by the hand, and dragged her with ſo much 
violence that ſhe came to herſelf; but it was on» 
ly to ſhed a torrent of tears. It is very well, 
niece, ſaid he, with a feyere ſmile, I have caught 
you in fine company; no wonder you thould pre- 
| fer 


a 


CANDIDUS, 189 


ſer it to the capital, to my houſe, and to your 
own f:mily, Yes, Sir, replied Zenoide, I prefer 
the habitation of truih and cundour to that of 


treachery and im poſtu e LI ſhall never behcld 


without horror, the place where my mis/ortunes 
began, where have had fuck convincing proofs 
of your baſeneſs, and where you are the only re- 
lation I haves, Lo Matter, Miſs, replied Volhall, 
you ſhall follow me, if you pleaſe, though you 
were to have another fit. So ſaying, he dragged 
her along, and put her into a chaiſe She had 
but juſt time to bid Candidus follow her, to bleſs 
her kind hoſt aud hoſteſs, promiſing to reward 
them for their generous hoſpitality. 

One of Volhall's ſervants, b-ing moved with 
Candidus's affliction, and b-lieving he had no o- 
ther intereſt in the young lady than what virtue 
in diltreſs might inſpire, adviſed him to take a 
j--urney to Copenhagen. He told bim, he could 
probably get him admitted into VolhalPs family, 
if he bad no other reſource, Candidus accepted 
his offer, and being ariived, his future comrade 
preſented him as a relation for whoſe fi.ielity he 
would anſwer. Maraut, ſaid Volhall, I conſent; 
you ſhall have the honour of waiting on a man of 
my rank and diſtinQion ; but be careful always 
to pay an implicit obedience to my will: anti- 
cipate my commands, if you are endowed with 
ſufficient penetration: remember that a man of 


my diſtinction degrades himſelf by converſing 


with iuch a wretch as you. Our philoſopher re- 


plied with great ſubmiſſion to this impertinent 


harangue, 


CANDIDUS. 


harangve, and that very day was drefſed in his 
maſter's livery. 

One may eaſily imagine Z,-noide's amazement 
and jov, when ſhe recollected her lover among 
her uncle's fervants She gave him all the op- 
portunities ſhe could, which Candidus judiciouſ- 
ly improved to their mutual fatisfaftion. They 
vowed an everlaſting conſtancy ; nevertheleſs Ze- 
noide was far from heing quite eaſy : ſhe ſome- 
times condemned her p>ſſinn for Candidus, and 
would now and then afflict him for amuſement; 
but Candidus adored ber: he knew that perfec- 
tion did not fall to the lot of man, much leſs of 
woman. Zenoide recevered her good humour 
in his arms; the conſtraint they were obliged to 
obſerve increaſed their enjoyment, and they were 


ktill bappr. 


190 


CHAP. XVI. 


Hou Candidus Found tis wife again. How be 
was deprived of his miſtreſs. 


UR hero had no hardſhip to undergo 
but the haughtineſs of his maſter, and 
this was not purchaſing at too dear a rate the 
favours of his miſtreſs. Happy lovers cannot 
conceal their paſſion ſo eaſily as is commonly 
imagined ; they ſoon betraved their own fecter ; 
their connexion was no longer a myſtery to any 
one in the houſe, except Volhall himſelf. Can- 
didus was honoured with felicitations that made 
him 


CANDIDUS. 195 


him tremble, be expected the ſtorm which was 
about to burſt over his head, and was in no 
doubt that the perſon who had bcen fo dear to 
him, was upon the point of accelerating his mis- 
fortunes. 

For fome days paſt Candidus had obſerved a 
woman, whoie face bore a ſtrong reſemblance 
to that of Cunegonda + he now faw her again in 
the court-yard, but her garb was mean; beſides, 
there was rot the leaſt probability that the fa» 
vourite mifl:eſs of a rich Mahometan ſhould ap- 
pear in the court yard of an inn at Copenhagen, 
Nevertheleſs this difagreeable object fixed her 
eyes on Candidus with great attention. She 
now precipitately approached, and ſaluted him 
with the moſt violent box on the ear he ever 
received in his life, I was not deceived, cricd 
our philoſopher; O heavens, who could have 
thought it! What buſineſs have you here, after 
ſuffcring yourfelt to be raviſhed by a Maho- 
metan? Go, per fidiqus fpouſe, I know nothing 
of ycu. {hou ſhalt know me by my fury, faid 
Cunegonda. I know all thy wicked cou fes, 
thy intrigue with thy maſter's niece, thy c n= 
tempt of me. Alas! it is three months ſince I 
was turned out of the ſeraglio, becauſe I was 
no longer uſeful à merchant bought me to 
mend his linen, and having occation to make a 
voyage to theſe parts, brought me along with 
him. Martin, Cacambo, and P-quetta, whom 
be alſo purchaſed, are of the party Voctor 
Pangloſs allo, by the greiteit chance imaginable, 
was a pafſenger ia the ſame ſhip: we were caſt 

away 


192 c AN DID us. 


away a few miles from hence; | efcaped with 
boneſt Cacambo. whoſe fleſh, 1 aflure thee, is as 
firm as thine; and I have found thee again to 
my ſorrow, for thy infidelity is manifeſt. ſrem- 
ble therefore, and dread the vengeance of an in- 
jured woman. 

Candidus was fo ſtupified with this moving 
ſcene, that he ſuffered Cunegonda to depart 
without conſdering how neseſſary it is to keep 
terms with thoſe who are in our ſecrets, when 
all at once Cacambo preſented himſelf to his 
view. They tenderly embraced. Candidus en- 
quired into the truth of what he had heard, and 
was extremely afflicte d for the Joſs of the great 
Pangloſs, who, after baving been hanged and 
burnt, was moſt miſerably drowned. He ſpoke 
of him with that effuſion of heart, which true 
friendſhip inſpires. A billet which Zenoide 
threw out of the window, put an end to their 
converſation. Candidus opened it, and read 
as follows: 

« Fly, my dear lover, every thing is diſco- 
vered. A: innocent and natural inclination, 
which does no injury to ſociety, is a crime in 
the eſtimation of credulous and cruel men. 
Volhall bas this moment leit my chamber, alter 
treating me with the utmoſt inhumanity : he is 
gone to obtain an order to have you immured 
in a dungcon Fly, therefore, my dear, dear 
lover, and fave a life which I am no longer ſuf- 
fered to enjoy. Thoſe happy days are paſt, 
when out mutual tenderneſs —— Ah! wretched. 
Zenoide, what haſt thou done to deſerve the 
wrath 


6 
| 

r 

5 

4 
e 


CANDIDUS, 193 


wrath of heaven! But I wander: O do not for- 
get thy dear Zenoide. Dear Candidus, thy i- 
mage will never be effaced from my heart 


No, thou never knew how much I loved thee. 


— Oh that thou couldſt receive from my 
burning lips, my laſt farewel, and my laſt ſigh! 
1 feel that I am ready to follow my unhappy 
father: I hold the world in abhorrence; it is 
all treachery and guilt.” 

Cacambo, always retaining his wiſdom and 
prudence, drew along with him Candidus, who 
had loſt all the power of his ſenſiti ve faculties. 
They went, by the ſhorteſt way, out of the city. 
Candidus d:d not open his mouth ; and they had 
got a good diſtance from Copenhagen, beſore he 
was rouſed from his lethargy ; but, at laſt look» 


ing on his faithful Cacambo, he thus ſpoke. 


C HAP. XVII. 


How Candidus intended to kill himſelf, and did not 
effeuate it. What happened to him in an inn. 


E AR Cacambo, formerly my ſervant, 
now my cqual, and always my friend, 
thou haſt partaken ſome of my misfortunes, thou 
haſt given me ſalutary advices, thou haſt ſeen 
my love for Miſs Cunegonda Alas! my dear 
old maſter, ſaid Cacambo, it is ſhe #ho played 
you this moſt baſe trick. Being informed by 
your * that you was deep in love with 
1 Zrnoide, 


194 CAN DID usS. 


Zenoide, as ſhe was with you, ſhe revealed the 
whole ſcene to the barbarous Volhall. Since 
this is the caſe, ſaid Candidus, death is my only 
refuge. Our philoſopher then taking a penknife 
| out of his pocket, began to whet it with a com · 
poſure worthy of an ancient Roman, or of an 
Engliſhman. What do you mean? ſaid Ca- 
cambo. To cut my throat, faid Candidus. 
An excellent thought, replied Cacambo; but 
wiſdom ſhould never determine, till after ma- 
ture deliberation ; the means of death will be 
always in your own power, if you continue in 
the ſame mind. Be adviſed, my dear maſter, 
and put it off till to-morrow; the longer you 
defer it, the more courageous will be the action. 
I kke thy reaſoning, faid Candidus ; beſides, if 
I ſhould cut my throat now, the gazetteer of Tre- 
voux would infalt my memory: it is then de - 
termined, I will not cut my throat for this two 
or three days at leaſt. Thus converfing they 


arrived at tifineur, a pretty confiderable town, 


at a little diſtance from Copenhagen : here they 
xeſted that night, and Cacambo applauded him- 
ſelf for the good effect which fleep had produced 
in the mind of Candidus They took their 
leave of this town at break of day; and Candi- 
dus, always a pbiloſopber, for the prejudices of 
youth are not ecafily effaced, entertained his 
friend Cacambo with a diſſertation on moral and 
phykGeal good, with the diſcourſes of the wiſe 
Zenoide, and the true lights he had received 
| from her learned converſation. If Pangloſs was 
not dead, faid he, I would confute bis ſyſtem be- 


8 
F 
, 
\ 
e 
d 
8 
r= 
d 


CAN DID US. 195 
yond contradiction. God preſerve me from be- 
coming a Manichean. My dear Miſtreſs has 
taught me to reſpect the impenetrable veil by 
which the Deity chuſes to. conceal his deſigns 
from mankind. Perhaps man himſelf is the 
cauſe of the misfortunes under which he groans : 
fruit eaters are become carnivorous animals. 
The ſavages we have ſeen devour only the Je- 
ſuits, yet they live in perfect harmony among 
themſelves; and thoſe which, by chance, are 
ſcattered through the deſatt, and feed only up- 


on roots and berbs, are certainly happy. 80o- 


ciety has given birth ts the moſt heinous crimes. . 


| There are people, who, from their fituation, ſeem 


as it were obliged to deſire the death of their 
fellow creatures. The fhipwreck of a veſſel, 
the burning of a houſe, and the loſs of a battle, 


is the occaſion of grief to ſome, and of joy to 


others. Things go very ill, my dear Cacambo, 
and a wiſe man has nothing to do but to cut his 
throat as genily as poſſhble. You are in the 


right, ſaid C cambo; but perceive an inn, you 


mult be thirſty; come, my old maſter, let up 
take a glaſs, and then we will proceed in our 
Philoſophical diſquiſitions. 

They entered the inn, where a croud of pegs | 
fants were dancing in the middle of the court, 
to the ſound of very bad inſtruments. A cheat- 
ful ſmile fat on- every face: it- was a picture 
worthy the pencil of Vatau. As ſoon as they 


perceived Candidus, 2 young girl took him by 
the hand, intreating him to dance. My: ſweet 


 _ lafs, replied Candidus, when a man bas lolt his 


I 2 | miſiteſs, 


196 CANDIDUS. 

miſtreſs, found his wife, and but juſt heard of 
the death of the great Panglofs, he can have no 
inclination to cut capers; beſides, I intend to 
kill myſelf to-morrow ; and you know, when a 
_ perſon has but a few hours to live, he ſhould 
not walte his time in dancing. Cacambo then 
advanced, and exprefi:d himfelf in the ſollowing 
manner: Great philoſophers have always had a 
paſſion for glory. Cato of Utica killed himſelf 
after having flept ſoundly; Socrates ſwallowed 
hemlock aſter familiarly converſing with his 
friends; ſeveral Engliſhmen have blown out 
their brains after coming from an entertain» 
ment: but I have never heard of any man who 
cut his throat after dancing. No, my dear 
maſter, this glory is reſerved for you. Let us 
dance our bellies full to-day, and we will kill 
ourſelves to morrow. Doft thou not obſerve, re · 
plicd Candidus, that pretty lively wench ? 
here is ſomething very ſtriking in her coun- 
tenance, faid Cacambo. She ſqueezed my hand, 
replied our philoſopher, Did you take notice, 
ſaid Cacambo, of her little round breatts, when 
her handkerchief flew back as ſhe was dancing ? 
Yes, I obſerved them well, taid Candidus: if 
my heart was not full of the charms of Miſs 
Zenoide—But the little black gil interrupted 
Cacambo, and again beſought him to dance. Cur 
hero was at laſt perſuaded, and danced with the 
genteeleſt air imaginable. He then embraced 
the pretty peaſant, and retired to his ſeat without 
aſking the queen of the bail to dance, Imme- 
diately there was a conluſed murmur, both the 
actors 


c AN DID US. 197 


actors and ſpectators were ſhocked at ſuch a ma- 
nifeſt neglect. Candidus was ignorant of his 
fault, and therefore could make no apol: gy. 
At length a great clown advanced, and gave 
bim a flap in the face, which was returned by 
Cacambo with a kick in the belly. [be inſtru- 
ments were ſcattered about in an inſlant, the 
women Joſt their caps, Candidus and Cacambo 
behaved like heroes; but they were forc-d 0 
betake themſelves to their heels, though quite 
crippled with the blows they bad teceised. 

I am very unlucky, ſaid Canitidus, leaning 
on his friend Cacambo; I had experienced great 
misfortunes, but I never expected to have had 
my bones broke for dancing with a peaſant = 
ber own debre, 


Candidus and Cacambo retire to an boſpital. Ad- 
venture there. | 


Acambo and his friend were unable to 
0 proceed; they began to give way to that 
dittemper of the ſoul which deſtroys all its fa- 
culties, dejection and deſpair: when looking 
up, they eſpied an hoſpital erected for travel 
lers. Cacambo entered, and Candidus follow- 
ed him; they were treated in the manner in 
which people are generally treated for the love 
of God. Their wounds were ſpeedily healed: 
but they both got the itch, which was not to be 
I 3 cured 


igs -CANDIDUS 


cured in a few days. This idea drew tears 
from the eyes of our philofopher, and, ſeratch - 
ing himfelf, he ſaid, O my dear Cacambo, why 
dioft thou hinder me from cutting my throat? 
Thy pernicious counſ:] hath plunged me again 
into diſgrace and misfortune : if I ſhould now 
cut my throat, they would ſay, in the Fournal 
of Trevoux, He was a coward ; he killed him- 
ſelf becauſe he bad the itch. See to what thou 
| haſt expoſed me by thy injudicious friend - 
- ſhip. Uur misfortunes are not without a re- 
medy, faid Cacambo; if you will follow my 
advice, we will become brothers of the hoſpi · 
tal; I underſtand a little of ſurgery, and I will 
engage to render our woful condition ſupport- 
able. Ab! cried: Candidus, pox take all the 
- affes in the world, and eſpecially thoſe chirur- 
gical aſſes, ſo fata] to human nature! No, I 
will not ſuffer thee to paſs for what thou art not; 
it were a piece of treachery, the conſequences 
of which might be terrible. Beſides, if thou 
didſt not know, after having been viceroy of a 
rich province, after having been able to purchaſe 
kingdoms, aſter having been the happy lover of 
Miſs Zenoide, how hard it is to refolve to ferve 
as mate in an hoſpital. All this I know full 
well; but I alſo know that it is very hard to die 
of hunger. Bcfites, the plan which I propofe 
is perhaps the only one to clude the cruelty of 
Volball. 

W kilſt he thus ſpake, one of the brothers of 
the hoſpital happening to paſs, aſked him a few 
queſtions, to which he replied properly. This 

brother 


CANDID US. 199 


brother aſſured them that the fraternity lived 
well, and enjoyed decent liberty. Candidus re- 
ſolved : they were admitted without ſcruple, and 
theſe two miſerable beings began to adminiſter 
comfort to beings yet more miſerable. 

One day as Candidus was diſtributing ſome 
bad broth among the patients, an old man par- 
ticularly caught his attention. He ſeemed in 
the agony of death. Poor man, faid Candidus, 
how I pity you! You mult ſuffer terribly. In- 
deed I do, he replied, with a hollow ſepulchral 
voice :- they tell me that | have a complication 
of diſlempers, and that | am poxed to the very 
bone; if fo, I muſt needs be extremely ill. 
Nevertheleſs, it is all for the beſt, and that is 
my conſolation. No man in the world, faid 
Candidus, but Doctor Pangloſs, could maintain 
optimiſm in fuch a deplorable tuation, when 
every other mortal would preach peſſ——. Do 
not pronounce that deteſtable word, ſaid the 
poor old man; I am that very Pangloſs. 
Weretch, let me die in peace: all things are 
good, every thing is beſt. The effort he made 
in pronouncing theſe words, coſt him his laſt 
tooth, and in a few moments after he expired. 

Candidus bewailed his death, after he had a good 
heart; his obſtinacy, however, afforded matter 
of reflexion to our philoſopher. He would fre- 
quently ruminate on his adventures. Cunegon - 
da remained at Copenhagen, where, he was in- 
formed, ſhe mended ſhirts and ſtockings with 
great reputation. He had now loſt ali his paſ- 
Gon for travelling. The faithful Cacambo aſ- 

I 4 ſiſted 


26060 C AND ID US. 

ſiſted him with his advice and friendſhip. He 
never complained at the diſpenſations of provi- 
dence: I know, he would ſometimes ſay, that 
happineſs is not the lot of humanity; it is no 
where to be found except in the good country 


of Eldorado; but it is not poſſivle to go thi · 
ther. 


New adventures, 


FN Andidus was not altoge:her . unhappy, for 
0 he had a real friend. lie had found in 
an American mongrel valet, what we ſcek for in 
Furope to no purpoſe. Perhaps nature, who has 
planted ſimples in America proper tor the diſtem- 
pers of European bodies, may there alſo hare 
ſawn remedies for the diſorders of our hearts and 
minds. 'Perhaps there are a ſpecies of men in 
this new world, who are formed differently from 
us, who are not ſlaves to .ſelf intereſt, who are 
capable of fincere friendſhip. Twere happy, if 
inſtead of bales of indigo and cechineal, (tained 
with blood, they would bring us ſome of thefe 
men: this kind of commerce would be very ad- 
vantageous to mankind, Cacambo was of more 
value to Candidus than a dozen of red ſheep 
loaded with the pebbles of Eldorado. Hur phi- 
— now began to be reconciled to life. tie 


+V 9 * conſoled 


; * * | 
SS 8 * : 


74 E. — 
— — 
2 * * 
5 * 
* 


% 


C ANDIDd US. 20 
cenſoled himſelf that he was W in the 
preſervation of the human ſpecies, and in not 
being an uſeleſs member of ſociety. Heaven re- 
warded the purity of his intentions, by reſtoring 
to him, as well as to his friend Cacambo, the 
bleſſing of health. They had no longer the 
itch, and they performed the duties of their 
function with great alacrity; but alas! fate ſoon 
broke in upon their peaceful ſecurity Cune- 
| gonda, who had fet her heart upon tormenting 
| ker huſband, fallied forth from Copenhagen in 
purſvit of bim: chance directed her to the hoſ- 
pital; ſhe was accompanied by a man whom 
Candidus ſoon diſcovered to be the Baron of 
Thunder-ten-tronckh ; his ſurpriſe may be eafily 
ſuppoſed. 'The Baron. perceiving it, ſpoke to 
bim in theſe words. I did not long continue 
to row in the Turkiſh galleys; the Jeſuits bear- 
ing of my misfortune, redeemed me for the ho- 
nour of the ſociety. I made a tour into Ger- 
many, where I received ſome civilities of my 
father's heirs. I left nothing unattempted to get 
intelligence of my ſiſter; and hearing at Con- 
ſtantinople, that ſhe had imbarked on board a 
veſſel which was caſt away on the coaſt of Den- 
maik, I difguiicd myſelt and departed, being 
provided with proper letiets of recommendation 
to Daniſh merchants in connection with the ſo- 
ciety: in ſhort, 1 bave found my fiſter again, 
who loves you notwithſtanding you are unworthy 
of that hom ur; and ſince yuu have had the in- 
ſolence to lie with her, I cenſent to the ratifi- 
cation, er rather a ue celebration of your nup- 
tials; 


202 CANDIDUS. 


'tials; that is to fay, provided ſhe gives you only. 


her left hand, which is but reaſonable, 386 ſhe 


bas no leſs than ſeventy one quarters, and you 
have none at all. 


married her ; ſhe became handſome, and ano- 
ther has enjoyed her charme, the is again grown 
ugly, and you would have me give my hand to 
her a ſecond time: no, no, Reverend Father ; 
ſend her back to her ſeraglio at Conſtantinople; 
ſhe has done me but too much injury in this 
country. Ungrateful man, ſaid Cunegonda, 
making horrible contortions, how can you be fo 
hard hearted ? Do not oblige the Baron, now a 
prieſt, to waſh the blot out of bis eſcutcheon 
with your blood. Doſt thou believe me capable 
of conſenting to the act of infidelity? What 
wouldſt thou have had me done when I was in 
the power of a Turk who thought me hand- 
fome ? Neither tears, nor my cries, had any ef- 
fet on his ſavage brutality : ſo that, Gnding it 
in vain to reſiſt, I contrived to be as commodi : 
.oufly raviſhed as poſſible, as any other woman 
would have dene in my fituation: this is all my 
crime. But my greateſt offence is having rob- 
bed thee of thy miſtreſs, which, on the con- 
trary, thou ſhouldeſt Eonfider as a proof of my 
affection. Come, come, my dear little foul ; it 
ever 1 fhould grow handiome again; if my 
breafts, which are now ſomewhat pendent, 
ſhould recover their rotund elaſticity ; i they 
hall be all for thee alone, my dear Candidus; 


Alas, ſaid Candidus, all tbe 
quarters in the world without beauty——. Miſe 
Cunegonda was very ugly when I imprudently 


ve 


_ 
* ” 


CANDIDUS 203 


we are" uo longer in Turkey, and I fwear that 
I will never ſuffer myſelt to be raviſhed again. 
This diſcourſe made no very deep impreſſion 
upon Candidus. He deſited a little time for 
confideration. the Baron granted him two 
| hours, which he ſpent in conſulting with. his 
friend Cacambo. After having weighed every 
argument pre and con, they determined to ac- 
company the Baron and bis ſiſter to Germany. 
Accordingly every thing being ſettled, they ſet 
out all together; not on foot, but mounted on 
good cavalry, which the Jeſuit Baron had brought 
along with him. They were now arrived at the 
frontiers of the kingdom, when a tall ill favoured 
ſellow fixed his eyes attentively on our hero. It 
is the very many. ſaid bez pray, Sir, it I may be 
ſo bold, is not your name Candidu> ? Yes, Sit, 
replied Candidus, io I have always been called. I 
am extremely glad of it, ſaid the wan. Yes in- 
deed, you have black eyebrows, ears of a mode» 
rate ſize, a round face, and ruddy complezion, 
and you appear to be about five feet five. Yes, 
dir, ſaid Candidus, that is my beight, but what 
are my ears, and my height to you? Sir, replied 
the man, we cannot be too circumipeCt in our 
employment: permit me to aſk you another que» 
ſtion; Was you not in the fervice of dquire 
Volball? In truth, dir, faid Candidus, a little 
diſconcerted, 1 do not undeiftand——But I un- 
derſtand perl ectiy well that :yuu arc the pet ſon 
whoſe deſcription | have in my hand. Pleaſe to 
walk into the guard- room. Soldier, conduct 
the gentleman im; prepare the black hole, aud 

tell 


204 C A N D 1: 8. 
tell the ſmith to make a flight chain of about 


thicty or forty pounds weight, Mr. Candidus, . 
you have got a goodlike horſe there; I want one 


of that colour; we ſhall agree about bim by 
and bye. 

The Baron did not dare to claim his horſe. 
Cunegonda wept for a quarter of an hour, The 
Jeſuit beheld the ſcene without emotion. I ſhould 
base been obliged, ſaid he to his ſiſter, either to 
kill him or force him to marry you again ; and 
every thing conſidered, it is the beſt that could 
happen for the honour of our family. Cunegon- 
da and her brother ſet out for Germany ; but the 
faithful Cacambo reſolved not to leave his friend 
in diſtreſs. 


CHAP. XL. 


Fhe concluſion of Candidus's misfortunes : how he 
found his miſtreſs again, and what was the con · 
ſequence. 


Pangloſs | ſaid Candidus, it is a great pi - 

ty that you have periſhed ſo miſerably : 
you have been witneſs only to the leaſt part of 
my misfortunes, and I was in hopes to make 


you rej«Ct that groundleſs opinion you fo obſti- 
nately maintained, even unto death. There 
is dot a man upon earth who has experienced 
greater adverfity than I have ; and yet there is 
not 


* 
\ 


3 


* 
\ 


>: 


CANDIDUS; 265 


not a ſingle foul who has not curſed: his own ex- 
iſtence, as the daughter of Pope Urban very pa- 
thetically told us. What will become of me, 
my dear Cacambo ? I cannot tell, replied Cacam- 
bo; all I know is, that I will never leave you. 
But Cunegonda has forſaken me, ſaid Candi- 


dus. Alas l a wife is not worth an American 


friend. 

This was the converſation of Candidus and 
Cacambo ip a dungeon, from whence they were 
dragged in order to be conveyed to Copenhagen, 
where our philoſopher was to learn his fate. He 
feared it would he a dregdful one, as the reader 


may alſo apprehend; but Candidus was miſtaken, 


and ſo is the reader. He was deſtined to be 
happy at Copenhagen, where he. was no ſooner 
arrived than he was appriſed of the death of 
Volhall ; this brute died unlamented, and e 
very body concerned themſelves about Candidus, 
His chains were immediately knocked cf, and 
liberty was the more agreeable to him, as it ſur- 
niſhed him with the means of finding Zenoide. 
He. haſtened to her houſe; he was a long time 
before he could utter a ſyllable, but their ſilence 
was ſufficiently expreſſive They embraced ; they 
endeavourcd. to ſpeak, but . they could only weep. 
Cacambo enjoyed this delightful ſcene like a be- 
ing of {enfibility ; be ſympathized in his fricnd's 
Joy, and was almoſt in tbe ſame fituation. My 
dear Cacambo, my beloved Zenoide, cried Can» 
didus, I am recompenſcd for all my ſufferings. 
Love and friendſhip ſhall ſweeten the remainder 


of my life, What numberleſs difficulties bave 


paved 


an 5 6 
nnn TY OUTER FF Irey _ | 
* * - * 7 . l & ue . * E. * x ; * " l * 
. Bo * | TENT TT: * 
2 * e 


286 CANDIDUS: 
_ pared the way to this unexpetted happineſs! But 
all is now forgotten, deareſt Z-noide, i ſee you, 
you love mex all things go well with me now, e- 
very thing is for the beſt, 
© The death of Volhall left Zenoide ber on 
miſtreſs, and the court allowed her a pension 
out of her father's fortune, which had been con- 
fiſcated, She readily ſhared it with Candidus and 
Cacambo, whom the allowed to live in the ſame 
houſe, and induſtriouſly reported, that, having 
received ſuch fignal ſervices from theſe two ftran- 
gere, ſhe thought herſcif obliged to recompence 
them with all the plcafuces of like. Some ſhrewd - 
people penetrated into the motives of her kind- 
neſs, which was not very difficult, as her in» 
trigue with Candidus had unluckily tranipired. 
Moſt people condemned ber, and her conduct 
was approved only by a ſew people who knew 
the world. Zenoide, who paid ſome regard to 
1 the eſteem of fools, was not quite happy in her 
&  Ffituation. The death of Cunegonda, which the 
, correfpendents of trading Jeſuits reported at Co- 
, penhagen, furniſhed Zenoide with an opportu- 
 nity.to reconcile the ſcrupulous : ſhe ordered a 
— made for Candidus ; and the au · 
ho was a man of parts, proved him to be 
deſcended from one of the moſt ancient families 
in Turope : he even pretended that bis true name 
was Kanut, the name of an ancient Danith king, 
than which nothing could be more probable; for 
to metamorphoſe dia into ut was no very extra- 
ordinary change. tn conſequence of this triſling 
alteration, Candidus became a nobleman of di- 
Ainckion. 


e ABDIiuus. 7 


flinQion. He was married publicly to Zenoide y 
they lived together as happily as it was poſſible. 1 
to live. Cacambo was their common friend; 
and Candidus uſed frequently to ſay, All things 
are not ſo well with us here as in Eldorado, but 
yet they are pretty well. 


42 


