&y- 
n 


AD & l = W 
1 
——— 
3 * 
; . 
x 
8 


* as a4 8 


0 1 A, * 1 


f Fa ; 
| 4} 9 4 
By M. DE VOLTAIRE. 


p TS « d of £ 
ny aw 1 I | 


” 2 
A 
14 | 
4 
1 
* 


bet, OY. a 


KD 


Printed by SaxDs, DowaLpsony MURRAY, and Cocnxan, 
For A. DowaLDsoN, at Pope's head, n 


44> 
_ 
| LY 
3 as.” | | | 
* 'Y 3 . : | 
C 
* 
} p 
I * „ 3 — | Ga 
1 - * | al, | 4s 


C8 4-1 


ow Condidus was brought up in a fone caſtle, | 
and how he was expelled from thence Pag. 1 


R II. 
What became of Aae among the Bulgarians 55 


* 


a S8 III. 


: How Candidus made bis eſcape from the Bulga- 
rians, and what afterwards. befel him 6 


CH: & 'Þ. IN. 


How Candidus met his old maſter f philoſophy, 
Dr Pangheft, and what * to them 9 


CHAP. v. 


Tempe /t, ſbipwreok, earthquake, and what r 
of Dr Pangleſs, MAN He” and mo the Ana- 


e * 13 
S iv Jos _— BY 


How a fine auto-da-fe was celebrated, fo prevent 
Fit and how. Candidus was whip* 


= Pe EE. AN. K.. 1 16 


. 
* 
20 — - © © % * 1 


£4 c H A P. VII. IG 


Haw an old woman took care of Candidus, and 
; how he found the object he loved . 2 


GY 22 CHAP. 


EOCNTENTS 


C H A f. VII. 


_ The hiſtory of Cunegonda 20 


* 


- 4 


N IX. 


What happened to Cunegonda, Candidus, the grand 
inquiſh tor, and the Jeu 23 


CHAP. X. 


In what diſtreſs Candidus, Cunegonda, and the old 


woman arrived at Cadiz; and of their imbar- 
kation | 25 


| F 

The biſtory of the old woman 27 
The ſequel of the old woman's adventures 31 
ä | 
How Candidus was obliged 10 part from the fair | 


e oven and the old woman | 35 
aua . ft, 8 
How Cundidus and Cacambo were received by the 

Oy if Paraguay F 


A . 
1 ow Candidus killed the brother of his dear cune- 
8 | | | 42 


CHA P. XVI. 


What uſed between our two travellers, and 6 
*. 57 90-20 OY 8 570g 


[ 

[ a 
i AS y —_ Pry - _ 9 9 9 
re 19 1 


8 


Void y men une In re a TY — — — . 


o - . 
* 
9 4 4 b 


CO NN TEN 1 8. a5 
girls, tuo monteys, and the ſavages called O. : 
reillons | ES 44 


c H A P. XVII. 


The arrival of Candidus and his man at the coun- 
3 of Eldorado, and what bey ſau there 49 


Cana won” 4 
IWhat they ſaw in the country of Eldorado 53 
E ne 3 


What happened to them at Surinam, and how Can- 
didus got acquainted with Martin + . 60 


% 


n 
Os happened at ſea to candidus and Martin 0s 


A XXII. 
What happened in France to Candidus and Mar- 


e 1 A 2 : 
Candidus and Martin. draw near. to Pa Loaf 5 
of France, and diſpute 5 1 


5 tin „ | £ 

) | x Fl 

4 C'H:A FE Rm 0 
| Cuandidus and Martin go to the Engliſh coaſt, and 1 

what they ſaw there 77 ® 

a 5 £ : | | | 5 

CH A: XXIV. | 
0 Concerning Paguetta, and Father Girofflee - 79 
5 5 „HR 


vi EQN TEN T4 
n A M 


The viſt t to Seignior Peeecurante the Noble Ve- 
- netian | 84 


n "ke - >. 
Of Candidus and Martin's ſupping with 1 x Aran - 
gers, and who they were 99 
C HAP. XXVII. | 
Candidus s voyage to Conflantinople 94 


C H A P. XXVIL B 

What happened to Candidus, Cunegonda, Pangleſs, 

. and Marie, &c. | 98 
Py „ 


Hou Candidus found Cunegonda and the old v woman 
„ 7 101 


CHA f. XXX, 1. 
= he conch 103 


3 Sy 

* af 
w— . * 
. ” 


** 


N 


pF 


an ee 
8 
> 
2 
| 


- 
1 jw n 2 * 
= Ws | . 5 
5 = 
4 1 - 
. 5 
: * 4 - 
N 
- 
- 
« 


* — * 
AP os 


. 
1 
oy *# uy * 


Y + > da, 28; at 907 
' 
% 


1 
2 


* 


AND. 1 DV. 85 


o *. 


THE OPTIMIS T. 


0 n A p. be 1 
ow Candi Jus 4as TOES © up in 4 fine caſtle, 
and how he, WAS expeſled from t Aces | 5 


Here lived in Weſtphalia, i in the caſtle'of my a 
Lord the Baron of Thunder - ten- tronckh, < . 
a young man, on whom nature had de⸗ 
ſtowed the moſt agreeable manners. His 64. 
e was the index of his mind. He had an up- 
gbt heart, with an eaſy frankneſs ; which, 1 by 
ve, waß the reaſon he got the name of Gandidus, 
e was ſuſpgRed, by the old ſervants of the family, 
| Lord the Baron's ſiſter, by a 
"the neighbourhood, whom 
at young lady declineFto marry;- becauſe he could 
ly produce: 75 eventy-one armorial quarterings, the 
ſt of his genealogical tree having been deftroyed 
rough the injuries of time. | 
The Baron was one of the moſt powerful lords 
Weſtphalia; for his caſtle had both a gate and 
indows; and his great ball was even adorned with 
peſtry. The dogs of his outer yard compoſed is 
ck upon occaſion ; his grooms were his huntſ- 


en ls and the vicar of the pariſh was his gen ny 
A 


2 c AN DID VSV; or, Chap. 1. 


ner. He was called by every body, My Lord; 
and every one would laugh when he told his ſtory. 
My Lady the Baroneſs, who weighed about 
three hundred and fifty pounds, attracted by that 
means very great regard, and did the honours of 
the houſe with a dignity that rendered her ſtill more 
reſpectable. Her daughter Cunegonda, aged about 
ſeventeen years, was of a high complexion, freſh, - 
43% plump, and the obje& of deſire, The Baron's ſon 
hoy | appeared to be in every reſpect worthy of his fa- 
F ther. The preceptor, Pangloſs, was the oracle of 
"IF the hopſe, and little Candidus liſtened to his lec- 
tures with all the ſimplicity that was ſuitable to bis 
8 age and his character. 9 N 
Pangloſs taught metaphyſico-theologo-coſmolo- . 
 SSWmoology. He proved moſt admirably, that there 
Could not be an effect without a cauſe; that in this 
beſt of poſſible worlds, my Lord the Baron's caſtle 
was the moſt magnificent of caſtles, and my Lady 
the beſt of baroneſſes that poſſibly could be. 
« Tt is demonſtrable,” ſaid he, “ that things can - 
not be otherwiſe than they are: for all things ha- 
ving been made for ſome end, they muſt neceſſarily 
be intended for the beſt end. Obſerve well, that 
the noſe has been made for carrying ſpectacles, 
therefore we have ſpectacles. The legs are viſibly 
deſigned for ſtockings, and therefore we have ſtock- 
ings. Stones have been formed to be hewn, and 
to make caſtles ;- therefore my Lord has a very 
ine caſtle; and the greateſt baron of the province 
. ought to be the beſt lodged. Swine were made to 
be eat; therefore we eat pork alk the year round': 
©». conſequently, thoſe who have aſſerted, that all is 
800d, have ſaid a fooliſh thing; they ſhould have 
id, that all is for the beſt.” | | 


= > OI Py _ = a = = * = = — 
. = _—_ \ - 14 1 = 88 * N * = 
” — = 7 2 N * * 
* | * | ä N 
N 5 % 


* 
Te N 
* 
* 


a 


* 2 Y 
FFF: * N _— DARP, = . £A,. 
* 4 = >. 8 £ 
_ - * * 
oy 


* 
* 


A * * 1 * 
. PP tf oath 
" 1 n 22 » x \. N 4 IG 
get. : gots Sir „ 
TY * 23 F r- \ 9 \ b * — „ FL 15 * 4 T 
, 5 P 
\ 


— 


we 
TP ED 


9 4 _ 
| . * r 8 r 
4 - 1 Dy Finn. 2 
3 
7 - 
. , 1 
$ f 


| 

Candidus liſtened »ttentively, and believed impli- a 
eitly; for he thought Miſs Cunegonda extremely | 
Handſome, thovgh he never had the courage to 50 k 


3 


* 


Chap. n The OPTIMIS TI. 
her ſo. He concluded, that next to the good fortune EN 


of being born baron of Thunder-ten-tronckh, tge q N 


ſecond degree of happineſs was that of being Miſs 


1 SAKS + * 1 
Cunegonda, the third to ſee her every day, and the . = 


fourth to hear Maſter Pangloſs, the greateſt philo+ = 
ſopher of the province, and conſequently of the 
whole world. | 2 
One day Cunegonda having taken a walk hard 
by the caſtle, in a little wood, which they called 
the park, eſpied among the buſhes Doctor Pangloſs 
glving a lecture in experimental philoſophy to her 
mother's chambermaid, a little brown wench, ve · 
- ry handſome, and very tractable. As Miſs Cupe - 
gonda had a ſtrong inclination for the ſciences, ſhe 
obſerved, without making any noiſe, the experi- 
ments repeated before her eyes; ſhe ſaw very clear- 
ly the ſufficient reaſon of the Doctor, the effects 
and the cauſes: and ſhe returned greatly flurried, 
quite penſive, and full of deſire to be learned; ima - 
gining, that ſhe might be a ſufficient reaſon for 
young Candidus, as he alſo might be the ſame to 
5 | 
In her return to the caſtle fe met Candidus, .and 
bluſhed ; Candidus alſo bluſhed : ſhe wiſhed him 
good morrow with a faltering voice; and Candidus 
made anſwer, without knowing what he ſaid. The 
next day, after dinner, as they roſe from table, 
Cunegonda and Candidus happened to get behind 
the ſcreen. Cunegonda dropt her handkerchief, and 
Candidus took it up; ſhe, not thinking any harm, 
took hold of his hand; and the young man, not 
thinking any harm neither, kiſſed the hand of the 
young lady, with an eagerneſs, a ſenſihility, aud 
grace, wholly ſingular; their mouths met, their 
eyes 2 their knees trembled, their hands 
ſirayed. The Baron of Thynder - ten-tronckh 
happening to paſs cloſe by the ſcreen, and vbſerving 
this cauſe and effect, kicked Candidus out of the 
1 2 a2 " "calle, 


caſtle, with luſty blows on the backſide. Cunegon- 
da fell into a ſwoon ; and as ſoon as ſhe came to 
herſelf, was heartily. cuffed on the ear by my Lady 
the Baroneſs. Thus all was thrown into confuſion 


in the fineſt and moſt agreeable caſtle poſſible. 


e Wh DA 
What became of Candidus among the Bulgarians, 


ANAndidus being expelled the terreſtrial paradiſe, 
rambled a long time without knowing where, 

in tears, lifting up his eyes to heaven, and ſome- 
times turning them towards the fineſt of caſtles, 
which contained the handſomeſt of baroneſſes. He 
laid himſelf down, without his ſupper, in the open 
fields, between two furrows, while the ſnow fell 
in great flakes. Candidus, almoſt frozen to death, 
crawled, next morning, to the neighbouring vil- 
lage, which is called r 
4 


Having no money, and dying with hunger and 


tigue, he ſtopped in a dejected poſture, before the 
gate of an inn, Twp men drefled in blue obſer- 
ving him in ſuch a ſituation, Brother,” ſays one 

f them to the other, © there is a young fellow 
well built, and of a proper height.“ They accoſt- 
ed Candidus, and invited him very civilly to din- 
ner.“ Gentlemen,” replied Candidus with an a- 
grecable modeſty, “ you do me much honour, but 


I have no money to pay for my ſhot.” „O Sir,” 
: aid one of the blues, © perſons of your appear- 
J 1 aͤnce and merit never pay any thing: are you not 
be feet five inches high?“ ©« Yes, Gentlemen, 


that is my height,” returned he, making a bow. 
« Come, Sir, ſit down at table: we will not only 
treat you, but we will never let ſuch a man as you 
want money: men are made to aſſiſt one another.“ 


Jou are in the right,” ſaid Candidus; “ that is 


[4 * 


mern — —— — 1 — 4 p — ID. 


n 


1 
E 


Chap.% The OP TIMIST, 3 


what Pangloſs always told me, and I fee plainly 
that every thing is for the beſt”: They intreat 
him to take a few crowns; which, he aècepts of, and 
would have given them his note, but the refuſed 
it, and fat down to table. © Do not you love ten- 
derly * „ O yes,” replied” he, © I love 
tenderly Miſs Cunegonda.” © No,” ſaid one of the 


gentlemen ; “ we aſk you if you do not love ten- 


derly the King of the Bulgarians ?? «© Not at all, 
faid he, © for I never ſaw him.“ © How he is 
the moſt charming of kings, and you muſt drink 
his health.” „O, with all my heart, Gentlemen,“ 
and drinks. That is enough,” ſaid they to him; 
% you are now the. bulwark, the ſupport, the de- 
fender, the hero of the Bulgarians; your fortune is 
made, and you are certain, of glory. ws Inſtantly 
they clap him in irons, and carry him to the regi- 
ment. He is made to turn about to the right and 
to the left, to draw the rammer, to return the 
rammer, to preſent, to fire, to double; and they 
give him thirty blows with a cudgel. The next 


day he performs his exerciſe not quite ſo bad, and 


receives but twenty blows ; the third day the blows 


are reſtricted to ten, and he is looked Pos his 


fellow-ſoldiers as a kind of prodigy. 

Candidus quite ſtupified, could not yet wal con- 
ceive how he had become a hero. One fine day in 
the ſpring it came into his head to take a walk, go- 
ing ſtraight forward; imagining that the human, as 
well as the animal ſpecies, were intitled to make 
whatever uſe they pleaſed of their limbs. He had 
not travelled two leagues, when four other heroes, 
ſix feet high, came up to him, bound him, and put 


him into a dungeon. He is aſked by à court: mar- 


tial, whether he chuſes to be whipped! Und thirty 


times through the whole regiment, or receive at 


once twelve bullets through the forehead? He in 
* argued that the will is free, and that he choſe 


* | „ * 


i 0 
# « 
S A 4 ® 
= * j 4 A . * - 

: 17s 5 42 N 6 

4 _—_ 168 » þ 

„ ee o i 
rn o * 
1 = | ( 


6 - CANDIDUS; or, Chap. 3. 


neither the one nor the other ; he was obliged to 
make a choice : he therefore reſolved, in virtue of 
God's gift, called free-will, to run the gauntlet fix 
and thirty times. He underwent this diſcipline 
twice. The regiment being compoſed of two thou- 
ſand men, he received four thouſand laſhes, which 
laid open all his muſcles and nerves, from the nape 
of the neck to the poſteriors. As they were pro- 
ceeding to a third operation, Candidus being quite 
ſpent, begged as a favour, that they would be fo 
kind as to ſhoot him : he obtained his requeſt ; they 
- hoodwink him, and make him kneel : the King of 
the Bulgarians paſling by, inquired into the crime 
of the delinquent z and as this prince was a perſon 
of great penetration, he diſcovered from what he 
heard of Candidus, that he was a young metaphy- 
ſician, entirely ignorant of the things of this world; 
and he granted him his pardon, with a clemency 
which will be extolled in all hiſtories, and through» 
out all ages. An experienced ſurgeon cured Candi» 
dus in three weeks, with emollients preſcribed by 
no leſs a maſter than Dioſcorides. He had now ac- 
quired ſome ſkin, and was able to walk, when the 


King of the Bulgarians gave battle to the King of 
the Abares, > 


Hou Candidus made his ' eſcape from the Bulga- 
rians, and That afterwards befel him. 


1 Othing could be ſo fine, ſo neat, fo brilliant, 
ſo well diſpoſed, as the two armies. The 
trumpets, fifes, hautboys, drums, and the cannon, 
formed an harmony ſuperior to what hell could in- 
vent. The cannon ſwept off at firſt about ſix thou- 
land men on each ſide; afterwards the muſke 
carried away from the beſt of worlds, about nine 


cd SL... I. / om 


* 


chap. 3. The OPTIMIST, . 


or ten thouſand raſcals that infected its ſurface, 
The bayonet was likewiſe the ſufficient reaſon of 
the death of ſome thouſands of men. The whole 
number might amount to about thirty thouſand 
ſouls. Candidus, who trembled like a philoſopher, 
hid himſelf as well as he could during this heroie 
butchery. 

In ſhort, while each of the two Kings were cau- 
ſing Te Deum to be ſung in their reſpective camps, 
be reſolved to go ſomewhere elſe, to reaſon. upon 
the effects and cauſes. He walked over heaps of 
the dead and dying: he came at firſt to a neigh- 
bouring village belonging to the Abares, but found 


it in aſhes; for it had been burnt by the Bulga- 


rians, according to the law of nations. Here were 
to be ſeen old men full of wounds, caſting their 
eyes on their murdered wives, who were holding 
their infants to their bloody breaſts. You might ſee 
in another place, virgins having their bellies ripped 
up, after they had ſatisfied the natural deſires of 
ſome of thoſe heroes, breathing out their laſt ſighs. 
Others half-burnt prayed earneſtly for inſtant death. 
The whole field was covered with brains, and with 
legs and arms lopped offf 

Candidus betook himſelf with full ſpeed to ano- 
ther village. It belonged to the Bulgarians, and 
had met with the ſame treatment from the Abarian 
heroes. Candidus, walking ſtill forward over qui- 


vering limbs, or through rubbiſh of houſes, got at 


laſt out of the theatre of war, having ſome ſmall 
22 of proviſions in his knapſack, and never 


forgetting Miſs Cunegonda. His proviſions failed 


bim when he arrived in Holland; but having heard 


that every one was rich in that country, and that 
they were Chriſtians, he did not doubt but he ſhould 
be as well treated there as he had been in my 
Lord the Baron's caſtle, before he had been 3 


ſpark - 


— a * 


led thence on account of Miſs Cunegonda's 
e sed als from ſeveral grave - looking per- 
ens; Who all replied, that if he continued that 
trade, they would confine him in a houſe of cor- 
rection, where he ſhould learn to get his bread. 

He applied himſelf afterwards to a man, who for 
#' whole hour had been diſcourſing on the ſubject of 
charity, before a large aſſembly. This orator look - 
ing on him aſkance, ſaid to him, „What are you 
doing here? are you for the good cauſe 2? There 
is no effect without a cauſe,” replied Candidus mo- 
deſtly ; © all is neceſſarily linked, and ordered for 
the beſt. A neceſſity baniſhed me from Cunegon- 
da a neceſſity forced” me to run the gauntlet; and 
another neceſſity makes me beg for my bread, till 


I can fall on a buſineſs to earn it. All this could 


not be otherwiſe.” “ My friend,” ſaid the orator 
to him, do you believe that the Pope is Anti- 
chriſt? I never have heard whether he is or 
not,” replied Candidus; “ but whether he is, or is 


not, I want bread.“ „ Tou do not deſerve to eat 
any, laid the other; “ get you gone, you rogue, 
| get you gone, you wretc 


| ; never in thy life come 
Dear me again.” The orator*s wife, having pop- 


pet ber head out of the window, and ſeeing a man 
Who doubted whether the Pope was Antichriſt, 


oured on his head a full O heavens! to 
what exceſs does religious zeal tranſport the fair 
ſex! 4 
A man who had not been baptized, a good Ana- 


baptiſt, named James, ſau the barbarous and igno- 


mintous manner with which they treated one of his 
brethren, a being with two feet, unfeathered, and 
endowed with a ratichal ſoul. He took him home 


With him, cleaned him, gave him bread and beer, 
made him a preſent of two florins, and offered to 
teach him the method of working in his manufae- 


tories 


an 2 * | ff — —_— 
, 0 


refreſhed a litile, Well,“ ſaid Candidus, “What 


Chaps The O PTINMITI NT.. 


tories of Perſian ſtuffs, which are fabricated in Hol- 
land. Candidus proſtrating himſelf almoſt at his 
knees, eried out, Mr Pangloſs argued well when 
he ſaid, that every thing is for the beſt in this 
world; for I am infinitely more affected with your 
very great generoſity, than by the hard-heartedneſs 
of that gentleman with the black cloak, and the la- 
dy his wife.” * 4 

Next day, as he was taking a walk, he met a 
beggar all covered over with ſores, his eyes dead, 
the tip of his noſe eat off, his mouth turned to one 
ſide of his face, his teeth black, ſpeaking through 
his throat, tormented with a violent cough, and 
ſpitting a tooth at every attempt to draw his breath. 


C H A : P. IV. * 9 


How Candidus met his old maſter of philoſophy, D 
Pangleſs, and what happened to them. 


Andidus, moved more with compaſſion than hor» 

ror, gave this frightful mendicant the two 
florins which he had received of his honeſt: Ana- 
baptiſt James. The ſpectre fixed his eyes atten- 
tively upon him, dropt ſome tears, ànd was going 
to fall upon his neck. Candidus affrighted, drew 
back. Alas!“ faid the one wretch to the other, 
4 don't you any longer know your dear Pangloſs?“ 
& What do I hear! Is it you, my dear maſter ! 
you in this dreadful condition! What misfortune 
has befallen you? Why are you no longer in the 
moſt magnificent of caſtles? What is become of 


Miſs Cunegonda, the nonpareil of the fair ſex, the 


maſterpiece of nature? '& I have no more 
ſtrength,” ſaid Pangloſs. Candidus immediately 
carried him to the Anabaptiſt's ſtable, where be 
gave him a little bread to eat. When Pangloſs was 


18 


— „ 
nn — - - 
iy 4 — > * . 
* 8 4 * » — * 
* cy o * 
o - 
» 4 _ * 


—— - 


8 


10 c AN DID Us; or, Chap. 4. 


is become of Cunegonda ? ? © She is dgad,” re» 
plied the other. Candidus fainted away®at this 


word: but his friend recovered his ſenſes, with a 


little bad vinegar which he found by chance in the 
ſtable. Candidus opening his eyes, cried out, * Cu · 
negonda is dead! Ah, beſt of worlds, where art 
thou? But of what diſtemper did ſhe die? Was 
not this the cauſe, her ſeeing me driven out of the 
caſtle by my Lord, her father, with great kicks on 
the breech?” No,“ ſaid Pangloſs, © ſhe was 
gutted by ſome Bulgarian ſoldiers, after having been 
barbarouſly raviſhed: they knocked my Lord the 
Baron on the head, for attempting to protect her ; 

my Lady the Baroneſs was cut in pieces; my poor 
pupil was treated preciſely like his ſiſter; and as for 

the caſtle, there is not one ſtone left upon another, 


nor a barn, nor a ſheep, nor a duck, nor a tree. 


But we have been ſufficiently revenged; for the 


Abarians have done the very ſame thing to a neigh - 


bouring barony, which belonged to a Bulgarian 
lord.” | | | du Lino C1821 

At this diſcourſe Candidus fainted away a ſecond 
time: but coming to himſelf, and having ſaid all 
that he ought to tay, he inquired into the cauſe and 
the effect, and into the ſufficient reaſon that had 
reduced Pangloſs to ſo deplorable a condition. 
4 Alas,” ſaid the other, “ it was love; love, the 


comforter of the human race, the preſerver of the 


univerſe, the ſoul of all ſenſible beings, tender love.“ 
% Alas!” faid Candidus, „I know this love, the 
ſovereign of hearts, the ſoul of our ſoul ; yet it ne- 
ver coſt me more than a kiſs, and twenty kicks on 
the breech. But how could this charming cauſe 
produce in you ſo abominable an effect?“ | 
Pangloſs made-anſwer as follows. O my dear 
Candidus, you knew Paquetta, that pretty atten - 
dant on our Noble Baroneſs : I taſted in her arms 
the delights of paradiſe, which produced thoſe tor - 
7 ments 


* 


chap. . The OPTIM IST. un 


ments of Hell with which you ſee me devoured, 
She was infected, and perhaps ſhe is dead. Pa- 
quetta received this preſent from a learned corde- 
lier, who had traced it to the ſource : for he had 
it from an old counteſs, who had received it from 
a captain of horſe, who was indebted for it to a 
marchioneſs, who got it from a page, who had re» 
ceived it from a Jeſuit, who in his noviciate had it 
in a direct line from one of the companions of 
Chriſtopher Columbus. For my part, I will give 
it fo nobody, for I am- dying.“ 

« OPangloſs!” cried Candidus, “ what a ſtrange 
genealogy ! Has not the devil given riſe to it?“ 
« Not at all,” replied this great man; © it was a 
thing indiſpenſable, a neceſſary ingredient, in the 
beſt of worlds : for if Columbus had not catched, 
in an iſland of America, this diſtemper, which poi- 
ſons the ſource of generation, frequently hinders 
generation, and is evidently oppoſite to the great 
deſign of nature, we ſhould have had neither cho+ 
colate nor cochineal. It may alſo be obſerved, that 
to this day, upon our continent, this malady, like 
a point of controverſy, is peculiar to us. The 
Turks, the Indians, the Perſians, the Chineſe, the 


Siameſe, and the Japaneſe, know nothing of it yet. 


But there is a ſufficient reaſon why they, in their 
turn, ſhould become acquainted with it, a few cen- 
turies hence. In the mean time, it has made a 
marvellous progreſs among us, and eſpecially in 
thoſe great armies compoſed of honeſt hirelings 
well Kſciplined, who decide the fate of ſtates; 
for one may be aſſured, that when thirty thouſand 


men in a pitched battle fight againſt troops equal 


to them in number, there are about twenty thous 
ſand of them poxed on each ſide.” 


That is ſurpriſitg,” , ſaid Candidus; © but you 
-muſt be cured.” © Ah ! how can I?” ſaid Pan- 


Slols; « I have not a penny, my friend; and, 


throughout | 


> » AA Pd TE Se os; 
CL. A > 


GET | 


2 


. 


: 2 
1 * 4 4 E. 1 * = 
8 , Fox 4 — * 5 8 1 2 
LEW „ MANS. 57 | RY £ As nn, 2 . ». 42 — KN * ang . 
r : y r 2 ins Ext a ot 2 A! « # Fee 
” 2 — 23”. > - 2 9 2 
& —_ — 4 = n * 
. — is at — 1 


1 


e = = n TY 
, e ic 


. 


1 3 


5 - 


* " 


<< 
F 


* _ e ran . ann ES. 
aaa eee”. or; * 
. a - 5 
-. y ; * 
"- - 


* 
ak. 4 
Ja 


12 CANDIDU'S; or, Chap. 4. 


throughout the whole extent of this globe, one can 
not be let blood, nor get a gliſter, without pay» 
ing for it, or ſome other perſon doing that office 
for us.“ 

This laſt ſpeech determined Candidus. He went 
to throw himſelf at the feet of his charitable Ana- 
baptiſt James ; and gave him ſo ſtriking a deſerip- 
tic of the late his'friend was reduced to, that the 


good man did not heſitate to entertain Dr Panglofs ; . 


and he had him cured at his own expence. During 
the cure, Pangloſs loſt only an eye and an ear. As 
he wrote well, and underſtood arithmetic perfectly, 
the Anabaptiſt James made him his book-keeper. 
At the end of two months, being obliged to go to 
Liſbon about the affairs of his trade, he took the 
two philoſophers with him in his ſhip. - Pangloſs 
explained to bim how every thing was ſuch as. it 
could Hot be better. James was not of this ſenti- 
ment. Mankind,” faid he, ; muſt bave a little cor- 
rupted their nature; for they were not born wolves, 
and yet they are become wolves: Cod has given 
them neither cannon of twenty-four pounds, nor 
bayonets; and yet they have made cannon. and 
bayonets to deſtroy one another. I might throw 


into the account bankrupts ; and the law, which 


ſeizes on the effects of bankrupts, only to bilk the 
creditors.” All this was indiſpenſable,” replied 
the one eyed doctor, “and private misfortunes 
conſtitute the general good; ſo that the more pri- 
vate misfortunes there are, the whole is the better.” 
While he was reaſoning, the air grew dark, the 


winds blew from the four quarters of the world, 


and the ſhip-was attacked by a moſt dreadful ſtorm, 
within * of the harbour of Lion. 


. 
* 1 


fp »* o * 
. f * * 3 * 
= * 9 1 L 8 £ , ' F (2 * 
** * 2 8 0 , - q a ' # > * 
* — 4 8 ' \ * - 
* , * 4 * * E Y F © . * * 
2 N . - 89 * , 
* 6 . e — 
+ 
; * 
. 2 


_ 
9, 


Mo. Te OO PTIHMIST. 


. Tempeſt, ſhipwreck, earthquake, and what became 


e 


of Dr Pangloſ5, Candidus, and James the Ana- 
baptiſt, Te 


NE half of the paſſengers being weakened, . 
[0 and ready to breathe their laſt, with the in- 
conceivable anguiſh which the rolling of the ſhip 
conveyed through the nerves and all the humours 
of the body, which were quite diſordered, were 
not capable of being alarmed at the danger they 
were in. The other half uttered cries and made 
prayers ; the fails were rent, the maſts broken, and 
the ſhip became leaky. ' Every one worked that was 
able ; no body regarded any thing, and no order 
was kept. The Anabaptiſt contributed his aſliſtance 
to work the ſhip. As he was upon deck, a furious 
ſailor rudely ſtruck him, and laid him ſprawling on 
the planks ; but with the blow he gave him, he 
himſelf was fo violently jolted, that he tumbled 
overboard with his head foremoſt and remained 
ſuſpended by a piece of a broken maſt. Honeſt 
James runs to his aſſiſtance, and helps him to get 
up again ; but in the attempt is thrown into the 
ſea, in the ſight of the ſailor, who ſuffered him to 
periſh without deigning to look upon him. Can- 
didus draws near, and fees his benefactor one 
moment emerging, and the next ſwallowed u 
for ever. He was juſt going to throw bimlſelf into 
the ſea after' him, when the philoſopher Panglofs 
hindered him,-by demonſtrating to him that the 
road of Liſbon had been made on purpoſe for this 
Anabaptiſt to be drowned there. While he was: 
proving this 2 priori, the veſſel foundered, and all | 
| periſhed except Pangloſs, Candidus, and this brute 
of a ſailor, who drowned the virtuous Anabaptiſt. 

| 3 B The 


2 — 
_ NT _ ———— w ——— Ce Ce ——_—_ 
. 


a 1 
= _ 


_— V 232 n 1 
o 8 AN = — I FL in #6; 3 


14 CANDIDU Ss; or, Chap. 5. 


they walked towards Liſbon. They had ſome mo- 
ney left, with which nh hoped to ſave themſelves | 


ving flept himſelf ſober, purchaſed the favours: of 


g % 0-9. 


grains and blood!” anſwered the other; .I am 
A failor, and was born at Batavia; four times I þ 


The villain luckily ſwam aſhore, whither Pangloſs 
and Candidus were carried on a plank. | 
When they had recovered themſelves a little, 


from hunger, after having eſcaped from the ſtorm. 

Scarce had they ſet foot in the city, bewailing 
the death of their benefactor, when they perceived 
the earth to tremble under their feet, and ſaw the 
ſea ſwell and foam in the harbour, and daſh to 
pieces the ſhips that were at anchor. The whirling 
flames and aſhes covered the ſtreets and public 
places, the houſes tottered, and their roofs fell un- 
der the foundations, and the foundations were ſcat- 
tered ; thirty thouſand inhabitants of all ages and 
ſexes were cruſhed to death in the ruins. The ſai- 
lor whiſtling and ſwearing, ſaid, © There is ſome 
booty to be got here.” «© What can be the ſuffi - 
cient reaſon of this phænomenon? “ ſaid Pangloſs. 
6 This is certainly the laſt day of the world,” cried 
Candidus. The failor ran immediately into the 
midſt of the ruins, encountered death to find mo- 
ney, found it, laid hold of it, got drunk, and ha- 


the firſt good-natured girl he met with, upon the 
ruins of the demoliſhed houſes, and in the midſt of 
the dying and the dead. In the mean time, Pan- 
gloſs pulled him by the ſleeve : My friend,” 
Aaid he, “ this is not right.; you treſpaſs againſt u- 
niverſal reaſon, you improve your time badly.“ 


have trampled upon the crucifix in four voyages to 
Japan; thou mayſt go ſeek for thy man with thy 

univerſal reaſon.” | : 
Some pieces of ſtone having wounded Candidus, 
he lay ſtretched. in the ſtreet, and covered with 
rubbiſh, © Alas!” ſaid he to Pangloſs, „ geg ms 
| | N 


r * 
= * 


re . 


Chap. 5. The OPTIMIST, 15 


a little wine and oil, I am a-dying.” © This trem- 
bling of the earth is no new thing,” anſwered Pan- 
40 © The city of Lima, in America, expe- 


g rienced the ſame concuſſions laſt year; the ſame 
$ cauſe has the ſame effects; there is certainly a 
* train of ſulphur under the earth from Lima to Liſ- 
2 bon,” * Nothing is more probable,” ſaid Candi - 
d dus; “ but, for God's ſake, a little oil and wine.” 
ix | © How probable!” replied the philoſopher; “ i 
to maintain, that the point is demonſtrable.” Candi- 
ng | dus loſt all ſenſe ; and Pangloſs brought him a little 
lic water from a neighbouring fountain. k 
m- ' The day following, having found ſome proviſions 
* WE. in rummaging through the rubbiſh, they recruited 
nd . thcir ſtrength a little. Afterwards they employed 
ſai- 1 themſelves, like others, in adminiſtering relief to 


the inhabitants that Had eſcaped from death. Some 
citizens that had been relieved by them, gave them 
as good a dinner as could be expected amidſt ſuch 
a diſaſter. It is true, that the repaſt was mournful, 
and the gueſts watered their bread with their tears. 
But Pangloſs conſoled them, by affirming that 
things could not be otherwiſe : “ For,” ſaid he, 
« if an univerſe exiſt, that univerſe muſt neceſſarily 
be the beſt. Now, in the beſt of worlds, all 
15 good, all is well, all is for the beſt : comfort 
yourſelves, be merry, and let us take a glaſs.” 
A little man clad in black, who belonged to the 
inquiſition, and fat at his fide, took him up very 
politely, and faid, © In all appearance, the gentle- 
man does not believe original ſin ; for if all is for 
the beſt, then there has been neither fall nor pu- 
niſhment.” I rod 4 

* I moſt humbly aſk your Excellency's pardon,“ 
anſwered Pangloſs till more politely ;- “ for the 
fall of man and the curſe neceſſarily entered into 
the beſt of worlds poſſible.” *© Then the gentle - 
man does not believe there is liberty,” ſaid the in- 

3 B 2 | quiſitor. 


— „„ K — . — — — — - 


16 CANDIDUS; or, Chap. 6. 


quiſitor. Your Excellency will excuſe me,” ſaid 
Pangloſs; © liberty can conſiſt with abſolute ne- 
cellity ; for it was neceſſary we ſhould be free; 
becauſe, in ſhort, the determinate will 

Pangloſs was in the middle of his propoſition, 
when the inquiſitor made a ſignal with the head to 
his footman who waited upon him, to bring him a 
glaſs of Por: wine. 


Wk} - WP VL 


How a fine auto-da-f'e was celebrated, to prevent 
earthquakes ; and how Candidus was whipped, 


Fter the earthquake, which had deſtroyed three 
fourths of Liſbon, the ſages of the country 
could not find any means more effectual to prevent 
a total deſtruction, than to give the people a ſplen- 
did auto- da- fe. It had been decided by the uni- 
verſity of Coimbra, that the ſpectacle of ſome per- 
ſons burnt by a ſlow fire, with great ceremony, 
was an infallible noſtrum to hinder the earth from 
quaking. 
In conſequence of this reſolution, they had ſeized 
a Biſcayner, convicted of having married his god - 
mother, and two Portugueſe, Who, in eating a pul- 


let, had ſtripped off the lard. After dinner they 
came and ſecured Dr Pangloſs, and his diſciple Can- 
*2=8dus, the one for having ſpoke too freely, and the 
other. for having heard with an air of approbation. 


were both conducted to ſeparate apartments, 
Sibel freſh, aud never incommoded with the 
ſun. Eight days after, they were both clothed 
with a ſanbenito, and had their heads adorned with 
paper mitres. Candidus's mitre and ſanbenito were 
painted with inverted flames, and with devils; that 


had neither tails nor claws : but Pangloſs's devils 
| bad claws. and tails, and the flames were pointed 
e | up ward. 


— 


Chap. 7. The OPTIMIST, 17 
upwards. Being thus dreſſed, they marched in pro- 
ceſſion, and heard a very pathetic ſermon, follow- 
ed with fine muſic on a ſqueaking organ. Candi- 
dus was whipped in cadence, while they were ſing- 
ing; the Biſcayner, and the two men who would 
not eat lard, were burnt; and Pangloſs, though it 
was contrary to cuſtom, was hanged: The ſame 
day the earth ſhook anew with a moſt dreadful 
noiſe, | 
Candidus, affrighted, interdicted, aſtoniſhed, all 
bloody, all panting, ſaid to himſelf, “ If this is 


t the beſt of poſſible worlds, what then are the reſt ? 
Suppoſing I had not been whipped, I have been a- 
mong the Bulgarians : but, O my dear Pangloſs ! 

e thou greateſt of philoſophers, that it ſhould be my 

y fate to fee you hanged without knowing for what ! 

at O my dear Anabaptiſt ! thou beſt of men, that it 

ne thould be thy fate to be drowned in the barbour ? 

Nie O Miſs Cunegonda ! the jewel of ladies, that it 

er- ſhould be thy fate to have thy belly ript up! 

ny, He returned, with difficulty ſupporting himſelf, 

om after being lectured, whipped, abſolved, and bleſſed, 


when an old woman accoſted him, and ſaid, 
« Child, take courage, and follow me.” 


E VII. 


How an old woman took care of Candidus, and how 
he found the object he loved. 


YAndidus did not take courage, but followed 
Q the old woman into a ruinated houſe... She 
gaye him a pot of pomatum to anoint himſelf, left 
him ſomething to eat and drink, and ſhewed him 
a very neat little bed, near which was a complete 
loi of cloaths. “ Fat, drink, and fleep,” ſaid ſhe 
"ton, and may our Lady of Mocha, our Lord 
Antony of Padua, and our Lord St James oF 
W Bag. 7-- Compalicila, 


wall 1 St 4S: cad 7.7 ; MA. 3 8 
1 i =] a 5 Fs TY SSI. 8 r 13A 3 mu bad 
4 7 WEST IL, r N e 1 
1 5 4 e | * _— 
+ FI \ 4 rr 6. FR 
*\ \ CES nt f 3 


- Compoſtela, take care of you. I will be back to- 
morrow.“ Candidus aſtoniſhed at all he had ſeen, 
at all he had ſuffered, and ſtill more at the charity 


— r e in 
„ a a N 1 


- 


wh 
+ + 1% 5 


> 


1s - CANDIDUS; or, Chap. 7 


of the old woman, offered to kiſs her hand.“ You 


muſt not kiſs my hand,” ſaid the old woman; 1 


will be back to-morrow. Rub yourſelf with the 
pomatum, eat, and take reſt,” 

Candidus, notwithſtanding ſo many misfortunes, 
eat, and went to ſleep. Next morning the old wo- 
man brought him his breakfaſt, looked at his back, 
and robbed it herſelf. with another ointment : ſhe 


afterwards brought him his. dinner ; and ſhe re- 


turned at night, and brought him his ſupper. The 
day following ſhe performed the ſame ceremonies. 
% Who are you?” would Candidus always ſay to 
her:“ Who has inſpired you with ſo much good- 


"neſs? What thanks can I render you?? The 
good woman made him no anſwer ; ſhe returned in 


the evening, but brought him no ſupper. © Come 


along with me,” ſaid ſhe, “ and ſay not a word.” 
She took him by the arm, and walked with him in- 


to the country about a quarter of a mile: they ar- 
rived at a houſe that ſtood by itſelf, ſurrounded 
With gardens and canals. The old woman knocked 
at a little door; which being opened, ſhe conducted 
Candidus by a private {tair-caſe into a gilded cloſet, 
and leaving him on @ brocade couch, ſhut the 
door, and went her way. Candidus thought he 
was in a revery, and looked upon all his life as an 
unlucky dream, but on the preſent. moment as an 
agreeable dream. 1 

They old woman returned very ſoon, ſupporting 
with difficulty a woman trembling, of a majeſtic 
port, gittering with jewels, and covered with. a 


veil. “ Take off that veil,” ſaid the old woman 
to Candidus. The young man approaches, and 


takes off the veil with a trembling hand. What 
Joy ! what ſurpriſe ! he thought he ſaw Miſs Cune- 
3 gonda; 


—— — — — —O—— - R. 


LE — 
1 A . 


— 


_ * 
chap.7. The OPTIMIS T. 19 


gonda; he ſaw her indeed, it was ſhe herſelf. His 
ſtrength fails him, he cannot utter a word, but 
falls down at her feet. Cunegonda falls upon the 
carpet. The old woman applies aromatic waters; 
they. recover their ſenſes, and ſpeak to one another. 
Ar firſt their words were imperfect, their queſtions 
and anſwers were carried on croſs-wiſe, with ſighs, 
tears, and cries The old woman recommended 
to them to make leſs noiſe, and then left them to 
| themſelves. © How! is it you!“ ſaid Candidus 
| | to her: Are you ſtill alive? do I find you again in 
| Portugal? was you not raviſhed then? was not 
your belly ripped up, as the philofopher Pangloſs 
. aſſured me? © Yes, the caſe was ſo,” ſaid the 
) lovely Cunegonda ; “ but death does not always 
follow from theſe two accidents.” * But your fa · 


e ther and mother! were not they killed?“ „ It is i 
1 but too true,” anſwered Cunegonda, weeping. © And | 
e pour brother?“ © My brother was killed too.“ | 
* « And why are you in Portugal? and how did 
1 you know that I was here? and by what ſtrange 
7 adventure did you contrive to bring me to this 
d houſe?” © I will tell you all that,” replied the 
d lady: “but firſt you muſt inform me of all that 
d has happened to you ſince the harmleſs kiſs you 
t, gave me, and the rude kicking which you received.“ 
ne Candidus obeyed her with the moſt profound re- 
he ſpect; and though he was forbidden to ſpeak, 
an though his voice was weak and faltering, and 
an though his back till pained him, yet he related to 
her, in the moſt genuine manner, every thing that 
ng had befallen him ſince the moment of their ſepa - 
tic ration. Cunegonda lifted up her eyes to heaven; 
1 4 ſhe ſhed tears at the death of the good Anabaptiſt, 
lan and of Pangloſs; after which ſhe ſpoke in the fol- 
ind+ - lqwing terms to Candidus, who loſt not a word, but 


dwelt upon her eyes as if he would devour them. 


— 


20 = NDIDUS; or, Chap. 8. 
. VIII. 
The hiſtory of Cunegonda. 


" & Was in my bed and faſt afleep, when it plea- 
1 ſed Heaven to ſend the Bulgarians to our fine 
caſtle of Thunder ten-tronckh : they murdered my 
father and my brother, and cut my mother in 
pieces. A huge Bulgarian, fix feet high, percei- 
ving the ſight had deprived me of my ſenſes, ſet 
himſelf to raviſh me. This abuſe made me come 
to myſelf; I recovered my ſenſes, I cried, I ſtrug- 
gled, I bit, I ſcratched, I wanted to tear out the 
huge Bulgarian's eyes, not conſidering that what 
had happened in my father's caſtle was a common 
thing in war. The brute gave me a cut with his 
hanger in the left flank, the mark of which 1 (till 

bear about me. Ah ! I hope I ſhall ſee it,” ſaid 
the ſimple Candidus. You ſhall,” anſwered Cu- 
negonda ; © bur let us continue.” © Do ſo,” re- 
plied Candidus. NE 

She then reſumed the thread of her ſtory in this 
manner. A Bulgarian captain came in, and faw 
me bleeding ; but the foldier was not at all diſcon- 

* certed; The captain flew-into a paſſion at the little 
reipe& the brute ſhewed him, and killed him upon 
my body. He then cauſed me to be dreſſed, and 
carrie& me as a priſoner of war to his own quarters. 
I waſhed the little linen he had, and dreſſed his vie- 

1} .tnals. He found me very pretty, I muſt fay it; 

1 and I cannot deny but he was well ſhaped, and 

ib that he had a white, ſoft ſkin-; but otherwiſe he 

1.68 had little ſenſe or philoſophy ; one might evidently 

ſee that he was not bred under Dr Pangloſs. A 
* the end of three months having loſt all his money, 
and being grown out of conceit with me, he ſold-_ 
me to a Jew, named Don Iſſac har, who traded 
Holland and Portugal, and who had a moſt violent 
8 paſſſon 


Chap.8, The OPTIMIST. 21 


paſſion for women. This Jew laid cloſe ſiege to 
my perſon, but could not triumph over me : I have 
reliſted him better than I did the Bulgarian ſoldier. 
A woman of honour may be raviſhed once, but her 
virtue gathers ſtrength from ſuch rudeneſs. The 
Jew, in order to render me more tractable, brought 
me to this country-houſe that you ſee. I always 
imagined hitherto, that no place on earth was fo fine 
as the caſtle of Thunder- ted-ffonckh ; but I am 
now undeceived. 

The grand inquiſitor obſerving me one e day at 
maſs, ogled me pretty much, and got notice ſent 
me that he wanted to ſpeak with me upon private 
buſineſs. Being conducted to his palace, I inform- 
ed him of my birth; upon which he repreſented to 
me, how much it was below my family to belong 


to an Iſraelite. A propoſal was then made by him 


to Don Iſſachar, to yield me up to my Lord. But 
Don Iſſachar, who is the court-banker, - and a man 
of credit, would not come into his meaſures. The 
inquiſitor threatened him with an auto- da- fe At 
laſt my Jew, being affrighted, concluded a bargain, 
by which the houſe and myſelf ſhould belong to 
them both in common ; that the Jew ſhould have 
Monday, Friday, and Saturday, and the inquiſitor 
the other days of the week. This agreement has 
now ſubſiſted ſix months. It has not however been 
without quarrels; for it has been often diſputed 
whether Saturday night or Sunday belonged to the 
old, or to the new law. For my part, I have hi- 
therto reſiſted them both; and I believe that this is 


the. reaſon, I am ſtill beloved by them. 
At length, to avert the ſcourge of earthquakes, f 


and to intimidate Don Iſſachar, it pleaſed his Lord- 
ſbip the Inquiſitor to celebrate an auto- da fe. He 


did me the honour to invite me to it. I got a very 

ine ſcat; and the ladies were ſerved with refreſh- 
ments between the maſs and the execution. 1 os 
ys 4 4 re * F 


* 


22 CANDIDUS; or, Chap. 8. 


really feized-with horror at ſeeing them burn the 

two Jews, and the honeſt Biſcayner who married 
his godmother: but how great was my ſurpriſe, 
my conſternation, my anguiſh, when I ſaw in a. 
ſanbenito and mitre a — that ſomewhat reſem- 

bled Pangloſs! I rubbed my eyes, I looked upon 
him very attentively, and I faw him hanged : I fell 
into a ſwoon ; and ſcarce had I recovered my ſen- 
ſes, when I ſaw you ſtripped ſtark naked; this was 
the height of horror, conſternation, grief, and de- 
ſpair. I will frankly own to you, that your ſkin is 
ſtill whiter, and of a better complexion than that 
of my Bulgarian captain. This ſight increaſed all 
the ſenſations that oppreſſed and diliraQted my ſoul. 

I cried out, I was going to ſay, Stop, barbarians ; 
but my voice failed me, and my cries would have 
been to no purpoſe. When you had. been ſeverely 
whipped, How is it poſſible, ſaid I, that the charm- 
ing Candidus, and the ſage Pangloſs, ſhould both 
be at Liſbon, the one to receive a hundred laſhes, 
and the other to be hanged by order of my Lord 
the Inquiſitor, by whom I am greatly beloved ? 
Pangloſs certainly deceived me moſt cruelly, when 
he told, that every thing is for the beſt in the 
world. 

Being agitated, aſtoniſhed, ſometimes beſide my- 
felf, and ſometimes ready to die with weakneſs, I had 
my head filled with the maſſacre of my father, my 
mother, and my brother; the inſolence of the vile Bul- 
gar ian ſoldier, the ſtab he gave me with his hanger; 
my abject ſervitude, and acting as cook to the Bul- 
garian captain; the raſcal Don Iſſachar, my abo- 
minable inquiſitor, the execution of Dr Pangloſs, 
the grand Miſerere on the organ while you was 
wiped, and eſpecially the kiſs I gave you behind 
the ſcreen, the laſt day I ſaw you. I praiſed; the 
Lord for having reſtored you to me after-ſa many 

trials. I charged my old woman to take care f 


you, 


* 


cap. . The OP TIMI1SB.- i 


you, and to bring you hither as ſoon as ſhe could. 

She has executed her commiſſion very well; I have 

taſted the inexpreſlible pleaſure of ſeeing you, hear- 

ing you, and ſpeaking to you. You muſt have a 

ravenous appetite by this time; I am hungry my- 
" ſelf too; let us therefore fit down to ſupper.” 

On this they both ſat down to table ; and after 
ſupper they ſeated themſelves -on the fine couch 
which was mentioned before. They were there 
when Signor Don Iſſachar, one of the maſters of 
the houſe, came thither. It was his ſabbath- day; 


- and he came to enjoy his right, and to expreſs his 
tender love. 


. IX. 


What . to Cunegonda, Candidus, the grew 
inquiſitor, and the Jew, 


h His Iſſachar was the moſt choleric Hebrew 
that had been ſeen in Iſrael ſince the captivi- 

ty in Babylon. What,” ſays he, you bitch 
of a Galilean, is it not enough to take in Maſter 
Inquiſitor ? but muſt this varlet alſo ſhare with 
me?” When he had thus ſpoke, he drew out a 
long poniard, which he always carried about him, 
and not ſuſpecting that his antagoniſt had any arms, 
fell upon Candidus : but our honeſt Weſtphalian 
had received a fine ſword from the old would, a- 
long with his full ſuit. He drew his rapier, and 
though he had the moſt agreeable temper, he laid 
the Iſraelite dead upon the ſpot, at the feet of Cu- 
negonda. 
Holy Virgin!” cried ſhe; “ what will be- 
come of us? a man murdered in my apartment! 
tk the peace - officer come, we are ruined.”  *:3f 

y Pangloſs had not been hanged,” ſaid Candidus, N 
88 ” l would have given us excellent advice in his 


r i emergency 3 


: 1 
1 
1 
10 
1 
„ 
: WM 
ol 
11 
, by 
q 
4 - 
: 
1 
; © 
* 
= 
1 : 
3 % 


v» = 


2 
—— * 


= a 
* — — b a; 
, > 2-4 
- > - 4 4 
—— — : — 
a ZAR r 
— an 
— — * ' 
_ n 
9 * 
2 5 1 * — 


9 


Fe > — 
'S.. at 
; 
? MS 
ä A N 
. * 


1 
2 


<p 
„ 


24 


CAN DID US; or, Chap. 9. 
emergency; for he was a great philoſopher, In 


this extremity let us conſult the old woman. 


She was a very prudent woman, and began to give 


her advice, when another little door opened, It 
was now about one o'clock in the morning, and 


conſequently the beginning of Sunday. This day 


Was allotted to my Lord the Inquiſitor. Entering, 


he ſaw the whipped Candidus with a ſword in his 
hand, a dead body ſtretched out on the floor, Cu- 
negonda i in a mighty fright, and the old woman gi - 
ving advice. 

See now what paſſed in Candidus's mind at this 
inftant, and how he reaſoned. © If this holy man 
calls in aſſiſtance, he will infallibly have me burnt; 
he may treat Cunegonda in the ſame manner; he 
has cauſed me be whipped without mercy ; he is 
my rival; I am in the way of killing, there is no 
time to heſitate.” This reaſoning was clear and 
precipitate; and, without giving time to the inqui- 
ſitor to recover from his ſurpriſe, he run him 
through the body, and laid him by the fide of the 
Jew. © Behold, here is a ſecond killed,” ſaid Cu- 
negonda ; “ there, is no pardon for us; we are ex- 
communicated, our laſt hour is come. How could 
you, that was born ſo gentle, kill in two minutes 
time a Jew and a prelate?” © My fair Lady,” an- 
ſwered Candidus, © when one is in love, jealqus, 

and whipped by the inquiſition, one does not know 
what one does.” 

The old woman then put in her word, and ſaid, 
e There are three Andaluſian horſes in the ſtable, 
with their ſaddles and bridles, which the gallant 
Candidus may get ready; Madam has ſome moi- 


dores and jewels ; let us get on horſeback without 
delay, though I cannot {it but on one buttock; 


and let us go to Cadiz: it is the fineſt time in the 


world, and very pleaſant it is to travel i in the cool 
| of the <> 81 | 


candidus 


Chap. 10 The OPTIMIST. ag 
Candidus immediately ſaddled the three horſes. 


Cunegonda, the old woman, and he, travelled thir-. 
bet 


ty miles on a ſtretch. While they were making 
the beſt of their way, the holy Hermandad came 
to the houſe ; they buried my Lord in a magnifi- 
cent church, and threw Iſſachar upon a lay-ſtall. 

Candidus, Cunegonda, and the old woman, had 
now got to the little town of Avacena, in the mid- 
dle of the mountains of Sierra Morena; and ſpoke 
as follows in an inn. 


CY A 


In what diſtreſs Candidus, Cunegonda, and the 
old woman arrived at Cadiz, and of their im- 
barkation. 


6 \ A 7HO could have robbed me of my piſtoles 
« and my jewels?” ſaid Cunegonda, with 
tears in her eyes: © what ſhall. we live on? what 
ſhall we do? where ſhall I find inquiſitors and Jews 
to give me more?” «© Alas,” ſaid the old woman, 
« I ſtrongly ſuſpect a Rev. Father Cordelier, who 
lay yeſterday in the ſame inn with us at Badajos. 
God preſerve me from judging raſhly, but he came 
twice into our chamber, and went away a lon 

time before us.” © Ah!” ſaid Candidus, © the 
good Pangloſs has often demonſtrated to me, that 


the goods of the earth are common to all men, 
and that every one has an equal right to them. 
According to theſe principles, the Cordelier ought 


to have left us. enough to carry us to our journey?s 
end, Have you nothing at all left then, my ptet- 


ty Cunegonda ?? © Not a farthing,” ſaid ſhe. 


&« What courſe ſhall we take?” ſaid Candidus, 

“Let us ſell one of the horſes,” ſaid the old wo- 

man; -I will mount behind Miſs, though I can hold 
| C =... mylclt 


# 


RS > i l - = 1 
ee 
0 (WY = 761 


\ 
* 4 » 
i = l _ 
- 5 by Los of 27. | \ Fay td 
* —_— k . 
Pe 3 LO q 8 
* * 


26 CANDIDUS;' or, chap. 10. 


myſelf only on one buttock, and we ſhall reach 
Cadiz.” | 
In the fame inn was a Benedictine prior, who 
bought the horſe very cheap. Candidus, Cunegon- 
da, and the old woman, paſſed through Lucena, 
Chillas, and Lebrixa, and arrived at length at Ca» 
diz. They were fitting out a fleet, and afſembling 
troops, for bringing to reaſon the Rev. fathers the 
Jeſuits of Paraguay, who were accuſed of having 
Excited one of their hordes, near the city of St Sa- 
crement, to revolt from their allegiance to the 
Kings of Spain and Portugal. Candidus having ſer- 
ved among the Bulgarians, performed the exerciſe 
of that nation, before the commander of this little 
army, with ſo much grace, celerity, addreſs, dex- 
terity, and agility, that he gave him the com- 
mand of a company of infantry. Being now made 
a captain, he imbarked with Miſs Cunegonda, the 
old woman, two valets, and the two Andaluſian 
horſes, which had belonged to his Lordſhip the 
grand inquiſitor of Portugal. 

During the whole voyage, they argued a great 
deal on the philoſophy of poor Pangloſs. We 
are going to another world,“ faid Candidus ; “ it 
is there without doubt that every thing is beſt, For 
it muſt be confeſſed; that one has reaſon to be a 
little uneaſy at what paſſeth in our world, with re- 
{pe& both to phyſics and ethics.” © I love you 
with all my heart,” ſaid Cunegonda ; - but my mind 

is till terrified at what I have ſeen and experien - 
ced. © All will be well,” replied Candidus ; 
« the ſea of the new world is already preferable to 
thoſe of ger Europe; it is more calm, and the 
winds ore conſtant, Certainly the new world 
is the beſt of all poſſible worlds.” * God grant it, 
ſaid Cunegonda; but 1 have been ſo terribly un · 
fortunate in mine, that my heart is almoſt ſhut as» 

gainſt hope.” © You complain indeed,” faid = 


; : . 
— ——— — — — — — Y d * — 1 = 
* i CT - — — of l 5 0 
— > "= 5 
n. * oO S 7 - 8 ä — n _ * — 
25 . wk" - 1 2 TIP e r — 
* A —— — N 8 _— r y x 3 AS I. 2 - 
* 2 — r wh IE ne — ——.— — 2 
— — —_ 3 8 Y of g —— — —— * — R p 
- 92 * "ze G 5 —— — * 2 li. IC 1 1 
LY — 
— — 8 * * — — 2 N * 4 * 0 
— > 8 242 4 — =p - PIES 46 . — 2 _ a= 4; q 
* * 9 n 2 2 2 . 5 Xo Lo _ p - w 
n r Y N * 22 — * 
* 6 * — 8 "0 * y Y by 0 * 
* 1 9 - 1 * 
, ie for nes” 


— —— 
bye” * a — 


— * 


ky # 
Ca 
Cn. 
2 


— * 
= * — 
— — Cf EIT 
— — - — 2 —1 
N. ix" "X88 


chap 11. The O PTIMIS T. 


old woman to them; © alas! you have not met 
with ſuch misfortunes as I have.” Rs 

Cunegonda was almoſt ready to fall a-· laughing, 
and thought the old woman very comical, for pre- 
tending to be more unfortunate than herſelf. | * A. 
las! my good dame,” ſaid Cunegonda, © unleſs 
you had been raviſhed by two Bulgarians, had re- 
ceived two cuts with a hanger in your belly, had 
had two caſtles demoliſhed, had had two fathers - 
and two mothers murdered, and had ſeen two lo- 
vers whipped at an auto- da- fe, I cannot ſee how 
you could have the advantage of me. Add to this, 
that I was born a baroneſs with ſeventy-two armo« 
rial quarterings, and that I have been a cook-maid.” 
« My Lady,” anſwered the old woman, “ you 
know nothing of my extraction; and were I to ſhew 
you my backſide, you would not talk as you do, 
but would ſuſpend your judgment.” This diſcourſe 
having raiſed an inſatiable curioſity in the minds of 
Cunegonda and -Candidus, the old woman related 
her ſtory in the following terms. 


K XI. 
The hiſtory of the old woman. 


1 Had not always eyes bleared, and bordered with 
red; my noſe has not always touched my chin; 
nor have I been always a ſervant. I am the daugh- 
ter of Pope Urban X. and of the Princeſs of Pale- 
ſtrina. I was brought up till I was fourteen, in a 
palace to which all the caſtles of your German ba- 
rons would not have ſerved for ſtables; and one 
of my robes coſt more than all the magnificence in 
Weltphalia, I increaſed in beauty, in charms, 
and in fine accompliſhments, in the very centre of 
pleaſures, of homages, and of high expectations. 
I now began to captivate every heart. My neck 

C 2 | Was 


bo oe —_ 
* 


A © 
2 
— — I" * — on. mg 8 * 1 
ö Wein , 15 * way * 7 
— A _ " * þ "1 n 
ERIE A. l 
— pn — e — * ” 
_— I _ 
+ A . 
en: _ * 1 * 1 s 
gp — * . 
9 2 1 N 3 
* 2 . 


— 4 wa 
— 2 
r — 
_— —— 2 2 
—_ 


. 


— — 
ith ä 
„ I 


28 CANDIDUS; or, Chap. 11. 


was ſo formed, and what a neck! white, firm, 
and ſhaped like that of the Venus of Medicis. And 
what eyes! what eyelids! what fine black eye- 
brows! what flames ſparkled from my eyeballs, 
and, as the poets of our country told me, eclipſed 


the twinkling of the ſtars! The maids who dreſſ- 


ed and undreſſed me, fell into an ecſtaſy when they 
viewed me before and behind, and all the men 
would have been glad to have been in their places. 
I was betrothed to a prince, the ſovereign of 
Maſſa Carara, What a prince! as handſome as 
myſelf, made up of ſweetneſs and charms, of a witty 
mind, and burning with love. I loved him, as one 
uſes to do for the firſt time, with idolatry, with 
tranſport. Preparations were made for our nup- 
tials. The pomp and magnificence were inconcei- 
vable; nothing but continual feaſts, carouſals, and 
operas; and all Italy made ſonnets upon me, of 
which there was ſcarce one tolerable. I was juſt on 
the point of reaching the ſummit of happineſs, 
when an old marchionefs, who had been miſtreſs 
to my prince, invited him to drink chocolate at 
her houſe. He died there in leſs than two hours 
time in terrible convullions, But this is only a 
mere trifle. My mother in deſpair, and yet leſs 
afflicted than me, reſolved to retreat for ſome time 
from ſo mournful a place. She had a very fine 
ſeat near Gaietta, We imbarked on board a galley 
of the country, gilt like the altar of St Peter's at 
Rome. We were ſcarce out at ſea, when a corſair 


of Sallee fell upon us, and boarded us. Our ſol- 


diers defended themſelves like thoſe of the Pope; 
ey all fell down upon their knees, after throwing 


away their arms, and aſked abſolution i articulo 


mor tis of the corſair. 
They inſtantly ſtripped us as naked as monkeys; 


| my mother, our maids of honour, and myſelf too, 


enn with no * ulagy It is a very furs 
3 2 


Africa. 


Chap/1t The OPT IMIS T. 29 


priſing thing with what expedition theſe gentry un- 
dreſs people. But what ſurpriſed me moſt was, that 
they ſhould put their fingets into a place, into 
which we women ſeldom ſuffer any thing to enter 
but pipes. This ceremony appeared very ſtrange to 
me; but ſo we judge of every thing that is not pro- 
duced in our own country, I ſoon learned, how- 
ever, that it was to ſearch whether we had not 
concealed ſome of our jewels there. It is a cuſtom 


eſtabliſhed time out of mind among civilized nations 


that ſcour the ſea. I know that the gentlemen the 
religious knights of Malta never omit to practiſe it, 
when they take Turks of either ſex. It is one of 
the laws of nations, from which they never de- 
viate. 

I need not tell you how great a bardſhip it is 
for a young princeſs and+her mother to be carried 
ſlaves to Morocco. You may eaſily form a notion 
of all that we muſt ſuffer on board the veſſel of the 
corſair. My mother was ſtill very handſome; our 
maids of honour, nay our plain chambermaids, had 
more charms than are to be found throughout all 
As for myſelf, I was all attraction, I was 
all beauty, and all charms, nay more, I was a vir- 

in. However, I was not one long: this flower, 
which had been reſerved for the accompliſhed 
Prince of Maſſa Carara, was taken from me by 
the captain of the corſair. He was an ugly negro, + 
but fancied he did me a great deal of honour. In- 
deed her Highneſs the Princeſs of Paleſtrina and - 
myſelf muſt have been very ſtrong to reſiſt all the 
violence we met with till our arrival at Morocco. 
But let me paſs over that: theſe are ſuch common 
things, that they are ſcarce worth the mentioning. 
Morocco was overflowed with blood when we. 
arrived there. Fifty ſons of the Emperor Muley I. 
mael had each their adherents: this produced in 
effect fifty civil wars, of blacks againſt_blacks, of 

X C 3 blacks 


8 


le — ; [ wi N 
8 1 2 26 5 = n — > © 


— — IS | - 
— Atv act _ — = 
—— -— _ * 


2 —— 


+ 
ui 


8 


a 2 — — EC 
— 
a — tet 
* 8 + Ox 8 — . — 
' - — 


1 
* 2 


M 3 — - 
, —. 
—_— _— * a * 
2 5 — pn 
OY — = 
— - * 
— * * 
% K , n * 41 I 
- os — 
1. 8 IS "> 
— _ 1 . ” — — 
- - 
— 
% 


* 


30 o AN DID usG; or, Chap. 1 t. 


blacks againſt tawnies, of tawnies againſt tawnies, 


and of mulattoes againſt mulattoes In a word, there 


was one continued carnage all over the empire. 
No ſooner were we landed, than the blacks of a 
party adverſaries to that of my corſair made an at- 
tempt to rob him of his booty. Next to the jewels 
and the gold, we were the moſt valuable things 
he had. I was here witneſs to ſuch a battle as you 
never ſaw in your European climates. The people 
of the north have not ſo much fire in their blood; 
nor have they that raging paſſion for women that 
is ſo common in Africa. One would think that 


vou Europeans had nothing but milk in your veins; 


but it is vitriol and fire that runs in thoſe of the in- 


habitants of Mount Atlas, and the neighbouring 


countries. They fought with the fury of lions, 
tygers, and ſerpents of the country, to know who 
ſhould have us. A moor ſeized my mother by the 
right arm, while my captain's lieutenant held her 
by the left; a mooriſh ſoldier then took hold of 
her by one leg, and our pirates held her by the o- 
ther. All our women found themſelves almoſt in 
a moment ſeized thus by four foldiers. My cap» 
tain kept me concealed at his back. He had a ſci- 
mitar in his hand, and killed every one that oppo- 
fed his fury. In ſhort, I ſaw all our Italian wo- 
men, and my mother, torn in pieces, hacked, and 
mangled by the brutes that fought for them. 


Ny fellow-prifoners, thoſe who had taken them, 


ſoldiers, failors, blacks, whites, mulattoes, and 
laſtly my captain himſelf, were all killed ; and I 
remained expiring upon a heap of dead bodies. 
"Theſe barbarous ſcenes extended, as every one 
knows, over more than three hundred leagues, 
without ever omitting the five prayers a- day ordain- 

ed by Mahomer. 
I diſengaged myſelf with great difficulty from the 
weight of ſo many bloody carcaſes heaped upon un 
-an 


oo \ 
4 
a A 


| chap. 12 The OPTIMIS T. 31 


— 


and made a ſhift to crawl to a large orange-tree on 
the bank of a neighbouring rivulet ; where 1 fell 
down oppreſſed with fear, fatigue, horror, deſpair; 
and hunger. Soon after, my ſenſes being over- 
powered, were locked up in a ſleep, which reſem- 
bled a fit rather than ſleep. I was in this ſtate of 
weakneſs and in ſenſibility, between death and life, 
when J felt myſelf preſſed by ſomething that moved 
upon my body. I opened my eyes, and ſaw a 
white man, of a very good aſpect, who ſighed, and 
muttered theſe words between his teeth, O che ſei- 
agura deſfſere ſenza coglioni! i. e.“ O this miſo 
fortune of being deprived of teſticles 1? 


CM A I 2M 
The ſequel of the old waman's adventures. 


Stoniſhed and tranſported to hear my own 
country-language, and not leſs ſurpriſed at 
the words uttered by the man, I made anſwer, that 
there might be far greater misfortunes than thoſe 
he complained of. I then gave him a ſhort hint of 
the horrid ſcenes I had undergone, and relapſed' 
again into a fwgon. He carried me to a neighbours. 
ivg boulg'cauſed me be put to bed, gave me ſome« 
thing to eat, waited upon me, comforted and flat- 
tered me, and ſaid, that ke had never ſeen any one 
ſo handſome as me, and that he never regretted ſo 
much the loſs of what no one could reſtore to him. 
« I was botu at Naples,“ ſaid he, „where they 
caſtrate two or three thouſand children every year; 
ſome die of the operation, others acquire a finer 
voice than that of any woman, and others become 
ſovereigns of ſtates. This operation was perform- 
ed on me with great ſucceſs, and I became a finger 
in the chapel of her Highneſs the Princeſs of Pas 
leſtrina,” © Of my mother 1“ cried I. « Of 

2 Jour 


aud was dying of the plagde at Algiers. 1 did not 


22 CANDIDUS; or, 


your mother!“ cried he again, ſhedding tears.“ 
& What! are you that young princeſs, whom I 


Chap. 12. 


had the care of bringing up till ſne was ſix years 


old, and who promiſed even then to be as hand- 
ſome as you are now?” © It is I myſelf: m 

mother lies about four hundred paces from” henc 

cut into four quarters, under a heap of dea 
bodies.” 

I related to him all that had befallen me: he 
likewiſe told me his adventures; and informed me, 
that he was ſent to the King of Morocco, by a 
Chriſtian power, to conclude a treaty with that 


monarch, by which he was to furniſh him with am + 
munition, artillery, and ſhips, to enable him en- 


tirely to deſtroy the commerce of other Chriſtians. 
« My commiſſion is fulfalled,” faid the honeſt eu- 
nuch to me; © I am going to imbark at Ceuta, 
and will carry you to Italy. But O my misfortune 
in wanting teſticles !?? 

IT thanked him with the tears of gratitude ; but 
inſtead of conducting me to Italy, he carried me 
to Algiers, and ſold me to the Dey of that pro- 
vince, Scarce was I ſold, when the plague, which 
had made the tour of Africa, Aſia, and Europe, 
broke out at Algiers with great fury. You have 


ſeen earthquakes ; but pray, Miſs, have you ever 


had the plague ? © Never,” replied the Baroneſs. 

If you had had it, replied the old woman, you 
would confeſs that it is far more terrible than 
an earthquake. It is very common in Africa; 
I was ſeized with it. Figure to yourſelf the fitua-' 
tion of a Pope's. daughter, about fifteen years of 
age, who, in the ſpace of three months, had un- 
dergone poverty and flavery, had been raviſhed al- 
moſt every day, had ſeen her ma ther cut into four 
quarters, bad experienced both famine and war, 


* 
IF 


* EIN inp RT Po Remo oa er 


I ed ²⁵¹ ²˙ʃ ö˙ ,. ˙ ati ior: ton 


apc 12 The O P(T:4-2MI SF, - 38 


die for all that. But my eunuch, and the Dey, and 
almoſt all the ſeraglio at Algiers, periſhed. 


When the firſt ravages of this dreadful peſtilener 


were over, they ſold the ſlaves belonging to the 
Dey. A merchant purchaſed me, and carried me 


to Tunis. There he ſold me to another merchant, 
who fold me again at Tripoli ; from Tripoli I was 


ſold again at Alexandria; from Alexandria I was 
ſold again at Smyrna; and from Smyrna at Con- 
ſtantinople. At laſt I became the property of an 
apa of the janiſaries; who was ſoon after ordered 
to go to the defence of Aſoph, then beſieged by 


'the Ruſhans. 


The aga, who was a man of great gallantry, took 
all his ſeraglio along with him, and lodged us in a 


ſmall fort on the Palus Mzotis, under the guard of 


two black eunuchs and twenty ſoldiers. We killed 
a great number of the Ruſſians, who returned the 
compliment with intereſt. Aſoph was put to fire 
and ſword, and no regard was paid to age or ſex, 


There remained only our little fort; which the ene- 


my reſolved to reduce by famine. The twenty ja- 
nifaries had ſworn, that they would never ſurren- 


der. The extremities of famine to which they, 


were reduced, obliged them to eat our two eu- 
nuchs, for fear of violating their oath ; and a few 


days after they reſolved to devour the women. 


We had an Iman, a very religious and humane 
man. He preached an excellent ſermon to them, 
in which he diſſuaded them from killing us all at 


once, © Cut off only one of the buttocks of theſe 


ladies,” ſaid he, “ and you will fare extremely 
well : if you muſt come to it again, you will have 
the ſame entertainment a few days hence : Heaven 


will bleſs you for ſo charitable an action, and you 


will find relief.” 


As he had an eloquent tongue, he eaſily pers 
ſuaded them. This horrible operation was per- 
: 5 formed 


# * 
— "x 8 d - 
— 


thy = 


Lo 2h ted r 


*4 
> — b . 4 3 
P ae SD. OO Ol EE—_——T ON a nN 
y = 1 wy \ . - g * 
a 5 f = i ine ES - by R U 4 
* = n & % 
0 — — 128 5 = Þ 


34 CANDIDUS; or, Chap. 12. 


formed upon us; and the Iman applied the ſame 
balſam to us that is applied to children after they 
are circumciſed. We were all ready to die. 


The janiſaries had ſcarce finiſhed the repaſt with 


which we had ſupplied them, when the Ruſſians 
came in flat bottomed boats; and not a ſingle ja- 
niſary eſcaped. The Ruſſians ſhewed no concern 
about the condition we were in. As there are 
French ſurgeons in every country, one of them who 
was a perſon of very great {kill, took us under his 
care, and cured us; and I will remember it all m 
life, that when my wounds were pretty well healed, 
he made me amorous propoſals. To be ſhort, he 
bid us all comfort ourſelves ; and affured us, that 
the like misfortune had happened in ſeveral ſieges, 
and that it was the law of war. i 
As ſoon as my companions were able to walk, 
they were obliged to go to Moſcow. I fell to the 
lot of a Boyard, who made me his gardener, and 
gave me twenty laſhes with his whip every day. But 


my Lord having been broke on the wheel, within 


two years after, along with thirty more Boyards, 
on account of ſome buſtle at court, I. availed my- 
ſelf of this event, and made my eſcape. After tra- 
verſing all Ruſſia, I was a long time ſervant to an 
innkeeper at Riga, afterwards at Roſtock, Wiſmar, 
Leipſic, Caſſel, Utrecht, Leyden, the Hague, and 
Rotterdam. I grew old in miſery and diſgrace, 
- baving only one half of my poſteriors, but ſtill re- 
membering that I was a Pope's daughter. A hun- 
dred times have I had thoughts of killing myſelf ; 
but ſtill I was fond of life. This ridiculous weak- 
neſs is perhaps one of our moſt melancholy foibles, 
For can any thing be more ſtupid, than to be de- 
Frous of continually carrying a burden, which one 
has a mind to throw down on the ground ? to dread 
exiſtence, and yet preſerve it ? in a word, to 1 

[ | > 2 the 


OY > LITE 
n 
* 9 


Chap. 13- The OPTIMIST. 35 


the ſerpent that devours us, till he has gnawed our 
very heart ? 

In the countries through which it has been m 
fate to travel, and in the inns where I have been a 
ſervant, I have ſeen a prodigious number of people 
who looked upon their own exiſtence as a curle ; 
but I never knew of more than eight who volun- 
tarily put an end to their miſery, viz. three ne- 
groes, four Engliſhmen, and a German profeſſor, 
named Robeck. My laſt ſervice was with Don If- 
ſachar the Jew, who. placed me near your perſon, 
my fair Lady. I am reſolved to ſhare your fate ; 


and I have been more affected with your mis for- 


tunes than my own. I ſhould never have ſpoke of 
my ſufferings, if you had not vexed me a little, and 
if it had not been cuſtomary on board a ſhip ro 
tell ſtories, by way of amuſement, In ſhort, Miſs, 
I have a good deal of experience, and I have known 
the world. Divert yourſelf, and prevail upon each 
paſſenger to tell you his ſtory ; and if there is one 
found who has not frequently curſed his life, and 
has not as often ſaid to himſelf, that he was the 
unhappieſt of mortals, I will give you leave to 
throw.me into the ſea, with my head foremoſt. 


G WG: + 


How Candidus was obliged to part from the fair 
Cunegonda and the old woman, 


. 


HE beautiful Cunegonda having heard the old 
woman's ſtory, paid her all the civilities that 
were due to a perſon of her rank and merit. She 


approved of her propoſal ; and engaged all the paſs 
ſengers, one after another, to relate their aden 
tures: and then both Candidus and ſhe confeſled, 


that the old woman was in the right. “It is a 
great pity,” ſaid Candidus, that the ſage Pangloſs 
| was 


1 


” 
* 
— BM 
2 
> — 


1 as ti. 
> 


36 CANDIDUS; or, Chap. 13. 


= 
yy 
SIRE 


> 


* 


3 
AE 
= 


a — 
rn 


was hanged, contrary to cuſtom, at the auto-da. 
fe; for he would tell us moſt ſurpriſing things con - 
cerning the phyſical and moral evil which cover 
both land and ſea ; and I ſhould be bold enough, 
with due reſpect, to propoſe ſome objections.“, 
While each paſſenger was relating his ſtory, the 
ſhip advanced in her voyage. They landed at 
Buenos-Ayres. Cunegonda, Capt. Candidus, and 
the old woman, waited on the governor, Don Fer- 
nandes d' Ibaraa, y Figueora, y Maſcarenes, y Lam- 
pourdos, y Souza, This nobleman was poſſeéſſed 
of pride ſuitable to a perſon dignified with ſo many 
titles. He ſpoke to other people with ſo noble a 
diſdain, carried his noſe ſo high, raiſed his voice 
ſo intolerably, aſſumed ſo imperious an air, and af- 
fected fo lofty a gait, that all thoſe who ſaluted him 
were tempted to beat him, He was an exceſlive 
lover of the fair ſex. Cunegonda appeared to him 
the prettieſt woman he had ever ſeen. The firſt 
thing he did, was to aſk whether ſhe was' not the 
Captain's wife? The manner in which he propoſed 
the queſtion alarmed Candidus. He durſt not ſay 
that ſhe was his wife, becauſe in reality ſhe was not ; 
he durſt not tell him that ſhe was his ſiſter, becauſe 
ſhe was not that neither : and though this officious 
lie might have bcen of ſervice to him, yet his foul 
was too refined to betray the truth.“ Miſs- Cune- 
gonda,“ ſaid he, © intends me the honour of mar- 
rying me, and we beſeech your Excellency to 
grace our nuptials with your preſence.” 
Don Fernandes d'Ibaraa, y Figueora, y Maſca- 
renes, y Lampourdos, y Souza, turning up his mu- 
ſtaches, forced a grim ſmile, and ordered Capt. Can- 
didus to go and review his company. Candidus o- 
beyed, and the Governor remained alone with Miſs 
Cunegonda. He declared his paſſion, proteſted that 


he would marry her the next day in the face of the 


Church, or otherwiſe, as it ſhould be agreeable to 
GL g n . a 
8 8 * 


Chap. 13. The OPTIMIST, WH 


a perſon of her charms. Cunegonda deſired a 
uarter of an hour to conſider of the propoſal, to 

conſult with the old woman, and to take her re- 
ſolution. \ 

Says the old woman to Cunegonda : * Miſs, * 
you can reckon up ſeventy-two deſcents in your fa- 
mily, and not one farthing in your pocket. It is 
now in your power to be wife to the greateſt lord in 
South America, who has very pretty whiſkers ; 
and what occaſion have you to pique yourſelf upon 
inviolable fidelity? You have been raviſhed by the 
Bulgarians ; a Jew and an inquiſitor have been in 
your good graces. Misfortunes have no law on their 
ſide. I confeſs, were I in your place, I ſhould have 
no ſcruple to marry the governor, and to make my 
Lord Capt. Candidus's fortune.“ | 

While the old woman was thus ſpeaking, with 
all the prudence which age and experience dicta- 
ted, they deſcried a ſmall veſſel entering the port, 
which had on board an alcaid and alguazils. The 
occaſion of their voyage was this. 

The old woman had ſhrewdly gueſſed, that it 
was a cordelier with a great ſleeve that ſtole the 
money and jewels from Cunegonda in the city of 
Badajox, when ſhe and Candidus were making their 
eſcape. The friar having offered to ſell ſome of the 
diamonds to a jeweller, he knew them to be the in- 
quiſitor's. The cordelier, before he was hanged, 
confeſſed he had ſtole them. He deſcribed the per- 
ſons he had ſtole them from, and told the route they 
had taken. The flight of Cunegonda and Candi- 
dus being by this means diſcovered; they were tra - 
.ced to Cadiz ; where a veſſel was immediately ſent 
in purſuit of them ; and now the veſſel was in the 
port of 'Buenos-Ayres. A report was ſpread, that 
an alcaid was going to land, and that he was in 
purſuit of the murderers of my Lord the grand in- 
quiſitor. The old yo ſaw in a moment what 
* | Was 


LF 832 
1 . Sw i D —— 
* > ; - Ad > - hz * > — 
3 Ts. 0 * 1 
ry — - = 2 it _ —— — 
— * * * a 1 9 — — 
— 3 


R — 


* 
# 
ne. p 
\ In 
a} 
k , 7 
l 14 * 
ö l 11 
8 
= - FS 
1 ' * 
7 , T3 
\ 2:78 
o : 
l : 
5 N N * 
p \ . ns 
1 . 
ON [4 2 VE 
—_ | 7 
| | 31 
4 o 
” 


33 CANDIDUS; or, Chap. 14. 


was to be done. You cannot run away,” faid ſhe 
to Cunegonda, © and you have nothing to fear; it 
was not you that killed my Lord ; and beſides, the 
governor, who is in love with you, will not ſuffer 
you to be ill treated: therefore ſtay here.” She 
then ran to Candidus : © Fly,” ſaid ſhe, © or in 
an hour you will be burnt alive.” He had not a 


moment to loſe : but how could he part from Cu- 
negonda, and where could he fly for ſhelter ? 


028 ak W 


How Candidus and Cacambo were received by the 
Feſuits of Paraguay. 


Andidus had brought ſuch a valet with him 
from Cadiz, as one often meets with in abun- 
dance on the coaſts of Spain, and in the colonies. 
He was a fourth part a Spaniard, born of a mon- 
el in Tucuman ; and had been a ſinging-boy, a 
xton, a ſailor, a monk, a factor, a ſoldier, and 


a lacquey. His name was Cacambo, and he had an 


entire regard to his maſter, becauſe his maſter was 


A very good ſort of man. Having ſaddled the two 


Andaluſian horſes with all expedition : © Let us 
go, Maſter, let us follow the old woman's advice, 
* us ſet off, and run without looking behind us.“ 
Candidus dropped ſome tears: O my dear Cu- 
negonda,” ſays he, muſt 1 leave you juſt at a 
time when the governor is going to ſee us married 
Cunegonda, when you are brought ſo far, What will 
become of yon? * She will do as well as ſhe 
can,” ſaid Cacambo ; / women are never at a loſs; 
God will provide for her; let us run.“ © Whither 
art thou carrying me? ” {aid Candidus: here are 
we going? what ſhall we do without Cunegonda? 
% By St James of Compoſtella,” ſaid Cacambo, 


£ you was going to fight againſt the Jeſuits ; 2 


* — 


© i „ tak, wy 


11 ˙¹ -m Do at be 


W— 
* 


Chap. 14. The O PTIMIS T. 39 


let us go and fight for them. I know the road per- 
fectly well; I will conduct you to their kingdom; 
they will be chaPmed to have a captain that knows 
the Bulgarian exerciſe ; you will make a prodigious 
fortune; though one cannot find his account in 
one world, he may in another. It is a great plea- 
ſure to ſee variety of objects, and to perform new 
exploits.” ; 

« Have you then been at Paraguay? “ ſaid Can- 
didus. “ Yes, in truth, I bave,” faid Cacambo : 
« I was uſher to the college of Aſſumption, and 
am acquainted with the government of the good 
fathers, as well as I am with the ſtreets of Cadiz. 
It is an admirable ſort of government. The king» 
dom is upwards of three hundred leagues in dia- 
meter, and divided into thirty provinces. The fa- 
thers therc are maſters of every thing, and the 
people have nothing. It is the maſterpiece of rea- 
ſon and juſtice. For my part, I ſee nothing ſo di- 
vine as the good fathers, who wage war here againſt 
the Kings of Spain and Portugal, and in Europe 
are their confeſſors; who in this country kill Spa- 
niards, and at Madrid ſend them to heaven. This 
tranſports me: let us therefore puſh forward; you 
are going to be the happieſt of mortals. What 
pleaſure will it be to thoſe fathers, when they know 
that a captain who underſtands the Bulgarian exere 
ciſe, comes to offer them his ſervice ! ?”? 

As ſoon as they reached the firſt paſs, Cacambo 
told the advanced guard, that a captain deſired to 
ſpeak with my Lord the commandant. They went 
to inform the main guard of it. A Paraguayan of- 
ficer ran on foot to the commandant, to impart 
the news to him. Candidus and Cacambo were at 
firſt difarmed, and their two Andaluſian horſes ſei- 
zed. The two ſtrangers were introduced between 
two files of muſketeers : the commandant was at 
the further end, with a three-cornered cap on his 

D 2 Y head, 


y N ol = 
Ser 
wh 


40 CANDIDUS; or, Chap. 14. 


head, his gown tucked up, a ſword by his ſide, 
and a ſpontoon in his hand. He made a figral, 
and ſtraightway four and twenty ſoldiers furrounded 
the new comers. A ſerjeant told them they muſt 
wait; that the commandant could not ſpeak to them; 
that the Rev. Father Provincial does not permit 
any Spaniard to open his mouth but in his pre- 
ſence, or to ſtay above three hours in the province. 
« And where is the Rev. Father Provincial?“ faid 
Cacambo. © He is upon the parade, after ſaying 
mals,” anſwered the ſerjeant; © and you cannot 
kiſs his ſpurs in leſs than three hours.” « But,” 
faid Cacambo, my maſter; the Captain, who is 
ready to die for hunger as well as myſelf, is not a 
Spaniard, but a German : cannot we have ſome- 
thing for breakfaſt, while we wait for his Reve- 
rence ? ” | 
The ſerjeant went that inſtant, to give an ac- 
count of this diſcourſe to the commandant. ©« God 
be praiſed,” ſaid the Rev. commandant ; ſince he 
is a German, I may ſpeak with him; bring him 
into my arbour.“ Candidus was immediately con- 
ducted into a green pavilion, decorated with a ver 
handſome balluſtrade of green and gold marble, with 
intertextures of vines, containing parrots, hum- 
ming birds, fly-birds, Guiney hens, and all other 
- ſorts of rare birds. An excellent breakfaſt was 
provided in veſſels of gold ; and while the Para- 
guayans were eating Indian corn out of -wooden 
diſhes, in the open fields, expoſed to the ſultry 


heat of the ſun, the Rev. Father Commandant re- 
tired to his arbour. 


— 


He was a very handſome young man, with a 
full face, tolerably fair, freſh coloured, his eye- 
brows were arched, his eye full of fire, his ear 
red, his lips like vermilion ; his air was ſomewhat 
fierce, but of a fierceneſs which differed both from 
that of a Spaniard and a Jeſuit. They now e, 

0 


r e WED 


The OPTIMIST, 


ed Candidus and Cacambo their arms, which had 
been taken from them, together with the two An- 
daluſian horſes; which, Cacambo took the liberty 
to feed near the arbour, keeping his eye upon them, 
for fear of a ſurpriſe. 

Candidas immediately kiſſed the hem of the com- 
mandant's garment ; after which they both, by his 
order, fat down to table. © You are a German 
then?” ſaid the Jeſuit to him, in that language. 
« Yes, my Reverend Father,” ſaid Candidus. In 
pronouncing theſe words, they looked on each o- 
ther with an extreme ſurpriſe, which they were not 
able to account for. And what part of Germa- 
ny do you belong to?“ ſaid the Jeſuit. To the 
lower part of Weſtphalia,” ſaid Candida: 64 was 
born in the caſtle of Thunder-ten-tronckh?”? ©« Hea-» 
vens! is it poſſible!” cried the commandant. 
“ What a miracle is this !”*cried Candidus. * Is 
it you?” ſaid the commandant, © *Tis impoſlible 1” 
ſaid Candidus. On this they both fell backwards; 
but getting up again, embraced each other, and 
ſhed tears. What! is it you, my Reverend Fa- 
ther! you! the brother of the fair Cunegonda ! 
you, that was ſlain by the Bulgarians! you, the 
Baron's fon! are you a Jeſuit at Paraguay! I myſt 
confeſs, that this is a ſtrange world indeed! Ali. 
Pangloſs ! Pangloſs! how glad would you have 
been, if you had not been hanged 1? 8 25 

'The commandant ordered the negro ſlaves, and 
the Paraguayans, that poured out their liquor in 
cups of rock cryſtal, to retire. He thanked God, 
and St Ignatius, a thouſand times; folded Candi- 
dus in his arms; their faces being all the while 
bathed in tears. You will be more aſtonithed, 
more affected, more out of your wits,” faid Cans 
didus, when I tell you that Miſs Cunegonda, your. 
ſiſter, who you thought was ripped up, is as well 
as I am.“ „ Where!“ In your neighbours. 
8 D 3 hood, 


Chap. 14. 


a Tor RS 
Da — * 


— A" * * 0 oO K 
. * — * * yu bo * *  ,Y 
d Py * 1 5 . 
Cr 


N r 
21 


I > Ay 
_ — PISS al * TS 
TTY W W ern 

5 »4 \ 


= — —— 2222 — — — 


42 c AN DID Vs: or, Chap. 15. 


hood, at the houſe of the governor of Buenos- 
Ayres; and I was coming to fight againſt you.“ 
Every word they ſpoke in this long converſation, 
heaped ſurpriſe upon ſurpriſe. Their fouls dwelt 
upon their tongues, liſtened in their ears, and 


| ſparkled in their eyes. As they were Germans, 


they made a long meal, (according to cuſtom), 
waiting for the Reverend Father, the Provincial ; 


2 the commandant thus addreſſed his dear Can» 
lidus. * 


E XV. 


How Candidus killed the brother of bis dear Cu- 
ne gonda. 


« T Shall ever have preſent to my memory that 
* horrible day wherein 1 faw my father and 
mother. killed, and my ſiſter raviſned. When the 
Bulgarians were gone, my ſweet ſiſter was no where 
to be found; and I, together with my father and 
mother, two maids, and three little lads that were 
murdered, were flung into a cart, in order to be 
buried in a chapel, which belonged to the Jeſuits, 
about two leagues diſtant from our family-caſtle. 
A Jeſuit ſprinkled us with holy water, which be- 


ing very ſalt, and ſome drops falling into my eyes, 


the Father could perceive my eyeballs move; on 
-yhich he put bis hand upon my ſide, and felt my 
heart beat: I was taken care of; and in about 
three weeks time, no one would have thought that 
any thing had ailed me. You know very well, my 


dear Candidus, I was very handſome, but I grew 


more ſo: on which account the Reverend Father 
Didrius, ſuperior of the houſe, conceived @ very 
great affection for me; gave me the habit of a no- 
vice; and ſome time after, ſent me to Rome. 
The ſuperior was then looking out for a recruit. of 


young 


* C9 = 
\ 2 =, 
Fel —— 31 
72 1 


| 
[1 I 
* 


chap. 15. The OPTIMIST. 


young Jeſuits from Germany. For the ruler 
Paraguay take as few Spaniſh Jeſuits as they « 
but chuſe foreigners, becauſe they think they 
tyrannize over them as they pleaſe. I was there- 
fore made choice of by the Reverend Father-Gene- 
ral, as a proper perſon to go to work in this vine- 
yard. I ſet fail in company with a Polander, and 
a Tiroleſian. On my arrival I was bonoured with 
a ſub-deaconry and a lieutenancy. At preſent I am 
a colonel and a-prieſt. We ſhall give the King of 
Spain's army a warm reception; I can aſſure you 
that they will be excommunicated, and beaten. 
Providence has ſent you hither to aſſiſt us. But is 
it true, that my dear ſiſter Cunegonda is in our 
neighbourhood, at the governor of Buenos-Ayres's 
houſe ?? Candidus ſwore that it was as trpe-as the 
goſpel. On this their tears guſhed out afreſh. ; 
The Baron could not refrain embracing Candidus, 
whom he called his brother and his protector. 
« Ah, perhaps,” faid he, “we two may enter the 
city in triumph, and recover my ſiſter Cunegonda.” 
There is nothing I could wiſh for more,” ſaid 
Candidus ; “ for I expected to be married to her 
before to-morrow, and I have ſome hopes I ſhall 
yet,” „ The inſolence of the fellow!“ replied. 
the Baron; © would you have the impudence to 
marry my ſiſter, who can ſhew ſeventy-two quar- 
terings in her coat of arms?” Candidus being 
quite thunderſtruck at this, made him the following: 
reply: “My Reverend Father, all the quarterings 
in the world do not ſignify a farthing. I have deli- 
vered your ſiſter from the hands of a-Jew, and an 
inquiſitor ; ſhe lies under a great many obligations 
to me; and is willing to marry,me. Maſter Pan- 
loſs always told me that all men are equal. I am 
Pie I ſhall have her.” © We will ſee whether you 
ſhall or no, you villain !“ ſaid the Jeſuit-Baron of 
Thunder · ten- ronckh ; and at the fame. time gave 


„ 


\ 1 5 © : 
\ 0 
\ : N ne } ; TH 
. — = . ” , - l 
1 . « _ . — b = [ 4 - 
PR - 7 3 1 1 I wo _— 
— \ 1 ITC , 7 - 1 , 
2 Yo AY y 4 * 
5 jy Fe L w - 2 . 9 $ ju < 95 . F * — fe W — —— 
an "ITY N : — 5 r — one 6 v 2 — — * 5 4 Me * 
OT NI Ae ü — 9 2 * —— a * 
, T7 ” 8 2 3 — "i — — > — — * © 1 2 _ — 
N a> 4 * 4 i, 4 * p \ 1 3 * 1 * — * " N 
— . - + 4 $ 1 8 7 1 > fn - a 1 " * p y 4 
2 : , — 0 * * * I's TR —— 2 R 8 — 5 : 
= = \ - — - * = _ AS — Wa —_ 
LR — - ; — — 2 7 * = 5 108 * 5 - 
pan(®. — and 4 = — — — = - * 2 7 £ —— by — —— — — 5 —=X — . 
. 8 — wt * — —— _ wk <A — 4 5 
3 by * * 6 - — I, — — >a rr — — 9 . . 2 
* 133 * 2 : : o Ca _ 2 7 - — — 7 — a — - 
922 LIED 2 — — 8—ͤ— — ö 1 
4 w — * — OY 
, : 7 
" ” 
— * 
p 


— 


— 


— - 
— — 1 . 
__ Gat _- I I 
—— — — S 
* — » — 
* — 2 3 
* p — —„V—⅜ __ . 
"uber — . 1 


CANDIDUS; or, Chap. 16. 


a blow on the face with the flat part of his 
rd, Candidus drew his immediately, and plun- 
,<d it up to the hilt in the Baron's body; but 
drawing it out again, and looking upon it as it 
reeked, he cried out, O God! I have killed my 


old maſter, my friend, my brother-in-law. I am 


one of the beſt natured men in the world, yet I 
have killed three men, and of the three, there 
were two of them prieſts.” 

Cacambo, who ſtood ſentry at the door of the 


arbour, and who heard the noiſe, ran in. We 


have nothing now to do but to ſell our lives as dear 
as we can,” ſaid his maſter to him; © and if they 
ſhould force their way into the arbour, let us at 
leaſt die with our arms in our hands.” 

Cacambo, who had been in circumſtances of a 
ſimilar nature, did not ſtand to rack' his brains for 
an expedient; but took the Jeſuit's dreſs, which 
the Baron wore, put it upon Candidus, gave him 


the dead man's cap, and made him mount his 


horſe. All this was done in the twinkling of an 
eye. © Let us gallop away, Maſter,” ſays he; 
« every body will take you for ſome Jeſuit that is 
Fes expreſs, and we ſhall get to the frontiers be- 
ore they can overtake us.” 

He fled like lightning, before theſe words were 
quite out of his mouth, crying out in Spaniſh, 
« Make way, make way for the Reverend Father, 
the Colonel.” 


„ NM . XVI. 


What paſſed between our two travellers, and two 
the two monkeys, and the ſavages called O- 
reillons. 


Andidus and his valet had got beyond the WY 
| before any perſon in the camp knew a ſylla- 


ble 


Chap. 16. The OPTIMIST. 45 


. ble of the death of the German jeſuit. The pro- b 
| vident Cacambo had taken care to fill his wallet - N 
. with bread, chocolate, hams, and ſome bottles oc 
r wine. They puſhed with their Andaluſian horſes . = 
7 into a ſtrange country, where they could not diſco- 1 
1 ver any path or road. At laſt a pleaſant meadow, Fo 
I which was diyided by a river, preſented itſelf to * 
0 their eyes. Our two travellers turned their horſes El 
a-grazing. And Cacambo made a propoſal to his JF 
2 maſter to eat a bit, and at the ſame time ſet him 190 
e the example. © Do you think,” faid Candidus, . 
r te that I can feaſt upon ham, when J have killed the 1 
y Baron's ſon, and find myſelf under a neceſſity ne- 4 
t ver to ſee Cunegonda again, as long as I live? 7h 
What ſignifies it to prolong my days in miſery, [i 
a ſince I muſt drag them far from her, a prey to re- 3 
be morſe and deſpair ? and what will the Journal of Ad 
h Trevoux ſay of me??? | | = 
Fn Having thus ſpoke, he refuſed to eat a morſel. =Y 
. The ſun was now ſet; when our two wanderers, £0 
_ to their very great ſurpriſe, heard a faint erp, awbich . 
>; ſeemed to come from ſome women. It was Ag ea: 7 
18 ſy to determine whether it was occaſioned % de 
8 ſtreſs or mirth ; they roſe immediately with all the 
anxiety and apprehenſion to which people are fubs» 
Te ject in a ſtrange place. The noiſe was made by _=$ 
h, two girls that ran ſtark naked on the banks of the' * 
er meadow, purſued by two large monkeys that bit 
. their backſides. Candidus was moved with pit; __ 
and as he had learned to ſhoot among the Bulga- =» 
rians, and was ſo good a markſman, that he would 
hit a nut in a buſh without touching the leaves, 
80 he took up his Spaniſh fuzee, which was double- 
O- charged, and killed the two monkeys. gd be 
praiſed, my dear Cacambo,” ſaid he, © I hat dee 
vered the two poor girls from this great "WL 
88 however, if I have been guilty of a fin in Kling 
m4; the inquiſitor, I have now made ample amends for 
ble | 5 it 


7 . 


a 


46 CANDIDUS; or, Chap. 16. 


it by ſaving the lives of the two girls. They may 
chance to prove a couple of ladies of rank; and 
who knows but this adventure may do us ſome 
ſervice in this country.” 
He was going on at this rate, thinking that he 
had done a great feat; but how great was his ſur- 
priſe, when, inſtead of rejoicing, he ſaw the two 
girls embracing the monkeys with all the marks of 
the moſt tender affection ! they bathed their bo- 
dies with tears, and filled the air with ſhrieks that 
teſtified the deepeſt diſtreſs. I could never have 
expected to have ſeen ſo much as this,” ſaid he to 
Cacambo; who replied, © You have done a fine piece 
of work indeed, Sir, you have killed the ladies two 
fweethearts,” © Their ſweethearts !-is it poſlible ! 
you are in jeſt ſure, Cacambo : who the duce could 
believe you to be in earneſt?” My dear Sir,” re- 
plied Cacambo, © you are always for making moun- 
- tains of mole-hills ; why ſhould you think it in- 
credible, that there are ſome countries where mon- 
keys enjoy the favours of the ladies ? why, they 
are got by human creatures, in the ſame manner 
as I was got by a Spaniard.” „ Ay,” replied Can - 
didus, *now I recollect, Mr Pangloſs has told me, 
that there m ay be many an inſtance of this kind, 
and that theſe mixtures gave birth to the Egi- 
pans, Fauns, and Satyrs ; that a great many of the 
ancients had ſeen them with their own eyes : but 
I always looked upon it as a mere romance.” 
« You ought, at preſent, to ſee your miſtake,” ſaid 
Cacambo, “and own that the Doctor was in the 
right. And you may ſee what influence the preju- 
8 of education has upon the underſtanding. All 
1 am afraid of is, that theſe ladies will play us 
: fome unlucky trick.” . 
>: "Theſe wiſe reflections induced Candidus to quit 
the meadow, and take to'a wood ; where he and 
Cacambo ſupped nr x : and, after heartily 2 


* 
FT 


Chap. 16. The OPTIMIST. 47 


ſing the Portugueſe inquiſitor, the governor of 


4 Buenos-Ayres, and the Baron, they fell aſleep. 
On their waking, they found that they could not 
- ſtir : for the Oreillons, the inhabitants of the 
country, whom the two laſſes had informed of their 
1 adventure, had bound them in the night-time, with 
x cords made of the bark of a tree. They were 
- ſurrounded by a body of fifty Oreillons, ſtark na- 
f ned, armed with arrows, clubs, and hatchets made 
- flint: ſome of them were making a great caul - 
1 | / icon boil, others preparing ſpits; and all of them 
. _ crying out, © He's a Jeſuit, he's a Jeſuit ; we will 
5 make him pay ſauce for it, we will pick his bones 
f for him; let us eat the Jeſuit, let us eat the Jeſuit.” 


«© You may remember I told you, my dear ma- 
4 ſter,” cried Cacambo in a lamentable tone, © that 
thoſe two lafſes would play us ſome ugly trick.” 


4 Candidus perceiving the cauldron and the ſpits, 
= cried out, O Lord! we are certainly going tobe roſt- 3, 
ut ed or boiled. Ah! would MrPangloſs now ſay, on 3 


ſeeing nature without diſguiſe, that whatever is, is 1 
Y right? It may be ſo : but I muſt confeſs it is a G 
ſad thing to have loſt Miſs Cunegonda, and to be j l = 


14 ſpitted by the Orcillons.” ; 19M 
4 Cacambo, who was never at a loſs for an in ven. 
1 tion: © Never deſpair,” ſaid he to the diſconſolate Can- 1 

E didus. © I underſtand the jargon of theſe people a = 
l little, and am going to ſpeak to them,” «Don't 1 

* fail,” ſaid Candidus, © to repreſent to them the in- 9 

54 humanity of dreſſing men for meat, and ſet forth 

5 what an unchriſtian practice it is.“ ba 5 

we “Gentlemen, ſays Cacambo, © you fancy that 

an you ſhall feaſt on a Jeſuit to-day ; a very good diſh, 

| I make no doubt, nor is there any thing more juſtt 

es than to ſerve one's enemies ſo. In effect, the law RT 

8 of nature teaches us to kill our neighbour, and it | 

one" is à principle which is put in practice all over the 


globe. If we do not make uſe of the right of eat · 
oy | ing 


= A 
= Af 
mk 


Wat > 
r 


48 CANDIDUS; or, Chap. 16. 


ing him, it is becauſe we have plenty of victuals 
without it ; but as you have not that advantage, it 
mult certainly be better for you to eat your ene- 
mies, than fling away the fruit of your victories as 
a feaſt to crows. and ravens. But, Gentlemen, I 
ſuppoſe you would not be for eating your friends. 
You fancy you are going to ſpit a Jeſuit ; but, be- 
lieve me, I aſſure you it is your defender, it is the 
enemy of your enemies that you are going to roſt. 
As for my part, I was born among you. The 
mas you fee here, is my maſter, and fo far 
rom being a Jeſuit, he has juſt now killed a Jeſuit, 
and he is only dreſſed in his ſpoils ; which is the 
cauſe of your miſtake. In order to confirm my 
_ aſſertion, let one of you take his gown off, carry 
it to the firſt paſs of the government of the fa- 
thers, and inform himſelf whether my maſter has 
not killed a Jeſuit-officer. It is an affair that won't 
take up much time; and you may always have it 
in your power to eat us, if you catch me in a lie. 
But if I have told you the truth, and nothing but 
the truth, you are too well acquainted with the 
principles of natural right, morality, and law, not 
to ſhew us ſome favour.” 2 
The Oreillons were ſo fully convinced of the 
reaſonableneſs of his propoſal, that they deputed 
two of their chiefs to go and inform themſelves 
of the truth of what he had told them. The two 
deputies acquitted themſelves of their charge like 
men of ſenſe, and returned ſoon with a favourable 
account. The Oreillons then unbound their pri- 
ſoners, ſhewed them a thouſand” civilities, offered 
them women, gave them ſomething to refreſh 
them, and conducted them back again to the con- 
- fines of their ſtate, crying all the while, like mad- 
men, He is no Jeſuit, he is no Jeſuit,” © 
5 Candidus could not help admiring the ſubjec᷑t 
ol his deliverance. What a people l“ ſaid 12 
9 | What 


4 
ve 
'C 


© e - AA — «os * 


Ghap. 17. The OPTIMIST. 49 


« What men ! what manners! If I had not had 
the good luck to whip Miſs Cunegonda's brother 
through the lungs, I ſhould inevitably have been 
eaten up. But, after all, the diftates of pure na- 
ture are always beſt, ſince this people, inſtead of 
eating me, ſhewed me a thouſand civilities as ſoon 
as they knew that I was not a Jeſuit;” 


CA XVII. 


The arrival of Candidus and his man at the coun+ 
try of Eldorado, and what they ſau there, 


Hen they had reached the frontiers of the 

Oreillons, “ You ſee now,” ſaid Cacambo 
to Candidus, “ that this part of the world is not 
one pin beiter than the other. Take a fools ad. 
vice for once, and let us return to Europe, as faſt 
as ever we can.” © How is that poſſible? “ ſaid 
Candidus : © And pray what part of it would you 
have us go to? Shall I go into my own coun- 
try ? the Bulgarians ard Abarians kill all they meet 
with there; if I return to Portugal, IJ am ſure I 
ſhall be burnt alive; if we ſtay in this country, we 
run the hazard of being roſted every moment. And 
again, how can I think of leaving that part of the 
globe where Miſs Cunegonda lives?“ 

« Why then, let us take our courſe towards 
Cayenne,” faid Cacamboz © we ſhall meet with 
ſome Frenchmen there, for you know they are to be 
met with all over the globe; perhaps they will 
give us fome relief, and God may have pity upon 
18. 

It was no eaſy matter for them to go to Cayenne, 
as they did not know whereabouts it lay; beſides, 
mountains, rivers, precipices, banditti, and ſavages, 
were difficulties they were ſure to encounter with 
in their journey. Their horſes died with fatigue, and 

is lh 1 5-4 


* _ 
— 
Wn \ 4 

d . 2 

r 4 — * * 
4 * — of 8 * Su 4 
J "= * * * IE * * . Maw: 1 5 X 
, — . 
* % Ia — * 


— 
—_— —— * — — 
5 ä 
1 7 = ” 
- £ x 
a — 
- , _ 


_— 
oy 
__ — 
— —— 
os * 8 — 
A X 
— — — — — —— — = 
— — 
8 — — 


2d 
we 


1 


— — 
— 
Ja * 


— 22 
— 
+ 
S D 
* 8 3 
: . 
4 


— 


— — 
— 


w OO en EO 
—— — 5 — 
3 — ® * A K 


” 
owe * 
a.) 
» 


N 2 7 b 
* 
RR __ —— 
* 


he VP OF 


50 
lived a whole month on the wild fruits, they found 


Vas bordered by cocao trees, which at once pre- 


ries one to ſome inhabited place. 


places, in others barren, in ſome parts level, and 


proceeded, and, at laſt, loſt itſelf in a ſpacious hori- 


CANDIDUS; or, Chap. 17. 


their proviſions were ſoon conſumed. After having 


themſelves on the banks of a ſmall river, which 


ſerved their lives, and kept up their hopes. 

Cacambo, who was on all occaſions as good a 
counſellor as the old woman, ſaid to Candidus, 
ce We can hold out no longer; we have walked e- 
nough already, and here's an empty canoe upon 
the ſhore, let's fall it with cocao, then get on board, 
and let it drive with the ſtream : a river always car. 
If we don't 
meet with what we like, we -are ſure to meet with 
ſomething new.” © Why, what you ſay is very right, 
e'en let us go,” ſaid Candidus, “ and recommend 
ourſelves to the care of Providence.” 

They rowed ſome leagues between the two 
banks, which were enamelled with flowers in ſome 


in others very ſteep. The river grew broader as they 


zon, that was bounded by ſome frightful rocks, which 
reached as high as the clouds. Our two-travellers 
had the courage to truſt themſelves to the ſtream. 
The river being very narrow in this place, drove 
them along with ſuch a rapidity and noiſe as filled 
them with' the utmoſt horror. In about four and 
twenty hours they got ſight of day-light again, but 
their canoe was daſhed in pieces againſt the break- 
ers. They were obliged to crawl from one rock 
to another for a whole league; after which they 
got ſight of a ſpacious plain, bounded with inacceſ- 
ſible mountains. The country was cultivated both 
for pleaſure and profit; which latter was always mix- 
ed with the agreeable, The roads were evvered, 
or, more properly ſpeaking, were adorned with car- 
riages, whoſe figure and materials were very brilliant; 
they were full of men and women, of an extraord!- 


LS Wks —Y 2 i Mer. 4 = # IS e N hop 2 * ny 
i - "IS > wn RR 9 1 1 3 n — JS - 
0 . 1 8 DR ä 


4 Chap. 18: ALL For THE BES x. 51 | 
g haſt expoſed me by thy injudicious friendſhip, _ 4 * 
d Our misfortunes are not without a remedy, ſaid IF 
h Cacambo; if you will follow my advice, we will * 
5 become brothers of the hoſpital; I underſtand a a 

little of furgery, and I wilt engage to render our = . 
FL woful condition ſupportable. Ah! cried Candi- 17 


dus, pox take all the aſſes in the world, and eſpe- 2 
cially thoſe chirurgical aſſes, ſo fatal to human na- 1 
ture ! No, I will not ſuffer thee to paſs for what | 
thou art not ; it were a piece of treachery, the con- 
8 ſequences of which might be terrible. Beſides, if 
thou didſt but know, after having been viceroy of 
a rich province, after having been able to purchaſe 
| kingdoms, after having been the happy lover of 
Miſs Zenoide, how hard it is to reſolve to ſerve as 
mate in an hoſpital. All this I know full well ; 
but I alſo know that it is very hard to die of hun- 
ger. Beſides, the plan which I propoſe is per- 
haps the only one to elude the cruelty of Volhall. 
S Whilft he thus ſpake, one of the brothers of 
the hoſpital happening to paſs, aſked-him a few 
queſtions, to which he replied properly. This 
brother aſſured them that the fraternity lived well, 
and enjoyed decent liberty. Candidus reſolved : 
they were admitted without ſcruple, and theſe two 
miſerable beings began to adminiſter comfort to 
beings yet more miſerable.” | | N 
One day as Caudidus was diſtributing ſome bad 
broth among the patients, an old man partitular- 
ly caught his attention. He ſeemed in the agony 
of death. Poor man, faid Candidus, how I pity 
you! You muſt ſuffer terribly. - Indeed I do, he 
replied, with a hollow ſepulchral voice : they tell 
me that I have a complication of diſtempers, and 
that I am poxed to the very bone; if ſo, I muſt 
needs be extremely ill, Nevertheleſs, it is all for 
e beſt, and that is my conſolation. No man in 
the world, ſaid Candidus, but Doctor Pangloſs, 
E 2 could 


the diſpenſations of providence :. I know, he would 


52 CANDIDU $;.or, Chap. 19. 


could maintain optimiſm in ſuch. a deplorable ſitu- 
ation, when every other mortal would: preach 


peſl- . Do not pronounce that deteſtable word, 
faid the poor old man; I am that very Pangloſs. 
Wretch, let me die in peace: all things are good, 
every thing is beſt. The effort he made in pro- 
nouncing theſe words, coſt him his laſt tooth, and 
in a few moments after he expired. 

Candidus bewailed his death, for he had a gocd 
heart: his obſtinacy, however, afforded matter of 
reflection to our philoſopher. He would frequent- 
ly ruminate on his adventures. Cunegonda had 
remained-at Copenhagen, where, he was inform- 
ed, ſhe mended ſhirts and ſtockings with great re- 
putation. He had now loſt all his paſſion for tra- 
velling. The faichful Cacambo aſſiſted him with | 
his advice and friendſhip. He never murmured at | 


ſometimes ſay, that happineſs is not the lot of huma-WM | 
nity; it is no where to be found except in the good 
country of Eldorado ; but to go thither is impoſſible. ; 
I 

CH A P. M. 

New adventures. ; 7 

Andidus was not quite unhappy, for he had a f 

true friend. He had found, in an Ameri- ! 

can mongrel valet, what, in Europe, we ſeek if © 
vain. Perhaps nature, who has planted fimples 1 d 
America proper for the maladies of European bo < 
dies, may there alſo have ſown remedies for the diſſ 
orders of our hearts and minds. Perhaps there are 4M ©: 
ſpecies of men in this new world; who are forme 
differently from us, whoare not ſlaves to ſelf-intereſt, th 
vrho are capable of ſincere friendſhip. * I were hap ti 
Py, if inſtead of bales of indigo and cochineal, ſtain . 
ed with blood, they would bring us ſome of the " 


men : this kind of commerce would be very ad 
| vantageou 


* 


had al 


meri- 
ek in 
ples 1 
an bo- 
he diſ 
e are 
formed 
1tereſt} 
re hap 
, ſtain 


f the: 


ery ad 
tageou 


ö ne ws LEE Px 3 
/ EIT NN TOE = 


Chap. 19. ALL FOR THE BEST. 93 


vantageous to mankind. Cacambo was of more 
value to Candidus than a dozen of red ſheep load- 
ed with the pebbles of Eldorado. Our philoſopher 
now began to be reconciled to life. He conſoled 
himſelf that he was employed in the preſervation 
of the human ſpecies, and in not being an uſeleſs 
member of ſociety. Heaven rewarded the purity 
of his intentions, by reſtoring to him, as well as 
to his friend Cacambo, the bleſſing of health. 
They had no longer the itch, and they performed 
the duties of their function with great alacrity ; 
but alas! fate ſoon broke in upon their peaceful 
ſecurity. Cunegonda, who had ſet her heart up- 
on tormenting her huſband, ſallied forth from Co- 
penhagen in purſuit of him: chance directed her 
to the hoſpital; ſhe was accompanied by a man 


whom Candidus ſoon diſcovered to be the Baron 


of Thunder-ten-tronckh : his ſurpriſe may be e 


* 
Ld 


ſuppoſed. The Baron, perceiving it, ſpoke to him” 
in theſe words. I did not long continue to row - 


in the Turkiſh galleys ; the Jeſuits, hearing of my 
misfortune, redeemed me for the honour of the ſo- 
ciety. I made a tour to Germany, where I recei-- 
ved ſome civilities from my father's heirs. I left 
nothing unattempted to get intelligence-of my ſi- 
ſter; and hearing at Conſtantinople, that ſhe had 
imbarked on board a-veſle]* which was. caſt awa 
on the coaſt of Denmark, I diſguiſed myſelf and 
departed, being, provided with proper letters of re- 
commendation to Daniſh-merchants in connection 
with the ſociety: in ſhort, I have found my ſiſter 
again, who loves you notwithſtanding you are un- 
worthy of that honour; and ſince you have had 
the inſolence to lie with her, I conſent to the ra- 
tification, or rather a new celebration of your nup- 
tials; that is to ſay, provided ſhe gives you only 
her left hand, which is but reaſonable, as ſhe has 
no leſs than ſeventy-one quarters, and you have - 
21 none 


54 CANDIDUS; or, Chap. 19. 


none at all. Alas, ſays Candidus, all the quar- 
ters in the world without beauty——, Miſs Cune- 
gonda was very ugly when 1 imprudently mar- 
ried her; ſhe became handſome, and another 
has enjoyed her charms ; ſhe is again grown ugly, 
and you would have me give my hand to her a ſe- 
cond time: no, no, Reverend father ; ſend her 
back to her ſeraglio at Conſtantinople ; ſhe has 
done me but too much injury in this country. 
Ungrateful man, ſaid Cunegonda, making hor- 
rible contortions, how can you be ſo hard-hearted'? 
Do not oblige the Baron, now a prieſt, to waſh 
the blot out of his eſcutcheon with your blood. 
Doft thou believe me capable of conſenting to the 
act of infidelity ? What wouldſt thou have had me 
done when I was in the power of a Turk who 
thought me handſome? Neither tears, nor my cries, 
had any effect on his ſavage brutality : fo that, find- 
ing it in vain to reſiſt, I contrived to be as commo- 
diouſly raviſhed as poflible, as any other woman 
would have done in my ſituation : this is all my 
crime. But my greateſt offence is having robbed 
thee of thy miitreſs, which, on the contrary, thou 
ſhouldit conſider as a proof of my affection. Come, 
come, my dear little foul ; if ever I fhould grow 
handſome again; if my breafts, which now are 
ſomewhat pendent, ſhould recover their rotund e- 
lafticity ; if they ſhall be all for thee alone, 
my dear Candidus; we are no longer in Turky, 
and I fwear that I will never ſuffer myſelf to be 
raviſhed again. 

This diſcourfe made no very deep impreſſion 
upon Candidus. He defired a little time for con- 
ſideration. The Baron granted him two hours, 
which he ſpent in conſulting with his friend Ca- 
cambo. After having weighed every argument 
pro and con, they determined to accompany” the 
Baron and his ſiſter to Germany. Accordingly 


every 


9. 
ar- 
le- 
ar- 
her 
ly, 
ſe- 
her 
has 


try. 
\Or- 

ed? 

"aſh 

200, 

the 

me 
who 
ries, 
ind- 
mo- 
man 
my 
bbed 
thou 
ome, 
roy 
are 
ad e- 
lone, 
urky, 
to be 


eſſion 

con- 
ours, 
d Ca- 
1ment 
y the 
linghy 


every 


Chap. 19. ALL FOR THE BEST. * 


every thing being ſettled, they ſet out all together; 
not on foot, but mounted on good cavalry, which 
the Jeſuit Baron had brought along with him. 
They were now arrived at the frontiers of the 
kingdom, when a tall ill-favoured fellow fixed his 
eyes attentively on our hero. It is the very man, 
ſaid he; pray, Sir, if I may be fo bold, is not your 


name Candidus? Yes, Sir, replied Candidus, fo 


I have always been called. I am extremely glad 
of it, ſaid the man. Yes indeed, you have black 
eyebrows, ears of a moderate ſize, a round face, 
and ruddy complexion, and you appear to be a- 
bout five feet five. es, Sir, ſaid Candidus, that 
is exactly my height; but what are my ears and my 
height to you? Sir, replied the man, we cannot 
be too circumſpect in our employment: permit me 
to aſk you another queſtion; Was you not in the 
ſervice of Squire Volhall? In truth, Sir, faid 
Candidus, a little diſconcerted, I do not under- 
ſtand But I underſtand perfectly well that 
you are the perſon whoſe deſcription I have in my 
hand. Pleaſe to walk into the guard-room. Sol- 
diers, conduct the gentleman in; prepare the 


black hole, and tell the ſmith to make a flight 


chain of about thirty or forty pound weight. r 


Candidus, you have gat a good-like horſe there; 
I] want one of that colour; we ſhall agree about 


him by and by. 


The Baron did not dare to claim his beaſt. 


Cunegonda wept for a quarter of an hour. The 


Jeſuit beheld the ſcene without emotion. 1 


ſhould have been obliged, faid he to his ſiſter, 


either to kill him or force him to remarr you; 


and, all things conſidered, it is the beſt that could 


happen for the honour of our family. Cunegon- 


da and her brother ſet out for Germany; bur the 


faithful Cacambo rcfolved not to abandon his 
friend in diſtreſs. 


CHAP. 


Th 7 W _— n \ _—_ W 
r 


Ln C * * . 
CERES YE Jy -- TO mn 
3 == an. row) =>: _ 1 
—_— Iz 
Sa" oe n by 
oo | EIN q 
W a 


—³ꝗͤ . 

yg 3 4 — 
58 K — a is - 
— — f 


— — 
. 


. 
* — = . 


hc —— 
— r 
- o 
— . - 
uw * OY 


— 
—— IRE 


i 4 
— — 
. ne 
toggle SM . _— 
— — — . * 2 
ee a bo 


ory - * 99 
* 
"I 4 7 h _ oY = 
- * 
_ — 
an wh 
2 * 
— — — 
—— * i — 
— — — — — 
. 


\ * . 
: —_— ' "I \ *. 898 7 
— . ” * * 
ai Io oo oo bf — — 
* * 1 a Io 1 2 y 
» F 54 
— > N = — 
7 _ L , F 
— 


— 
1 3 ˙ 322 
- Id” _ 
aw — „ 


56 C AND ILD US; or, Chap. 20. 


Fr 


The continuation of Candidus s misfortunes; how he 
found his miſtreſs again, and what was. the con- 


ſequence. 


Pangloſs! ſaid Candidus, it is a thouſand 
pities that you have periſhed ſo miſerably : 
you have been witneſs only to the ſmalleſt part of 


my misfortunes, and I was in hopes-to make you 


reject that groundleſs opinion you ſo obſtinately 
maintained, even unto death. There is not 4 man 


in the world who has experienced greater adverſity 


than I have; and yet there is not a ſingle ſoul who 
has not curſed his own exiſtence, as the daugh- 
ter of Pope Urban very pathetically told us. What 
will become of me, my dear Cacambo? I can- 
not tell, replied Cacambo; all I know is, that I 
will never forſake you. But Cunegonda has fer- 
ſaken me, ſaid Candidus. Alas! a wife is not 
worth an American friend. 

This was the converſation of Candidus and Ca- 
cambo in a dungeon, from whence they were drag- 
ged in order to be conveyed to Copenhagen, where 
our philoſopher was to learn his fate. He feared 
it would be a dreadful one, as the reader may alſo 
apprehend; but Candidus was miſtaken, and ſo is 
the reader. He was deſtined to be happy at Co- 
penhagen, where he was no ſooner arrived than 
he was appriſed of the death of Volhall; this brute 
died unlamented, and every body concerned them- 
ſelves about Candidus. His chains were immedi- 
ately knocked off, and liberty was the more agree- 
able to him, as it furniſhed him with the means of 
finding Zenoide, He haſtened to her houſe; he 
was a long time before he could utter a ſyllable, 
but their filence was ſufficiently expreſſive. I hey 
embraced ; 


7 


Chap. 20. ALL FOR THE BEST. 57 


embraced ; they endeavoured to ſpeak, but they 
could only weep, Cacambo enjoyed this delight- 
ful ſcene like a being of ſenſibility ; he ſympa- 
thized in his friend's joy, and- was almoſt in the- 
ſame fituation. My dear Cacambo, my beloved: 
Zenoide, cried Candidus, I am: now recompenſed 
for all my ſufferings. | Love and; friendſhip ſhall 
ſweeten the remainder of my life. What num- 
berleſs difficulties have paved the way to this un- 
expected happineſs? But all is now forgotten, 
deareſt Zenoide, I ſee you, you love me; all 
things go well. with. me now, every thing is for 
the beſt. | | 

The death of Volhall left Zenoide her own 
miſtreſs, and the court allowed her a penſion out 
of her father's fortune,. which had been confiſcated, 
She readily ſhared with Candidus and Cacambo, 
whom ſhe permitted to, live in the ſame houſe, and 
induſtriouſly reported, that, having received ſuch 
ſiznal ſervices from theſe two ſtrangers, ſhe 
thought herſelf obliged ta reward them with all 
the pleaſures of life. Some ſhrewd people pene- 
trated into the motives of her kindneſs, which was 
not very difficult, as her intrigue with Candidus 
had unluckily tranſpired. Moſt people condemned 
her, and her conduct was approved only by a few 
people who knew the world. Zenoide, who paid 
ſome regard to the eſteem of fools, was not quite 
happy in her ſituation. * The death of Cunegonda, 
which the correſpondents of trading Jeſuits report- 
ed at Copenhagen, furniſhed Zenoide with an 
opportunity to reconcile the fcrupulous: ſhe order- 
ed a pedigree to be made for Candidus; and the 
author, who was a man of parts, proved him to 
be deſcended from one of the moſt ancient fami- 
lies in Europe : he even pretended that his real 
name was Canut, the name of an ancient Daniſh 
king, than which nothing could be mere probable 


for 


5 i 1 =_ = 


D — — 1 — I 8 
_ „ w — * * 9 4 - 7 
52 " E. — — — a 
— — — — 1 —_— — — bs on — = 
Dae + of 2 N 2 — — . 1 
— CC. 5 — 1 £ 2 w * „ 5 
4 yo 9 - - pl © E 1 
922 f ob - * * — — + 
— 
— ry 2 , — 2 4 — 
ala waa hs * F 
m_— 


— — 
— 
— 


— — 
— 


— ( —A2—ů—ͤ 


—— ͤ— — 
- — 7 
6 
AR 


* — 1 Nr 4 - 
1 . a 
* — > © — 3 
e . Pay 

rs yo . 

* py o D 
— "4 a * 

—— — — = - 


32 


1 
—ͤ— — 
Þ — 6 Ave xs 


—— 


58 


pretty well, 


CANDIDUS. Chap. 20. 


for to change did into ut was no very extraordi- 
nary metamorphoſis. In confequence of this tri- 
fling alteration, Candidus became a nobleman of 
diſtinction. He was married publicly to Zenoide; 
they lived together as happily as it is poſſible to live, 
Cacambo was their common friend ; and Candidus 
uſed frequently to ſay, All things are not ſo well 


with us here as in Elodrado, but yet they are 


& 


„ins 


' 
— 
> * % , 
4 Py % 
— 1 5 \ m4 
& F i % \ IT 3 4 - 
Y of Ta 
o f - F, 
o 
* 
1 y 4 * 
%. — +4 % 
hy, ll 1 — 
—.— 
. 
= #1 i _— 7 
. n 
0 i + * IE 
> 8 


