. 
* — 
TY 
er 
o - 
— 
* 
-- 
. 
* = 
_ 
at 
3 
* 
LI 
* 
- 
* 


w —— 
72 
— \ 
% 
_ * 
— 
1 * 
- — 
3 
: 
— - 
- 
. 
bag 4 
"©. 
2 


\\ 


* &#3 


{ . + - | . 8 : - 
24 Pons | ; 
- 4 4 * 


- . + ln K —_— 
RY | 4 4 7 1 F L p 

-» 2 9 : wpey 
+ , E : 5 — 1 


* 
- 


STS, 


* 


— 
1 


* 


& 1 


„ 


* G 
* 
4 * 
* 
1 
8 
* ” #: . 
. 
= » ug 
. 
* * * 5. 
— 9 — 5 


* „ * 7 
p TEND | 


1 9 
** 12 1 


1 


. 4 * r * 1 A. T 3 "0 
- F e 4, | A 
3 * . 
44 1 t — - 1 
. 
ul : [ 4 
, v . 

= F 

- . * Pl = 
- *, 
. Ss x 
- * 
4 - 
4 \ 
* ö © 2 * * I 
* * 
a , * - f 
- 7 2 ö 
5 4 2 
-- . * 
5 of | 


. 
== , 5 
* 2232 1 - 
* 4 
" — - 


a , . * 
2 # =» * 
; 
0 4 * * 1 - 7 
* - > * 4 . 
1 7 4 : - 
* E f KL » 
- 4 > 3 . 
— 3 — 4 g ob * b K 
7 4 5 - 
- * * 
: s £E 11 
— i Pd 7 4 3 
4 , iS 6 
- o A 4 
- P , 


* 


\ 


_ 


Tranſlated from the French of : 
M. oz VOLTAIRE. 


The Szcond EDiTION, carefully reviſed 
; and corrected. 


1 
* 


LONDON, 
Printed for J. Novnss at the Land oppoſite 
| Katherine-Street in the Strand, 
MDCCLIX. | 


* — % » * 
3 
* 
43 1 4 : : 
23 > E 
= * R LY 
— WW 1 . 
* 
3 2 4 * - - 
* wy F Ce 
x 
_ , 4 
y | 
ay 
* 
oh 
o # . 4 A * - 
by o 
* * go 
* 0 — "IG * 
N Fr 4 | ” we” 
w ww * * * 
**.- mom ——— . * * 
— be, By 
* a * þ " * 4 A 
* . . - N 
” 1 8 9 75 
8 wy yu * * * „ —— . 
* F< 4 ; * 
G. . 1 * " 2 4 _ pe of vw f 1 * 
5 z . — 
& 4 L * 
-4 % 2 4 — 
+= * * 
* __ . * 1 
* l 4 F k LY 0 — * * 
* * . 3 — 
, 1 Ps - 1 
— aa? A hg: £ 4 4 
— i . 
— _— 
bs 3 , & py 
bb i ot a . 
=” : FR a 
* * 6 * * ö 
Wt 9 4 
A — * * 
= = - G 
” © 
* 4 


"> WTR = NE. | 1 PEE "ol 


” g 25 2 g 


F 1 — — . * —— —̃ — ↄ — — — . 1 ̃⅛— ; ˙*˙ Sg ov A OOO 
LAY 


2118 116 
* * # £* *% 
# F oh - 7 * * 3 


CONTENTS. 
CHAP, 1 


Freer brought u in a magnificent en h, 
and how be <a exgried flog theves. Page 1 


enn 

What became of Candid among the Bulgari. | 
CHAS, III. 

F and 


what afterwards breane of bi. . 
CHAP, IV. | 

Hino Candid found his old mafter Parr, aud" what 
n. 1 4 


a wwe * NN. nne e 
4 ng 5 Fang an 2 and what be- 
2. — rn, c . fan Lo 


euAr. vf. 


How the Portugueſe mad a fompous A 
Frevont any further carthquales ; ny wo Weed 
Aua, publicity _ | 20 


1 


CONTENTS. 


* 7*. TA'S-F. "VIE; 2 * 
Blow the old woman bool cart of Candid, and bow he 
ITT 1 Page 22 


CH AP, VIII. 


1. nud of Congund,» Rl AbR; 1 


e HA r. IX. 
What became of Cunegund, . 
and the Jeu. 29 
CHAP. x. 


2 — Cunegund, and the-old woman, 


came to Cadix; and of their embarkation. 31 
MASH 


e In dn ee es ood 


CHAP. XI. 


pon ene pe og 39 


1 * 1 * Te 


| Hes Cond was obliged ts 4 2 ar ad 


and the old woman. 44 
+7 1 2 7 

5 7 {0% \ a O H Fi Fl XIV. „„ 434 one 4 

\How Candid ond . een 

P Paraguay, _ ow 24th win 


9 G 7 CHAP, 


contents. 


CHAP. vv. 


this c- lilkd the brother of bias Comic 


| Page 53 
CHAP, xv. 


Adventures of the twe travellers, "with. tae. girls, 
Iwo monkeys, and WP Javages 2 Oreillons,. 56 


CHAP, xMI. 5 


Fee 
ee er 8 


CH AP. xu. 


| IT hat they ſaw i in the country of 214 4. | 66 


got equine wh Martin. + P- 
Wat luv at fn ts Candid and Martin. 81 
| CHAP. XXI, 
Candid and Martin draw near the c, of France; ad 
PETIT other... 8 
HA r. XXIT. 


Whet happened in France to Candid and Martin. 5 27 


— 


Go wu * 


CHAP, 


eonrENTS. 


| 0 H. A P. XXIII. 
nay Martin touch upon the Bight ef 1. and * 
5 they ſee there. Page 94 


HA f. Xxlv. | 
. . We ee, 4 


CHAP. xxv. 


Candid and Martih fay a viſit to the ſenator Pococu- 
rants, a noble Fenttian. * "00 10 


= * 


CHAP. xXVI. 
How Candid and Martin Jupped aun fix frangers, and 


who they aware; 110 
0 WA p. XXVII. . 
ce, wages chene. 5 3 


. # > * * 99 3 


CHAP: xxVIII. 
What — to Candid, Pe ers Paul, ol 


CHAP, XXIX.. 
Uno ci. . 
A 124 
n. cui, | FO 
ED CANDID: 


—_ * 


CAN DIP. 


} mY . A 0K 5 1 8 (I 

: All for the Beſt. 
* mY <P. > 

J 55 Fan 550 


How cent war brought up in a een an, 
e ee e g $44"; = 


N a calle of Weſtphalia, vole to 
the baron of Thunder-ten-tronekh, liv- 
ed a youth, 'whom nature had bleſſed 
with a moſt ſweet diſpoſition. ' His 
countenance was a true picture of his mind. He 
had a ſound judgment, with great frankneſs and 

ſimplicity, which was the reaſon, I apprehend, of 
his being called Candid, The old ſervants of the 
family ſuſpected him to have been the ſon of the 
. i £2 l \L baron's 


Lure to laugh whenever he was pleaſed to tell a 
Kory. 


kn 


2 /CAND1D: Or, 


| ;baron' 5 gte, by a good - natured worthy gentleman 


of the neighbaurhood, whom that young lady re- 
fuſed to marry, becauſe he could produce no more 
than ſeventy-one quarterings in” his arms, the reſt 
being loſt through the injuries of time, 

The baron was one of the moſt powerful lords in 
Weſtphalia ; for his caſtle had not only a gate, but 


eren windows, and his great hall was hung with 
| tapeſtry, He uſed to hunt with bis maſtifs and 


ſpaniels, inſtead of hounds ; his grooms were his 
huntſmen; and the country curate Was bis grand 
almoner. They all called him, My Lord, and were 


The baron's lady weighed about three hundred 
and a half, and upon that conſideration was 


greatly revered ; but the' did the honours of the 


houſe with a dignity that commanded ſtill greater 
reſpe&t. - Her daughter Cunegund was ſeventeen 
years of age, freſh coloured, comely, plump, and 
deſirable. The baron's ſon ſeemed to be a youth = 
in every reſpe& worthy: of his father. Panglofs, 
the preceptor, was the oracle of the family; and 
little Candid gave ear to his inſtructions with all che 
„ eee eee and N ner of. 


ieee of the metaphy ico-theologo+ 
aafaialonigelogy. He could: prove moſt admirably, 
that there is no effe&, without a cauſe, and that in 
his world, the beſt of all poſlible worlds, the ba. 


ron's 


* 


— y F 


1 FOR d= Byer: 
ren's caſtle was the moſt magnificent of all caſtles, and 
his lady the beſt of baroneſſes that could poſlbly exiſt. 
It is demonſtrable, ſaid he, that things cannot 
be otherwiſe than as they are: for all things having. 
been created for ſome end, they muſt conſequent- 
Iy be intended for the beſt, Obſerve, that the noſe 
is formed for ſpeQacles, and therefore we wear 
ſpectacles. The legs are viſibly defigned for 
ſtockings, and therefore we wear ſtockings. Stones 
were made to be hewn, and to conſtruct caſtles; 
therefore my lord bas a magnificent caſtle: for 
the greateſt baron in the province ought to be the 
| beſt lodged. Swine were intended to be eat; 
therefore we eat pork all the year round: and 0 
who aſſert, that every thing is right, do not expreſs 
themſelves correcuy ; they thould ſay that every 
thing is beſt, 
| Candid liſtened attentively, and believed impli- 
citly ; for he thought miſs Cunegund exceffively 
handſome, though he never had the courage to tell 
her ſo. He concluded, that after the happineſs of 
being baron of Thunder-ten-tronckh, the next 
was that of being miſs Cunegund, the next that of 
ſeeing her every day, and the laſt that of hearing the 
doctrine of maſter Pangloſs, the greateſt philoſo- 
pher of the whole province, and 9 of the 
whole world, | 
One day that Cunegund went to take a walk in a 
little neighbouring wood, which they called the 
park, looking through the buſhes, ſhe-eſpied doctor 
B 2 Panglols 


4 CANDID: al” 


7 Pangloſs giving a lecture in experimental philoſo. 
phy to her mother's chambermaid, a little brown 
wench, very pretty, and very docil. As miſs Cune- 
gund had a great diſpoſition for the ſciences, ſhe 
obſerved with the utmoſt attention the experiments 


repeated before her eyes; ſhe clearly perceived the 


force of the doQor's ; reaſoning upon cauſes and effects; 
ſhe turned back greatly flurried, quite penſive, and 
filled with the defire of knowledge; imagining that 
ſhe might be a ſufficient reaſon for young Candid, and 
he for her. | 
In her way-back ſhe met the youth, and bluſhed.; 
Candid alſo bluſhed : ſhe wiſhed him good morrow © 
in a faltering tone ; and he returned the ſalute with- 
out knowing what he ſaid, The next day, as they 
roſe from dinner, Cunegund and Candid got be- 
hind, the ſcreen, when Cunegund dropped her 
handkerchief, and Candid took it up; ſhe inno- 
cently laid hold of his hand, and the youth as inno- 
. cently kiſſed the young lady's hand with an ea- 
gerneſs, ſenſibility, and grace, —all very particular: 
their lips met, their eyes n their knees 
trembled, their hands ſtrayed .. . Baron Thun- 
der-ten-tronckh happening to come « by, and behold- 
Ing this cauſe and effect, gave Candid a kick on the 
"backſide, and drove him out of doors; miſs Cune- 
d fainted away ; and as ſoon as ſhe came to her- 
ſelf, the baroneſs boxed her ears: thus a general con- 
fernation was ſpread over this moſt magnificent and 
1 — of all poſſible caſtles. 
HN. 


* FOR THE BIS. 3 


bl , 
"a" 4 Cf 42 7 : OA ' 1 oh 
ö 111 . 47 4 p . '4 
: 


* 0 Ap. mn. 3 28), 
bat became 7 Candi 2 iid among the Bulgarians. ts 


b 


(ANDED being driven out of this terreſtrial 
aradiſe, rambled a long time, without kno-w- 
ing "Ie he was; his eyes,  bedewed with tears, 
were ſometimes raiſed towards heaven, and ſome- 
times turned towards the magnificent caſtle, where 
lived the faireſt of all baroneſſes, Though it 
ſnowed very hard, he layed himſelf down, to fleep 
0 in a- farrow, without his ſupper... In the morn- 
ing he awaked almoſt frozen to death, and made 
a wift to crawl to the next town, Which was 
called Waldberghoff- trarbk. dikdorff: having no mo- 
ney, and being ready to periſh with hunger. and fa- 
tigue, he placed himſelf in a melancholy poſture be- 
fore an inn-keeper' s door. In this fituation he was 
taken notice of by two men dreſſed in blue, one 
of whom ſaid. to the other, See bere is a well made 
young fellow, and of a proper fire; upon which they 
made up to Candid, and very civilly invited him 
to dinner: Gentlemen, replied Candid with a moſt 
engaging modeſty, vou do mg a great deal of 
honour, but 1 have no money. O, fir, ſaid. 
one of, the blues to him, lads of your appearance 
and merit ſhould never pay any thing; are not 
yau "five feet five inches high ? Yes, gentlemen, that 
is my ſize, anſwered he, making a low bow, 8 
5 1 B 3 9 *. 


| o De. Or 


fir, fit down along with us; A we ll not only pay 
your reckoning, Hut we'll never ſuffer ſuch a cle- 
ver fellow as you to want money; mankind were 
born to aſſiſt one another. You are right, faid 
Candid ; this is what I was always taught by Mr. 
| Panglofs ; and I ſee plainly, that every ching is for 
the bell. They beg of him to accept of a few 
crowns, which he complies with ; he wants to give 
them his note, but they refuſe it, and place them 
ſelves at table. Are not you deeply in love? | 
E yes! anſwered he, I an deeply in love with wife 
Cunegund!: no, replied one of the blues, we alk 
you whether you are not deeply in love with the 
King of the Bulgarians? Not at all, ſaid Candid, 
T vever faw him in my life. Ts it poſſible?! O, he 
3s a moſt charming king; we muſt drink his health. 
With all my heart, gentlemen, and he, drinks. 
Well, they tell him, you are now the fapport, 


the defender, the heroe of the Bulgarians z "your | 


fortune is made, you are in the | high-road to 
glory. Inſtanthy they hand- cuff him, and carry 
bim away to the regiment. There he is made to 
wheel about to the right, and to the left; to draw 
his rammer, to return his rammer, to preſent; to 
fire, to match; and they give him thirty blows 
with a ſtick: the next day he does his exerciſe a 
little"better,” and he receives but twenty: the day 
* following they let him off with ten, and his _ 
"Tues _ upon kim a5 A N. young GOAT 


9 * 


* 74 . 
* | . 2 
1 = 
£ 


E 7 


Art ror Tur BIST. 7 
© Candid was confounded, and could not for the 
fe of him conceive what made him a heroe, It 


came into his head upon a very fine day in the ſpring, 
to take a walk; and he marched ſtraight forward, look 


ing upon it as a privilege of the human ſpecies, as well 
as of the ' brute creation, to make uſe of their legs in 
what manner they pleaſed. He had not advanced two 
leagues, when he was overtook by four other he: 
roes fix feet high, who bound him, and carried him 


to a dungeon. A-court-martial ſat upon him, and 


he was aſked which he liked beſt, either to be 
whipped fix and thirty times through the whole reg. 
ment; or to have his brains blown out at once with 


twelve muſquet- balls. In vain was it for him to 


tell them that the human will is free, and that he 
choſe neither; they obliged- him to make a choice, 
and he determined, in virtue of that divine gift call- 
ed bberty, to run the gaunitlet fix and thirty times. 
He had gone through this diſcipline twice; and the 
regiment being compoſed of two thouſand men, that 


compoſed for him four thouſand ſtrokes, Which laid 


bare all his muſcles and nerves, from the nape of 
the neck quite down to his rump. As they were go- 
ing to proceed to a third whippingy Candid, unable 
to withſtand the operation any longer, begged as a 
favour that they would be ſo good as to ſhoot him: 


the favour being granted, they pull a cap over his 


eyes, and bid him kneel down. At this very inſtant, 


the king of the Bulgarians happening to paſs by, in- 
quires into the nature. of the crime: being a prince 
* 5 of | 


— 


"Ig - C AND ID: Or, 


of great penetration, he found that Candid was a 
young metaphyſician, extremely ignorant of the 
world, and therefore, out of his great clemency, he 
condeſcended to pardon him; for which his name 
will be celebrated in all the journals, and throughout 
all ages. An able ſurgeon makes a cure of Candid 
in three weeks by means of emollients taught by Di- 
oſcorides. His wounds were now ſkinned over, and he 
was able to march, when ane 
gave battle to the king of the . 


ease 


CHAP. III. 8 


e i de- from the Sabin, and 
what afterwards became of bim. 


HERE was never any thing ſo gallant, ſo | 
IJ well accoutered, ſo brilliant and ſo well diſ- 
poſed, as the two armies. Trumpets, fifes, haut- 
boys, drums, and cannon, made ſuch muſic, as the | 
devil himſelf never heard in hell. The cannonading 
firſt of all laid flat about fix thouſand men on each 
fide ; the muſquet-balls ſwept away out of the beſt of 
worlds, nine or ten thouſand ruffians that infected the 
ſurface of the earth. The bayonet was next a f. 
Acient reaſon for the death of ſeveral thouſands. The | 
whole might amount to thirty thouſand ſouls. Can- | 
did trembled like a philoſopher, and concealed. him- | 
a well as he could ring this herne butchery. | 
| At 


ers erer 


> 


— LEY 


ALL FOR THE 287. 9 


At lengik, while the two kings were caufing Te 
Deum to be ſung in each of their camps, Candid 
took a reſolution to go and reaſon ſomewhere elſe, 
about effects and cauſes, After he had paſſed over 
heaps of dead, or dying men, the firſt place he came 
to was a neighbouring village, which belonged to 
the Abares, and had been ſet on fire by the Bulga- 
rians, according to the laws of war. Here lay a 
number of old men covered with wounds, who be- 
held their wives dying with their throats cut, and 
hugging their children. to their breaſts all tained with 
blood. There the young virgins, with their bellies rip- 
ped open, after they had been ſubjeR to the natural ne- 
ceſſities of Bulgarian heroes, breathed their laſt; while 
others, half burnt in the flames, begged to be dif- 
patched out of the world. © The earth was firewed 
with the brains, arms, and legs of dead men, | 
Candid made all the haſte he could to another 
village, which belonged to the Bulgarians ; and 
there he found that the heroic Abares had acted 


the ſame tragedy. From thence continuing to 
walk over ſhattered palpitating limbs, or through 
ruined buildings, he arrived at laſt beyond the 
ſeat of war, with a little proviſion in bis knap- 


ſack, and miſs Cunegund always in his heart. At 
his arrival in Holland, his proviſion failed him ; but 


Having heard that the inhabitants of this Fintry 


were all rich, and Chriſtians, he made no doubt but 
he ſhould meet with the ſame treatment from them, 


as he kad met with in the baron's caſtle, before mife 


- Cune- 


Canegund's brink of ho were the — of his expul- 
fion from thence, _ 

He aſked charity of ſeveral grave lcoking people, 
who unanimouſly anſwered him, that if he continued | 
to follow this trade, they would confine him to the . | 
houſe of correction, where he ſhould be taught to | 
get his bread. 

The next he addreſſed "himſelf to, was a perſon 
who had been haranguing a large aſſembly for a 
whole hour, on the ſubje& of charity. But the orator 
looking aſkew, ſaid, What brought you hither ? Are 
you for the good cauſe? There can be no effect 
without a cauſe, anſwered Candid in a ſubmiſſive- 
manner, the whole is neceſſarily concatenated, and 
arranged for the beſt, It was neceſſary for me to 
have been baniſhed the preſence of miſs Cunegund, 
to have afterwards run the gauntlet, and now: it. 
is neceſſary I ſhould beg my bread till I am able to 
get it; all this cannot be otherwiſe. My friend, 
ſaid the orator to him, do you believe the pope to 
be antichriſt ? I never heard any thing: ſaid about it, 
anſwered Candid ; but whether he is or is not, I have 
not a morſel of bread. Thou deſerveſt none, ſaid the 
other; be gone, varlet; be gone, wretch; never 
come near me while thou liveſt. The orator's wife 
put her head out of the window, when eſpying a 
man that doubted whether the pope was antichriſt, 
the diſcharged upon his head a chamber pot full of — 
O heavens, to what exceſs does | religions zeal tranſ- 
| * the ſex ! 


rr wa RET 


Aman 


; r . 
ALL rox THE BEST. 11 
A man who had never been chriſtened, a good an- | 
abaptiſt, named James, beheld the cruel and igno- 
minious treatment ſhewn to one of his brethren, to 
a rational being, with two feet, and no feathers; 
moved with pity he carried . to his own houſe, 
got him clean, gave him to eat and to drink, made 
him a preſent of two florins, and intended to 
inſtruct him in his trade of weaving Perſian filks, 
which are fabricated in Holland. Candid threw 
himſelf at his feet, and cried out, Maſter Pangloſs 
was in the right, when he ſaid that every thing was 
for the beſt in this world; for I am infinitely more 
affected with your extraordinary generoſity, than 
with the inhumanity of that gentleman. in the black 
cloak, and his wife. The next day as he was 
walking out, he met a beggar all covered with 
ſcabs, his eyes ſunk in his head, the end of his 
noſe corroded, his mouth diſtorted, his teeth black, 
ſnuffling through his noſe, coughing moſt violently, 
and out came z tooth every time he tried to ſpit. | 


eee dh. 


ae ene 
2 | Candid found his old maſter Pangle ſi, and what 


happened to them. 


A N D ID, more touched with compaſſion than 
{truck with horror, gave to this ſhocking figure | 
he two florins, which he had received of honeſk 
ames the anabaptiſt. The ſpectre looked at him 


#4 
N r 68; 


* 4 


w. 


5 


5 a 


very , 


12 ND. Or, 


very. earneſtly, dropped a few tears, and in 4 rap-/ 
ture enfolded him in his arms, Candid, quite aghaſt, 
withdrew himſelf. Then ſaid one wretch to the other, 
Alas! don't you know your | dear Pangloſs ? What 
ſound is this? Is it you, my dear maſter! you in this 
terrible plight | And what misfortune has happened 
to you ? What has brought you away from that 
moſt magnificent of all caſtles ? What's become of 
miſs Cunegund, the mirror of young ladies, and 
nature's maſter- piece? I am ſo weak that I cannot 
ſtand, ſaid Pangloſs ; upon which Candid carried . 
him to the anabaptiſt's ſtable, and got him ſomething i * 
to eat. As ſoon as Pangloſs had refreſhed him- ] 
felf a little ; Well, ſaid Candid, what news of Cu. i * 
negund ? She is dead, replied the other. At theſe . 
words Candid fainted ; but his friend recovered him Ml © 
by the help of a little bad vinegar, which hefound by by 
accident in the ſtable. Candid opening his eyes again, * 
cries out, Cunegund is dead! Ah, beſt of worlds, where | 
art thou? But of what illneſs did ſhe die? was it for 
Brief, upon ſeeing her father kick me out of his mag- 
nificent caſtle? No, ſaid Pangloſs, her belly was rip- 
ped open by the Bulgarian ſoldiers, after they had 
raviſhed her ; they likewiſe knocked the baron her | 
father on the head, for attempting to defend her ; 
my lady her mother was cut in pieces; my poor pu- 
pil was ſerved juſt in the ſame manner as his ſiſter : 
and as for the caſtle, they have not left one ſtone up- 
en another; they have deſtroyed all the ducks, and all 
the ſheep; neither have they left one barn or tree ſtand- 
57s TY ee 


+» 


— 


Art ron Tar Ber. « 


„ge ber we have had our revenge, for the Abares 
have done the very ſame-thing in a CONN 
barony, which belonged to a Bulgarian lord. 
At this diſcourſe Candid fainteda ſecond h * 
coming to himſelf, and having ſaid all that it be- 
came him to ſay, he enquired into the cauſe” and 
effect, as well as into the ſufficient reaſon that had 
reduced Pangloſs to ſo miſerable a condition. Alas! 
ſaid” the other, it was love; love, the comfort of 
the human ſpecies, the preſerver of the univerſe, 
the ſoul of all ſenſible beings; love, tenderolove. 
Indeed, ſaid Candid, I have ſome knowledge of 
love myſelf,” the ſovereign of hearts, the ſoul of oar 
ſouls; yet it never coſt me mote than a kiſs and 
twenty kicks on the backſide. But how could this 
beautiful 3 produce in you" {0 -lideous'/an 
einst Hood © i 5663] $4; 140. 

reges nds ester d theſe terms: O my dear 
Candid, you remember Paquette, that pretty wench 
* ited on dur noble baroneſs : in her arms 1 
the pleaſures of paradiſe, which produced 
— hell torments with which you ſee ine devoured. 
She was infected with the diſtemper, and; perhaps 
5 fince dead of it. This preſent,” Paquettetreceiyed 
df a learned Cordeher,” who had traced it to tue 
ource ; he was indebted for it to an old couniteſs, 
ho had it of a captain of horſe; he had it of 
Pechioneſs, who had it of à page z the page hal 
of a:Jeſuit,” who in his novitiate had it in a di- 
* line Tom ons e companions of Chriſto- 

| c aer 


— 


: nobody, I am a dying man. 


44 CANDID: Qu: 
pher Columbus. For my. part I ſhall gine/it ud 


| O Pangloſs! cried Candid, what a Grange genes 
_ alogy | Is not the devil the original ſource. of it? 


Not at all, rephed this great man, it was a thing 


unavoidable, a neceſſary ingredient, in the beſt of 
worlds: for, if Columbus had not caught in an 
American iſland this diſeaſe, which contaminates 
the ſource of generation, is frequently an impe- 


diment thereto, and evidently oppoſite to the great 
end of nature, we ſhould have had neither chocolate 


nor cochineal: we are alſo to obſerve, that even | 


to the 3 in this continent of ours, this 
malady, like religious controverſy, is confined to 
ourſelves. The Turks, che Indians, the Perfians, the 
Chineſe, the Siameſe, and the Japaneſe, know nothing 
of it ; yet there is a ſufficient reaſon to make +us 
conclude that they will be acquainted with it in a 
few centuries hence. In the mean time, it has made 
prodigious havock among us, eſpecially in thoſe ar- 
mies compoſed of well diſciplined hirelings, who 
determine the fate af nations ; for we may ſafely 
affirm, that When an army of thirty thouſand men 
ſihts another in equal numbers, there are about 
twenty thouſand of them p-x-d on each ſide. 


Surpriaing l ſaid Candid: but you muſt get cured, | 


Ales 1 haw can I, -aid\Pangloſa, 1 haue not a far- 
thing, my friend ; and 


or of 0 


* 


and this I know, that all over 
the globe, there is — blood, 


* 00 2 Q bs la) 1.7 2 — * 23 —— a % oe —_m a D af: 2 1 


7 


Aut FOR THE Side: 18 


| This laſt ſpeech had its effe& upon Candid ; ho 
went and flung himſelf at the feet of James, the 
charitable anabaptiſt, and gave him: ſo- ſtriking a 
picture of the ſituation of his poor friend, that the 
good man did not ſcruple-to take Dr, Pangloſs into 
his houſe, and had him cured at his own expence. 
HF Vnder the operation Panglofs loſt only an eye and 
a eat. As he wrote a good hand, and underſtood 
FF accounts very well, the anabaptiſt made him his 
book-keeper. At the expiration of two months, 
being obliged to go to Liſbon abour ſome mercan- 
tile affairs, he took the two philoſophers with him 
in the ſame ſhip. Pangloſs explained to him how 
every thing was ſo conſtituted as it could not be bet - 
ter. James was not of this opinion. Mankind, 
ſaid he, muſt, in ſome things, have deviated from 
their original innocence ; for they were not born 
wolves, and yet they worry one another like thoſe 
beaſts of prey: God never gave them twenty- 
four pounders, nor bayonets; and yet they 
have made cannon and bayonets to deſtroy 
one another, Into this account I might throw 
not only bankruptcies, but the law which ſeizes 
on the effects of bankrupts, only to cheat the 
creditors, All this was indifpenſably neceſſary, 
replied the one-eyed doctor: for private misfortunes 
conſtitute the general good, ſo that the more pri- 
vate misfortunes there are, the greater is the general 
good, Deer dhe ſky 
1 F ©): 86s 722 dark - 


m— 


KA. 7 WTI, 


2 


chip, that they were not even ſenſible of their danger, 
The other half, either made loud outcries, or fell to 


had ſaved; yet the barbarons wretch deigned not even 


16 CAN DID. Or, 
darkebady the winds blew. from the ſour quarters of 


the compaſs; and the ſhip was aſſailed by a moſkter- 
d W ee n of the r PLANS: 1145 


? 
3 


% : k \ 
- — - g . Mw * 
— * * F : - = — L 
— — 


* 


ee ee e e e a 

4 e n an tee * 2 5 he. | 

; ee jo arg * N 8 1 aua - 
api. 


NE half of the 3 were 'fo gel an 
their nerves ſo ſhattered by. the rolling of the 


their prayers; the ſails were tattered, the maſts were 


| brought to the board, and the veſſel was rived. - All 


hands aloft; but nobody could be either heard or 
obeyed. . The anabaptiſt being upon deck, bores 
hand z- when a-brutiſh ſailor gave him a knock, and 
laid kim ſprawling z but with the violence of the 
blew; he-bimſelf tumbled head foremoſt overboard, 
and ſtuck upon a piece of a broken maſt. Honeſt 
James flies to his aſſiſtance, and with great difficulty, 
hauls him up again; but in the attempt he falls into 
the ſea himſelf, in fight of the very ſailor whom he 


to take the leaſt notice of him. Candid draws nears 
and ſees. his beneſadtor one moment rifing above wa · 
ter, and the next ſwallowed up by the mercileſs deep. 


3 | | He 
| | ? 


ALL ror TARA Bas) 11 
He was juſt going to jump after him, but wWas pre- 
vented by the philoſopher Pangloſs,whodemonſtrated 
to him that the coaſt of Liſbon had been made ow 
purpoſe for the anabaptiſt to be drowned; While hs 
was proving this à priori, the ſhip foundered, aud the 
whole crew periſned, except Pangloſi, Candid, and 
the ſailor who drowned: the good anabaptiſt; the 
F emerge . b ee 
upon a plank. 461 
0 W e eee PET walked a GE 
wards Liſhon: with what little money they had let, 
they hoped ta ſave themſelves from ſtarving, aftey 
had they, lamenting the death of their benefaktor, 
ſet foot. in the city, but they perceived the euch to 
tremble under their feet; and the ſea ſwelling, and 
foatning in the harbour; daſhed in pieces the veſſets 
riding at anchor. Large ſheets of flames and cindery: 
covered the ſtreets and public places, the houſes torteced; 
and were tumbled topſy · turvy down eventotheir foun· 
dations, and thoſe were diſperſed; and chirty thou - 
land jphabitants of all ages and fexes were buried in 
the ruins. | Says the. ſuilor, whiſlling and ſwearing, 
Zounds, there is fomething to be got here. What 
can be the /ufficient reaſon of this phænomenon ? ſaid 
Pangloſs. This is: certainly the day of judgment, 
ried Candid, The ſailor defying death in pusſuit 
of plunder, ruſhed-forthwith into the midi of the 
dins ; and there he found ſome money, with which 
L got drunk: and after. he had ſlept himſelf ſober, 
: C3 mo 


3 


—. 


ZE ET rprrTCTTlYYmey murr 


' = «0 *- 


18 CANDID: Ot, 


N he-punckiaſed the favours: of the A tt mand 
wench that. fell in hib way. As he was thus wan 
tonly rioting in the ruins of demoliſhed houſes,” and 
amidſt the groans of dying perſons; Pangloſs came 
and pulled him by che ſleeve, ſaying, this is not 
right, my friend, you treſpaſs againſt the uni venſal rea- 
ſon and fitneſs, of things; this is not a proper time for! 
fuch.extravagances: S blood and fury, anſwered the 
other, I am a ſailor, and born at Batavia; four times. 
have I ftawpled upon the crucifix in four voyages to 

Japan; you have pitched upon a very pretty fellow 
with your univerſal reaſon and fitneſs of things. 

In the mean time Candid, being wounded by ſome 
pieces of ſtones that fell from the houſes, lay ſtretch- 
ed in the ſtreet, almoſt covered with rubbiſh. For | 
God's ſake, ſaid he to Pangloſs, get me a little wine 
Veil, Lam dying. This concuſſion of the earth is i 
new thing; anſwered Pangloſs: the city of Lima, 
in America, experienced, the . ſame convulſions laſt 
year ; the ſame. cauſe, the ſame effects ; there is cer - 
tainly a train of ſulphur under ground from Lima to 
Liſhon, Nothing more probable, ſaid Candid, but 
for the love of God, a little oil and wine. Probable ? 
replied the philoſopher ; I maintain that the point is 
capable of being demonſtrated. Candid fainted away; 
and Pangloſs fetched him ſome pee . 
Tue nent . rummaging i ruins, they 
found ſome eatables, with which they repaired their 


I WW aa a4 wa 


— 
e 


2 5 


| ALL ror dr: 19 
the inhabitants, i in relieving the diſtreſſed and wound- 
ed. Some, whom they Rad humanely aſſiſted, gave 
them. as good a dinner as could be expected under 
ſuch terrible eircumfances;, true, the reyaſt was. 
mournful, and the company moiſtened their bread 
with tears; but Pangloſs endeavoured to conſole them, 
by affirming that things could not be otherwiſe than 
ns they wers; becauſe, ſaid. he, all this is fitteſt and. - 
F beſt; for if there is a volcano at Liſbon, it could ba 
| in no other ſpot: for it is impoſſible but things ſhould, - 
, deen nantes aer every thing is right. 

3 Near him fat a little man dreſſed in black, he... 
longing to the inquiſition *, who taking him up with, 
great complailance, ſaid, Very likely, fir, you do. . 
not believe in original ſin ; for if every thing is, 
beſt. and fitteſt, there could have been no ſuch.ching, 
as the fall, ' or. puniſhment. of man. 


Pangloſs ſtill. more politely, for the fall and curſe; of 
man, neceſſarily entered into the ſyſtem of the beſt, 
of worlds. Therefore, ſir, ſaid the other, you do 
not believe any ſuch thing as liberty. Vour excel- 


liberty is conſiſtent with abſolute neceſſity, for it was 
neceſſary we ſhoald be free; for, in ſhort, ons, | 
minate will 

Pangloſs was in the middle of his 1 ' 
when the inquiſror beckoned to his attendant to help... 
him to a glaſs of Port wine. 8 a4 


* One of the ſubordinate officers of the i ;nquiſtion, who are. 
known in Spain by the name of familiares, becanle they act a 
enn different families. CH — 


TW Te” Ts” T7 


K 8. K 


= 
" 
* 
9 


I humbly aſk your excellency's pardon, . | 


leney will be ſo good as to excuſe me, ſaid. Pangloſs ;,- 


= — 


a "CANDID: 0; 


3 4 i 
ei 4 $448 


"CHAP. Vi. 8 


How the Poriuguif made a pompous BT, to we 
went any further earthquakes ; we bad Ard 2s 


W e — * 


Au R the elle e 
| fourths of the city of Liſbon, che ſages of 

that country could think of no means more effectu- 
al to preſerve the kingdom from utter ruin, than 
to entertain the people with an Auto- da- f. For 
it had been decided by the univerſity of Coimbra, 
that the burning of a few people alive, by a flow 
fire, eee is u 
to prevent earthquakes. | 

In conſequence hereof, they had ſeized on a B. 
cayner, for marrying his godmother; and on two 
Portugueſe, for taking out the bacon as they were 
eating a larded pullet: after dinner they came and 
ſecured doctor Pangloſs, and his diſciple Candid, 
the one for ſpeaking his mind, the other for ſeem- 
ing to approve of what he ſaid. They were con- 
ducted to ſeparate apartments, extremely cool, being 
never incommoded by the ſun: eight days after they 
were dreſſed in a /anbenito, and their heads were 
crowned with paper mitres. Candid's mitre and 
fanbenito were painted with flames reverſed; and 
with devils that had neither tails nor claws : but 
Pangloſs's devils had both tails and claws, and the 
flames were N KL this þ habit they marched i in, 


AlL rox The Bas. 21 
proceſſion, and heard a very pathetic ſermon, which 
was followed by an anthem fet to muſic, Candid was 
whipt in cadence, while they were ſinging ; the Biſ- 
cayner, and the two men who would not eat bacon, 
were burnt ; and Pangloſs, though there had been 
no inſtance of the like -puniſhment, was hanged. 
The ſame day there was another nn. which 
made a moſt terrible havock. | 

. Candid, affrighted, terrified, eee NS 
ed, . all bloody, and trembling: every limb of him, 
ſaid to himſelf; If chis is the beſt of. poſſible worlds, 
what are the others? Well, if I had been only - 
whipped, I could put up with it, for I met with the 
ſame uſage among the Bulgarians ; but, O my dear 
Pangloſs/!; thou, gteateſt of [philoſophers, that it 
ſhould be my hard fate to ſee thee hanged, without 
knowing for what l O my dear anabaptiſt, thou beſt 
| of men, that it ſhould be thy fate to be drown- 
ed in the very harbour! O miſs Cunegund, thou 
mirror of young ladies! chat it ſhould be v facs 
to have thy belly ripped open 
Thus he was muſing, though. 3 able to land, 
after having been preached to, whipt, abſolved, and 
received benediction, when an old woman accoſted 
him, and ſaid, Child, take courage, and follow me- 


22 CAND1D: Os 


. en AP. vi. 


e the old auen, took care of Cantid, and how be | 


ul the des be weed. 
ANDID indeed could not take courage, but 


followed: the old woman to a decayed houſe, 
where ſhe gave him a pot of pomatum to anoint his | 
ſores, ſhewed him a very neat bed, with a ſuitof cloaths 
hanging up, and leſt him victuals and drink. Eat, | 


drink, and take your reſt, ſaid ſhe, and may our la- 
dy of Atocha, the great St. Antony of Padua, and 
the great St. James of Compoſtella, receive you un- 
der their protection. I ſhall be back to-morrow. 
Candid, amazed at all he had ſegn, at all he had 


ſuffered, and, more than all, at the charity of the old | 
you ought to kiſs, ſaid the old woman; I ſhall be 
back to-morrow. dag er pris enen 3 


tum, eat, and go to ſleep, 
+ Candid,  notwithſlanding ſo mavy Claire, eat 


the returned with his ſupper. The day following ſhe 
went through the very ſame ceremonies. Who are 
you? ſaid Candid; what deity has inſpired you with 
ſo much goodneſs? what return can I make you? 


Tue . but came 


back 


rr . dn. AS att - 4- 


— — lane a Au Bad, 84 
rubbed it herſelf wich another ointment : in like 
manner ſhe brought him his dinner; and at night 


RR „ , „% „ 


All rok TRE BAS T. 23 
back in the evening, without bringing him his ſup. - 
per: Come along with me, ſaid ſhe, and don't ſay 
a word: | She took him under her arm, and walked 

where they arrived at a lonely houſe, ſurrounded 

with moats and gardens. ''The old woman knocked 

at 3 little door, which opened directly, and ſhe hew+ 
Jed him up the back-ſtairs into a ſmall apartment, 
richly furniſhed. She left him on a brocaded ſofa, 
ſhut the door, and went away. Candid, in amaze, 
| confidered his whole life hitherto as a mouruful 
dream, PO en eee enn, 
one. 
The old woman returned very ſoon, fpporing, 
with great difficulty, a lady ſcarce able to ſtand ; ſhe 
was of a majeſtic mien, and ftature ; ber attire was 
rich, and glittering: with diamonds ;/ and her face 
was covered with a veil. Take off that veil, ſaid 
che old woman to Candid. The young man ap» 
proaches, and with awful reverence takes off the veil; 
What a happy moment ! what ſurprize l he believ- 
ed he ſaw miſs Cunegund ; and he really did ſee 
her, for it was ſhe herſelf. His ſtrength fails him, 
he is dumb, and falls at her feet. Cunegund faints 
upon the ſofa. The ald woman, bedews them with 
ſpirits; they recover, and begin to ſpeak, At firſt 
they expreſſed themſelves in broken accents; their 
queſtions and anſwers were alternately interrupted 
with ſighs, with tears, with cries: the old woman de- 
n make leſs noiſe ; and left them to 
them- 


"AS —_ 31 — tint * 5 


24 ; *BY AN D 1D: Or, ö 


themſelves And is ĩt you? ſaid Candid to her; are you 
then alive l and do I ſind you again in Portugal? then 
you have not been raviſhed? then they did not rĩp open 
your belly, as the philoſopherPangloſs informed me? 
Yes they did, ſaid Cunegund; but thoſe two dccidents | 
are not abways mortal. But were your father and 
mother killed? That's but too true, anſwered Cune- 
gund, and wept. And your brother? My brother 
was alſo killed. And how came you into Portu- 
gal? and how did you know of my being here? and 
by what ſtrange adventure did you contrive to bring 
me to this houſe ?. I will tell you, replied the lady; 
but firſt of all let me know your hiſtory, from the 
time of the innocent kiſs you gave me at my father's 
honſe, and the rude kicking you then received. 
Candid reſpectfully obeyed her, and though he 
was ſtill in a ſurprize, though his voice was low and 
tremulous, though his back pained him, yet he 
gave her a moſt ingenuous account of every thing WW- 
that had befallen him, ſince the moment of their 
ſeparation. Cunegund lifted up her eyes to heaven; 
and ſhed tears when he related the death of the good | 
Anabaptiſt, and of Pangloſs.; after which ſhe made | 
- the following narration to Candid, who loſt not one | 
ſyllable amm eg at her al 
a wan | . {hd 


—_— 


. 


Ms e 44 wes , a4 awe 


ade Fr 


5 Deer A Regza te Fe 865 47" (44 4.365 
n | nn "CHAP. vm.” . 18 1550 
t | e 70 me 
ts | MY 5 11 
4 PR ou d e cede | 
1 ſend che Bulgarians to our delightful caſtle of 
1 Thunder - ten tronckh ; where they flew my father and 
5 brother, and cut my mother i in pieces, A tall Bulga- 
nan, ſix feet high, , perceiving: that I had fainted at 
'S = this _ ſight, attempted to raviſn me: this brought 
„e e e my ſenſes; 1 cried, L. fryggled, | 1. bir, 


I, ſcratched, I wanted to tear this tall Bulgari; 
an's eyes out, not knowing that what had 100 | 
pened in my father's caſtle, was a cuſtomary ching. 
The brute gave me a cut in the left fide with. his 
hanger, the mark of which I Rill © carry. I ay am in great 
opes I. ſhall ſee. it, ſaid- honeſt Candid : you. In 
ſaid Cunegund ; but let us e Do fo, a 
andid. | 
And thas the reſumed the thread of her 4504 A. 
Bulgarian captain came in, and ſaw me weltering i in 
ny blood, and the ſoldier not in the leaſt diſconcert- 
d, The captain flew into a paſſion at the difref] peRtful 4 
chaviour of the brute to him, and killed him, while be 5 
as even upon me. He got me cured, and carried "2 
ne priſoner, of war £0 his quarters. 1 waſhed bar 
rele linen he was maſter of, and dreiled his viduals; 
9 me Very. pretty, I mu .confeſs ; 5 weiber 
D can 


„— 


* 7 » * 


nne 
can I deny that he was well made, and had a white ſoft 

fun, but he was ſtupid, and little of a philoſopher ; in 
ſhort, you mightplainly ſeethatheh notbeeneducat- 
ed under doctor Pangloſs. In three months time, having 
loſt all his money, and being grown tired of my compa- 
ny, he ſold me to a Jew, named Don Iſſachar, Who 
traded to Holland and Portugal, and was paſſionate- 
ly fond of women. This Jew-careſſed me extreme- 
ly, but never could prevail; I made a better reſiſt- 


nance againſt him than againſt the Bulgarian ſoldier. 


A modeſt woman may be once raviſhed, but her vir- 
tus is thereby ſtrengthened. In order to render me 
more complying, he brought me to this country houſe 
that you ſee. Hitherto I had imagined that nothing 
could equal the beauty of the caſtle of Thunder- ten- 
wonckh; but I found I was miſtaken, ' ' © 
The grand inquiſſtor ſaw me one-day at maſs, 
was ſmitten with my perſon, and ſent to let me 
know he wanted to ſpeak with me about private 
buſineſs. I was conducted to his palace, where I ac- 
quainted him with the hiſtory of my family: he'repre- 
ſented to me, how mach it was beneath a perſon of my | 
birth, to belong to a circamciſed Iſraelite. A propo- 
Tal then was made to Don Iſſachar, that he ſhould re- 
High me to my lord. Don Iffachar, being the court 
banker, and a man of credit, would not acquieſce. 
The inquifitor threatened him with an Auto-da-fe ; 
in ſhort, my- Jew was frightened into a co ion, 
that both the houſe and myſelf ſhould be in common 
between them; m_ the Jew ſhould bave Monday, 
Wed- | 


0 


At FOR TR Besr. 27 


Wedneſday, . and his ſabbath to. bimſelf; and the 
other days I ſhould” be the inquiſitor's. It is now fix 
months ſince this agreement was made, during which 
time they have often conteſted, whether the ſpace 
from Saturday night to Sunday morning, belonged 
to the old or new law, For my part, I have hitherto 
keld out againſt them both; and 1 verily believe that 
this is the reaſon why I am ſtill beloved by them. 
At length, to avert the ſcourge of earthquakes, and 
to intimidate Don Ifſachar, my lord inquiſitor was 
pleaſed to celebrate an Auto.da-fe. He did me the 
bonour to invite me to the ceremony. I had a very 
good ſeat, and the ladies were ſerved with refreſh- 
ments between maſs and the execution. I was really 
ſhocked at the burning of thoſe two Jews, and the 
honeſt Biſcayner, that married his godmother: but 
how great my ſurprize, my conſternation, and con- 
cern, when I beheld a figure ſo like Pangloſs, dreſſed 
in a ſanbenito and mitre! I rubbed my eyes, I look- 
ed upon him attentively, 1 ſaw him hanged, and 
I fainted away: but no ſooner was I recovered, than 
I beheld you ſtark naked, and this was the full mea- 
ſure of horror, grief, and deſpair. I ſhall ingenuouſly 
own to you, that your ſkin is far whiter, and of a 
better complexion, than that of my Bulgarian cap- 
tain, This ſpeQacle worked me up to a pitch of 
diſtraction. 1 ſereamed out, and was going to ſay, 


ſtop barbarians, but my voice failed me, "and my 


cries would have ſignified nothing, After you had 
been ſeverely whipped, bow is it poſſible, ſaid I, that 
the 


D 2 


28. CANDID: Or. 


the > OL Candid, and the ſage Pangloſs, ſhould 
both be at Liſbon, the one to receive a hundred laſhes, 


-and the other to be hanged by the order of my lord 
the inquiſitor, who is my lover? Pangloſs moſt cruelly 1 
deceived me, in pings that every thing is fitteſt and 1 


deft. 


la this Bltry' ad agitation of ip: tits; now dif. f 
trated and loſt, and now ready to ſink under the 
weight of my affliction, I revolved in my mind the | 


maſſacre of my father, mother, and brother, the 
inſolence of the vile Bulgarian ſoldier, the wound he 
gave me with his hanger, my ſervitude, and the mean 
employment of a cook to the Bulgarian captain, my 
ſubjection ta the filthy Don Iſſachar, the abominable 
Inquiſitor, the execution of doctor Pangloſs, the miſe- 
rere ſung to muſic while you was whipped, and above 
all, the kiſs you gave me behind the ſcreen, that day 
which was the laſt I ſaw you. I gave thanks to God 
7 bringing you back to me after ſo many trials, and 
charged my old woman to take care of you, 'and 


to conduct you hither as ſoon as poſſible. She has | 


executed her commiſſion perfectly well; and I have 
had the inexpreſſible ſatisfaction to ſee you again, to 
hear you, and to talk to you. But you muſt be very 
hungry, and ſo am I; let us go to ſupper. 
On this they both ſatdown to table; and when ſapper 
was over, they placed themſelves once more on the 
ſofa already mentioned: there they were, when fignor 
Don Iffachar, one of the maſters of the houſe, furpriz- 
ed them. It was the Jewiſh ſabbath ; and Iſſachar 


Was 


Deren r am coo om ww OA Tamar. ac 


„ 


DD 


F 1 283838 KK KA 4 5 8 8 


% 


Arx rox Tur Bas, 29 


was come to aſſert an une e 
der ſentiments to Cunegund. 260. Te 


1 


. . bk . / 2 * 
18 : 

ONCE 
1 4 2 12 * 


3 


ferme crete. 
a, e wh 8 . | 


FT #15 64 ts dat den bi 
brew that had been ever ſeen in Iſrael fince 
the captivity of Babylon. What |. ſaid hey thoy 
b—h of a Galilean, was not the inquiſſtor enough | 
for thee ? Muſt: this raſcal alſo come in for à ſhay 
with me ? As he was uttering theſe words, he drew 
out a long poniard, which he always carried about 
kim; and not imagining that his adverſary had any 


| arms, he attacked him moſt furiouſly : but our ho- 


delt Weſtphalian had received 4 handſome fyord 
of the old woman with the ſuit of cloaths. Cav- 
did draus his rapier, and though he was of ſo hu- 
mane and gentle a diſpoſition, he laid the Iſraclite 
ſprawling upon the floor at Cunegund's feet. 
5 Holy virgin! cried ſhe, what will become of us ? 
A man killed in my apartment! If the peace-officers 
2 we ate undone. Had not Pangloſs been hang- 
ed, replied Candid, he would have given us good 
counſel in this emergency, for he was a profound phi- 
loſopher. But ſince he is not here, let us conſult tbe 
23 yu knowing, and began to 

| D 3 give 


30 CANDID: Or PI 


give her opinion, when ſuddenly another kttle door 
. burſt open. It was now one o'clock in the morning; 
and..of courſe the beginning of Sunday, which by 
agreement was allotted to my lord the inquiſmor. En- 
tering the room he beholds a ſhocking ſpeQacle ; Can- | 
did, who had been whipped, ſtanding with his drawn | 
ford a dead body ſtretehed upon the floor; -Cane- 
gund frightened out of her * the 1280 woman 
giving her advice. 
At that very inſtant the folfowimg Sth 2 2 | 
to Candid. If this boly man calls in aſſiſtance, he | 
will ſarely eonſign me to the flames: and Cunegund, 
perhaps, will be ſerved'in the ſame manner; befides, 
he was the cauſe of my being crnelly whipped ; he 
is my rival; and, as I have now begun to Kill, I will 
Kill away, for there is no time to-hefitate. This whole 
reaſoning was clear and inftantaneons ; ſo that without 
giving * time to che inquifitor to recover from his fur+ 
prize, he ran him throagh the body, and laid him by 
the ſide of the Jew. | Look, there is another killed; 
 faid Cunegund, now there can be no mercy for us, we 
are excommunicated, our laft hour is come: But how 
could you, who are of fo mild a temper, prevail on your- | 
felf to Kill a Jew and a prelate in two minutes time? 
My fair creature, anſwered Candid, when love, jealou- 
fy, and the terror of the inquifttion, act upon a man's 
drain, they arc enough to drive him to diſtraction. 
The old woman then put in her word, ſaying, | 

there are three Andalufian horſes in the ſtable with 
Tan and ſaddles; let the brave Candid get 
3 them 


* 


5 A 


7 Et aca ao ES ARB. 5 7 5 7 74 . 


95 ALL rox THE BxsT. 91 
us mount immediately, though I can fit only on one 
buttock: ;. let us ſet out for Cadiz, it is the fineſt wea- 
ther in the world, and there is great pleaſure in ger 
e e e e e 3243 234 044; 
Candid ſpeedily ſaddles the three horſes ; and 
G the old woman, and he, travel thirty 
miles upon à ſtretch. While they were making the 
beſt ol / their way, the St. Hermandad. enters the 
houſe, my; lord the inquiſitor is interred in a grand 
church, and Iſſachars wur 3s h upon a 
dunghill. Lo acts 
Candid, Cunegund, e | 
reached the little town of Avacena in the midſt of 
the mountains of La r | 


eee d en ken 
ONION XOX 
ws CHAP. x. Jan 


hs gubat difirgs, Candid, Gre and he c 
$142 AIR. 


£4. 413 


"HO could de eee ee 
dores and jewels ? ſaid Cunegund, all bathed in 
tears: How ſhall we live? what ſhall we do? where 
mall I find. inquifitors- or Jews who can give me more? 
Alas I faid the old woman, I have a ſhrewd ſuſpicion of 
a reveread — laſt night in the 

ſame 


32 CAN DID: or, 
| fame inn with us at Badajos ; God preſerve me from 
making a raſh jodgment; but he came into our room 
twice, and he ſet ont upon his journey long before 
us. Alas ! faid Candid, Pangloſs has often demon- 
ſtrated to me, that the goods ef this world are com- 
mon to mankind, and that they all have an equal 
right to enjoy them. But, according to theſe prin- 
ciples, the Cordelier ought to have left us enough to 
ea ry us through our journey. Have you nothing at 
all left, my dear C. ? Not a farthing, faid 
me. What then muſt we do? ſaid Candid, Self 
one of the horſes, replied the old woman; I will 
get behind mifs Cunegund, "though I can ride 
only on one buttock; and we ſhall reach Cadiz, 
In the ſame inn there was a BenediQtine prior, 
who bought the horfe very cheap. Candid, Cune- 
and, and the old woman, having paſſed through 
Lucena, Chillas, and Lebrixa, arrived at length at 
Cadiz. A fleet was then getting ready, and troops 
were aſſembling, in order to reduce the Jeſuits of 
Paraguay, who were accuſed of having excited one of 
their tribes, in Me neighbourhood of the town af 
the Holy Sacrament, to revolt againſt the kings of 
Spain and Portugal. Candid having been in the Bul- 
garian ſervice, performed che military exerciſe” of 
that nation, before the general of this kule army, with 
ſio graceful an addreſs, with fo intrepid an air, and 
with ſach agility and expedition, that he gave him 
a company of foot. Being now made à captain, 
he ſets fail with miſs Cunegund, the old woman, 
| | two 


—w ww a24 0 21 „ = =, + „ of wt ery OO wo + 23. 


- - = 


Ls WS. -1 


FF -= &. a, 2 


OY 


r — L ad 9 9 * w 


DMM_ MY WY e "IP 


* 


_ ALL rox TAI BIST. 33 
two valets, and two Andaluſian horſes, which had 
belonged to the grand inquiſitor of Portugal. 5 
' During their voyage, they reaſoned a wah deal 
about poor Pangloſs's philoſophy... We are go- 
ing into another world, faid Candid; and ſurely it 
muſt be there that every thing is beſt.” For I muſt 
confeſs, there is reaſon to complain a little of what 
8 in our world, in regard both to the phyſical 

nd moral government of it. I have a fincere value for 
you, ſaid Cunegund, but I ſhudder ftill to think of 
what I have ſeen and experienced. All will be 


well, replied Candid; the ſea of this new world 


3 European ſeas, it is 
ſmoother, and the winds blow more regularly. Cer- 
tainly the new world muſt be the beſt and fitteſt of all 
worlds, God grant it, ſaid Cunegund ; but I have 
met with ſuch terrible treatment in this, that I have 
almoſt loſt all hopes of a better, You murmur and 
complain, ſaid the old woman; but alas! you have 
not gone through half the © misfortunes that 1 
have done: Cunegund was ready to burſt out a+ 
laughing at the good old woman, and thought it 
was very pleaſant in her to pretend to more un- 
fortunate ſcenes than herſelf. - Alas ſaid Cu- 
negund, my good dame, | unleſs you had been 
raviſhed by two Bulgarians; had received. two 
deep wounds in your belly; had had two caſtles 
demoliſhed ; bad loſt two fathers, and two mo- 
thers, and ſeen. both of them cruelly murdered 
behave your eyes; and, laſtly, had two lovers 


whipped 


/ 


34 CANDID: Or, 

„ et 1,0 e e en Jo 
you could be more unfortunate than me. Beſides, 
though born a baroneſs, and able to prove ſeventy- 


two quarterings, I have been obliged to ſubmit to 


| the drudgery of a couk-maid; Miſs, replied the old 
woman, you do not know my family as yet; and were 
I to ſhew you my back6de, you would not talk in 
that manner, but would ſuſpend your judgment, 
This ſpeech having raiſed a high curioſity in Cu- 
negund and Candid, tho! old woman ſpoke to them 
as Ane | ; 


S Dh O GGGOOSECS 


"CHAP. XI. 
Ai of the old woman; 


ice ati Ween wheres 
-ndſe always touch my chin; nor was L always a 


ſervant : I am the daughter of pope Urban the tenth, 


and of the princeſs of Paleſtrina. To the age of ſour- 
teen, I was brought up in a palace, to which, all 
the caſtles of your German barons would not have 
been fit for ſtabling; and one of my robes was worth 
all the magnificence of Weſtphalia, As I grew up, 1 
improved in beauty, wit, and every graceful accom- 
pliſhment, amidſt pleaſures, homages, and the higheſt 
expectations. Now I began to inſpire the men with 
love. My neck. was come to its right ſhape ; and 

ſach 


ng aasee „„ 2 ee. 


ALL rex THE Dus. 35 
ſuch a neck ! white, ere&, and exactly formed like 
that of the Venus of Medicis : my eye-brows were 
as black as jet; and as for my eyes, they darted 
flames, and eclipſed the twinleling of the ſtars, as T was 
told by the poets in our part of the world, My 
waiting-women, in drefling and undrefling me, uſed 
to fall into an extaſy, whether they viewed me be- 
fore or behind : Rey ON er 
ed to have been in their places. 

I was contracted to a ſovereign prince of Mala 
Carara, Such à prinee! as handſome as myſelf, 
ſweet tempered, agreeable, witty, and deſperately 
in love. I loved him, as one is apt to love for the 
firſt time, with tranſport, with idolatry.- The nup- 
tials were prepared with ſurprizing pomp and mag- 
nificence ; the ceremony was attended with -feaſts, 
carouſals, and burletta's; and all Italy compoſed 
ſonnets in my praiſe, though not one of them 
was tolerable. I was juſt upon the point of reach- 


. —kD!¼ 


Y BY ing the ſummit of bliſs, when an did marchioriefs; 
do had been miſtreſs to the prince my huſband, in- 
„ viced him to drive chocolate. After the viſt he died 
oc moſt terrible convulfions in leſs than two hours! 
1 But this is only a bagatelle. My mother, diſtructed 
in the higheft degree, and yet leſs afficted than me; 
tb BY determined to abſent herſelf. for ſome time from ſs 
1 BY fatal a place. As ſue had a very fine-eftare-in-the 
"" Leighbourhood of Cajeta, we embarked on board 
4 x galley, which was gilded'like the great altar of 


>". neee No ſooner were we out at 
lea, 


— 


' 36 VAN DIP: Or, 
ſea, than a Sallee rover came up, and boarded: us. 


Our men defended themſelves like true pope's ſol- 

diers ; they flung themſelves upon their knees, and 

laid down their arms, begging of the Coriair an ab- 

ſolution in articulo mortis., - , aber 

Aae che Moors r pre ne ap ben an io many 

baboons; my mother, my maids of -honour, and my. 

ſelf, were ſerved. all in the ſame manner. It is 

amazing with what expedition thoſe, gentry ers 

people. But what ſurprized me moſt was, that they 

2 thruſt their fingers into that part of our bodies, 

which the generality of women ſuffer no other in · 

ſtrument but pipes to enter. It appeared to me a 

| very ſtrange kind of ceremony; and thus we are 

| | apt to judge of things, when we have not ſeen the 

| world. I afterwards learnt, that it was to try whe. 

ther we had concealed any diamonds,. This is the 

| practice eſtabliſhed time immemorial, among the civi- 

| lized nations that ſcour the ſeas., I was informed 

| that the very religious knights of Malta never fail to 

mage this ſearch, when they take any-Turkiſh pri- 

IF ſoners of either ſex. It is a branch of che law of 

| nations, from which they never deviate. - |: - 

I need not tell you how great a hardſhip it was * 

a young princeſs and her mother to be madę ſlaves, 

and carried to Morocco. You may eaſily imagine 

what we muſt have ſuffered on board the Mooriſh 
veſſel. My mother was ftill very handſome ;/ our 

maids of honour; and even our waiting-women, had 

more charms chan are to be found in all Africa. As 

EN | (0 IS oh for 


| 


| 
| 


AAL ro THE BRS Tr. 


itſelf, and. virgin. 1 did not remain fo long 
this flower, , which had been reſerved for 'the hand- 
ſome prince of Maſſa. Catara, was plucked ern 
captain of the Sallee rover, a frightful negro, who 


indeed botk the princeſs of Paleſhiaa and myſelf 
muſt; have had a very ſtrong conſtitution, to g 
through all the hardſhips we ſuffered till our arrival 
at Morocco. But I proceed; theſe ure ſuch/ com. 
mon things as not to be worth 


ole kingdom a ſcene of blood and confuſion: 


he. Ae alt IA od. Beg 


adherents :' this . produced! fifty" civil' wars of 
| en blacks, of tawnies againſt tawnies, and 
pf mulattos againſt mul attos. Tn ſhort, it was: con- 
inual carnage throughout the empire. unn; 


* 


ob him of his booty, Next to the jewels and money, 
e were the moſt valuable things he had. I was wit- 


2. 7 8 K 7 oe 


or cheld in any part of Europe. The nofthern thern na- 

es, have not that fermentation in their blood, nor 
ne at raging luſt for women, ſo common in Africa. ; 
iſh he natives of Europe ſeem to have their veins on ö 
zur led with milk ; but fire and vitriol eirculate in'theſe 
ad Pn Cn Atlas, and the neigh? 
As ing provinces, They faoght/wih' the fury ef 
for YG E the ' 


— ſons of the emperor Malep-Iſhmael had each 


eſs, on this occaſion; to ſuch a battle as you never 


5 . 
for myſelf, I was an exquiſite beauty; I was grace 


imagined he did me a great deal of honour, And F 


pon bur arrival at Moroces, ' we ford! the | 


No ſooner were we landed, chan the blacks "a 
faction to that of my captain d, attempted to 


tier Moor had hold af ber by che right leg, and 


deemed to be in à trance. Thus I lay in a Rate 


35 CAN DID: Or. 
the lions, gers add ſerpents of he country, to 
ſee. Who ſhould have us far chair prey. A Moor 
ſeized my - mother. by che right arm, while my 
captain's lieutenant held her by the left 3 ano- 


one of our Corſaits held her by the other. Thus 
almoſt all our women were dragged by four ſol - 
diert. My captain concealed me behind him; and 
that oppoſed his fury. At length I ſaw all our Ita- 
lian women, and my mother herſeif, torn and man. 
gled by the monſters, wha contended for them. The 
captives my companiths, the Moors who took us, the 
ſoldiers, the ſailura the blacks, the whites,” the mu- 
tattos, and laſtly my captain himſelf, were all killed, 
and I remained alone, expiring upon à heap: of dead 
every day all over the country, through an extent of 
three hundred leagues, and yet they never milled the 
nnn en waer as A1 e N 


| - With ane I diſengaged myfu rm ck 


ror; "deſpair, and hunger, 1 tumbled down. My 
ſenſes being over-powered, I fell aſleep, or rather 


of weaknaſs and infenſibility, or between life and 


= TT Þ Xr © @» 0 + & 


Ta 2 K. F Ta 


Ali ron T Bydr. 39 
moved upon my body. This brought me to my. 


ſelf, and I ſaw a very good looking man, of a fair 
complexion, who fighed and muttered theſe words 


nnn On ages dat girth 


| H A p. XII. | 
The adventure of the old aupman cating... 0 


URPR1Z BD/ un pleaſed in a b degree 

to hear my native language, and no lefs afto- 
niſhed at what the man faid, I made anſwer; thut 
ee W cn deer ae lan that - 
which he complained of. I gave him a compendi- 
ous account of the horrid ſcenes I had under- 
gone, and I fainted a ſecond time. He removed 
me to a neighbouring "houſe, put me te bed, fed 
me, waited upon me, did all he could to eafe and | 
comfort me, ſaying; that he had never ſeen ſo fine a 
woman, and that he never regretted ſo much the 
loſs of what it was impoſſible for him to recover, 
I was born at Naples, ſaid he; there they caſtrate two 
or three thouſand children every year; ſome die of 
the operation, others acquire a voice more ſoft than 
that of women, and others go governors © of pro- 
vinces. This operation was performed on me with 
great ſucceſs, and I was muſician to the chapel of 
her highneſs'the princeſs of Faleſtrina. To my mo- 


ther! cried J. Your mother! cried he, the tears 


E 2 trickling 


40 CAN DID: Or, 

trickling down his cheeks. Is it poſſible that you 
mould be the young princeſs, whom I had the care of 
bringing up till ſhe was fix years old, and who pro- 
miſed then to be as fair as you are now? It is 1 
myſelf : but my mother lies four hundred paces 
from hence, cut in pieces, under a heap of dead 
bodies. I told him all my adventures, and he made 
me acquainted with his ; letting me know, that he had 
deen ſent to the emperor of Morocco by a Chriſtian 
power, to conclude a treaty with that prince; in 
conſequence of which he was to be furniſhed with 
military ſtores. and ſhips, in order to enable him to 
demoliſh: the commerce of other Chriftian govern- 
meats. I have executed my commiſſion, ſaid the ho- 
neſt eunuch ; I am going to. embark hy 


and 1 ˙II take you along with me ler 
ſciagura d gſere ſenza caglian i? | 
© With tears of joy 1 thanked, him ; but inflead.of 
reconduQting me. to Italy, he carried me to Al- 
giers, where he. ſold me to the Dey. No ſooner 
was I ſold into ſlavery, than the plague, which 
had made ſuch hayock over Africa, Afia, and Eu- 
rope, broke out with great fury in Algiers. You | 
have ſeen earthquakes ; but pray, miſs, have you 
ever had the plague ?. Never, anſwered Cunegund. 
I you. had, ſaid the old woman, you would ac- 
| knowledge chat it is far more terrible than an earth- 
quake. It is common in Africa; and I catched it. 
Imagine to yourſelf the diſtreſſed fituation of the 
daughter of a pope, rr . years old, and 
Dl 4 4 who, 


J. d ˙A -v“. — ˙ rd ee nt 


Ali rot Tt Buoy. 41 
who, in leſs Man three months, had felt che miſe- 
ries of poverty and ſlavery, had been raviſhed almoſt 
every day, had beheld her motheycut into four quar- 
ters, bad experienced the ed 
war, and now was dying of the plague in Algiers. 
1 dd not however die of it ; but my eunuck And 
the Dey, nen ene een Y 


5. 


— — of this terrible peftilence 
was over, a ſale was made of the Dey's flaves; I 
was purchaſed by a merchant, and carried to Tu- 
nis: this man ſold me to another merchant, ' who 
fold me again to another at Tripoli ; from Tripoli I 
was ſold to Alexandria; from Alezandria to Smyrna; 
and from Smyrna to Conſtantinople. At length 1 
decame the property of an aga of the janiſſaties, 
who was ſoon ordered away to the OE 4 
Aſoph, then beſicged by the, Ruflans. 

The aya; being a man 3 took wy 
whale" ane with Kim God lodged mim a 
ſmall fort on the Palus Matis, guarded by two 
black eunuchs and twenty ſoldiers. The Turks 
killed a great number of the Rufans, but the latter 
had them revenge Aſoph was taken by ſtorm, 
and the inhabitants, without any diſtiaction of 
age or ſex, were all put to the ſword. There re« 
mained only our little fort, and the enemy wanted 
10 ſtarve us out. The twenty janiflaries had ſworn 
they would never ſurrender. Being reduced to che 
extremity of famipe, they found themſelves under 
0 Ez. a ne- 


42 CANDID: Or, 

a neceſſity of eating our two eunuchs, for fear of 
violating their oath. And in the courſe of a few 
days, they reſolved alſo to devour the women. 
We had a very pious and humane iman, who 
preached an excellent ſermon, exhorting them not 
to kill us all at once ; © only cut off one buttock of 
4 of als nies eee 
extremely well; if you muſt go to it again, there 
„vill be the ſame entertainment a few days hence ; 
«4 heaven will accept of. ſo charitable an action, 
6c and ſend you relief. 

Being a man of grenteloquence, heperſandat them; 
ne de terrible operation. The iman 
applied the ſame balſam to us, as he does to chil- 
Gen aſter Ercumciion; and we were all in a very 
dangerous way. 

| No ſooger-kad the janiflaties Snithed. their repatt 
with which we had ſupplied them, than the Ruſſians 
attacked them in/ flat-bottomed boats, and not one 
janiffary eſcaped. The Ruſſians had no regard 
to the condition in which we were: but as 
there are Prench ſurgeons in all parts of the world, 


mM 1 


% 
þ 
" RE tw * "  2vT” YT ERECT 


a very {kilful operator of that nation took us under 
his care, and cured us; and as long as I live I ſhall 
remember, that as ſoon as my wounds were healed 
be made love to me. He bid us all have a good 
heart, telling us, that the like had happened in ma- 
ny _ and that it was ox th to the laws of 
War. | 4 5. 


1 — &@ ©þ ww kw ww 


e 
* 


, " * . 
. ; * 

— | As 

* — 


dn 1 ee 


ALL ror! The BIST. 49 
they were obliged to ſet. out for Moſcow, For my part, 
gardener, and gave me twenty laſhes a day. But 
this nobleman. having in two years time been broke 
upon the wheel along with thirty more boiards,' for 
ſome broils at court, I took advantage of this 
event, and made my eſcape. Aſter traverſing all 
Ruſia, I was a long time an inholder's ſervant at 
Riga, the ſame at Roſtock, Wiſmar, Leipſick, Caſ- 
ſel, Utrecht, Leyden, the Hague, and Rotterdam. 
I have grown old in miſery and diſgrace, having only 
one half of my poſteriors, and always remembering - 
I was a pope's daughter. A hundred times was 1 
upon the point of killing myſelf ;_ but till: I was 
fond of life. This ridiculous weakneſs is perhaps one 
of the moſt dangerous principles implanted in our na- 
ture. For what can be more abſurd, than to perſiſt 


_in carrying a burden, of which we would willingly 


be eaſed? to deteſt, and yet to ſtrive to preſerve our 
exiſtence? In a word, to careſs the ſerpent that de- 
vours us, till he has gnawed our very entrails ? 

In the different countries which it has beea my 
fate to traverſe, and the numerous inns where I 
have been ſervant, I have taken notice of a vaſt 
number of people, who held their own exiſtence in 
abhorrence, and yet I never knew of more than 
eight, who put an end to their miſery, by laying vio- 
lent hands on themſelves; viz. three negroes, four 
Engliſhmeo, and a German profeſſor, named Robek. 
My 


4 AN DID. Or; 

My laſt ſcene was being ſervant to the Jew, Don Iſſa- 
I have attached myſelf to you, from the firſt moment, 
and have been much more affected with your mizfor- 
tunes than with my own,” I ſhould never have 
troubled you with the narrative of my ſufferings, if 
you had not incited me to it, and if it was not 
cuſtomary to tell ſtories on board a ſhip, in order to 
| paſs away the time. In ſhort, miſs Cunegund, 1 
have a good deal of experience, and knowledge' of 
the world; therefore I adviſe you to divert yourſelf, 
and prevail upon each paſſenger to tell his ſtory ; 
and if there is one of them all that has not curſed | 
his ſtars many a time, that has not frequently looked | 
upon himſelf as the unhappieſt of mortals, I give 
eee ORIG ere ä 


end care been Ab 
CHAP. xIII. 


Hou Candid aut obliged to leave his fair 22 
aud the old woman. 1 


F 
„ 


＋ H E beautiful Cunegund, having heat the 
narrative of the old woman's adventures, paid 
her all the civilities due to a perfon of her rank and 
merit. She likewiſe accepted the propoſal, and en- 
gaged all the paſſengers to relate their adventures one 
after another; and then both Candid and ſhe allowed, 
Ku. che old woman was = the right. It is rear iy. 
| ſaid 


„ % v ER 


_ ALL fork Tur BEST. Js 
faid Candid, that the fage Pangloſs was hanged; with- 


out p̃recedent, at an Auto. da- fe; he would have told 


us moſt amazing things in regard to the natural and 
moral evils that overſpread the earth and ſea, and I 
ſhould have courage enough to preſums to offer —_ 
—ů with all due reſpect. | 
While each paſſenger was e aun 
the ſhip made her way, and-they landed at Buenos- 
Ayres. Cunegund, captain Candid, - and the old 
woman, waited on the governor, Don Fernando 
d'Ibara, y Figueora, y Maſcarenes, y Lampourdos, 
y Souza. This nobleman had a ſtatelineſs becoming 
a perſon dignified with ſuch a ſtring of names, He 
ſpoke with ſo noble à diſdain, carried” his noſe ſo 
lofty, - trained his voice to ſuch a pitch; aſſumed fo 
imperious an air, and ſtalked: with ſuch intolerable 
pride, that thoſe who. ſaluted him were ſtrongly: in- 
clined to give him a good drubbing. He was immode- 
rately fond of women, and Cunegund appeared in his 
eye the choiceſt morſe} he had ever beheld. The firſt 
thing he did, was to aſk whether ſhe was not the rap» 
tain's wife. The manner in which he aſked the queſtion 
alarmed. Candid ; he durſt not ſay ſhe was his wife, 
becauſe indeed ſhe was not; neither durſt he fay ſhe 
was his fiſter, becauſe. it was not-ſo : and: though 
this lye might have been of ſervice to him, and do 
no hurt to any body, ſtill he was too ingenuous to be- 
tray the truth. Miſs Cunegund, ſaid he, is to do me 


| the hononr to marry me, and we beſeech your excel- 


lency to grace our nuptials with your preſence. - - 
1135 - 5 Don 
Py 


— 


46 CANDID: Or, | 
Don Fernando d'Ibara, y Figueora, y Maſcarenes, 
y Lampourdos, y Souza, turning up his whiſkers, put 
on an ill natured grin, and ordered captain Can- 
did to go and review his company. Candid obeyed, 
and the governor remained alone with miſs Cune- 
gund. Immediately he declared his paſſion, pro- 
telting he would marry her the next day in the face 
of the church, or otherwiſe, juſt as ſhould be agree- 
able to a perſon of her charms. Cunegund aſked a 
EO WARREN 
woman, and to take her reſolution. _ — 
5 The old woman ſpoke thus to Cunegund : Ki, 
you have ſeventy- tuo quarterings in your arms, 
and not one fanthing in your - pocket : it is now 
in your power to be wife to the greateſt lord in 
America, who. has beſides. a very clever pair of 
whiſkers. And what occafion has fuch a one as 
you to pique herſelf upon inviolable fidelity ? You 
| have been-rayiſhed by Balgarians ; a Jew and an in- 
quiſtor: have enjoyed your favours. Misfortunes are 
à very gnod plea. I own, that if I was in your 
place, I ſhould have no ſeruple to marry the go- 
veruor, and to make the captain's fortune. While 
the old woman was thus giving her advice, with all 
the prudence that can be expected from age and 
experience, behold à ſloop arrives from Spain, on 
board of which — Me Ora 
and fes how it Bappened. 2 
Ta eld woman bad rightly gueſled, A wn 
1 purloined Cunegund's money and 
jewels 


* = 


* * 


- 


ALL FOR THE BESs v. 47 
jewels in the town, of Badajax, when ſhe and Can- 
did were making their eſcape. The friar offered 
ſome of the diamonds to fale to a jeweller; the jew- 
eller knew them to be the grand inquiſitor's, The 
friar,/ before he was hanged, ' confeſſed the theft: 
he likewiſe deſcribed the perſons he had ſtole them 
diz, where a veſſel was immediately gat ready, and 
ſent in purſuit of them and the veſſel had now reach. 
ed the port of Buenos-Ayres. : A report was ſpread, 
that an Alcalde was going to land, and that he was in 
purſuit of the murderers of my lord the grand inqui- 
was to be done. Von cannot run away, faid ſhe to 
Cunegund; but you have nothing to fear, for it was 
not you that killed my lord; beſides, as the gover- 
nor is in love with you; he will not ſuffer you to be ill 
treated; therefore dont ſtir. Then hurrying away 
to Candid, Be gone, ſaid ſhe, from hence, or in 
an hour you will be burnt alive; there was not a 
moment to loſe; but how could he part from Cune- 
und, and where could he fly for ſhelter ? — 


4 
1 * 1 j 
1 X > * 
* 
"I. a 
* 
174 
F HS > 4 
„ e , - 
© F 4 1 8 . 9 
"> P * * * ; 


4 CAN DID. or, 


8 C HA P. XIV. ; 
How Candid and Cacambo, « were toll Ji 
of Paraguay. ate ar 


AND 1D bad brought ſuch n valet with him 
from Cadiz, as one often meets with on the 
coaſts. of Spain, and in the American colonies.” He 
vas the fourth part of a/Spaniard, of a mongrel breed, 
and born in Tucuman: he had ſucceſſively gone thro? 
the profeſſions of finging-boy, ſexton, ſailor, monk, 
pedlar, ſoldier, and lacquey. His name was Caeambo, 
and he loved his maſter, becauſe his maſter was a very 
good ſort of a man. He got the two Andaluſian horſes 
ſaddled with all expedition. Come, maſter, let us 
follow the old woman's advice, let us ſet off, and 
make what haſte we can, without ever looking be- 
hind us. Candid dropped a few tears; O my dear 
Cunegund l muſt I leave you juſt at a time when the 
governor was going to ſee us married? Cune- 
gund, what will become of you, in this remote 
part of the world ? She will do as well as ſhe can, 
ſaid Cacambo ; che women are never at « loſs. God 
provides for every body ; let's be gone. "Whither 
art thou carrying me ? where art thou going? 
what ſhall we do without Cunegund ? ſaid Candid. 
By St. James of Compoſtela, anſwered Cacambo, you 
was going to fight againſt the Jeſuits; now let's go 
and fight for them; I know the road perfectly well; 
I'll conduct you to their kingdom; they will be 
Charmed to haye a Caper, that underſtands the 
| Bulgarian 


ALL FOR THE BIS r. 49 
Bulgarian exerciſe; you will certainly make a prodi- 
gious fortune; if we cannot find our account in one 
world, we ſhall in another. It is a great pleaſure to ſee 
variety of objects, and to perform new exploits. 

Then you have been in Paraguay? ſaid Candid. 
Ay ſure, anſwered Cacambo, I was a ſcout of the 
college of the Aſſumption, and am acquainted with the 
government of the good fathers, as well as I am with 
the fireets of Cadiz, This government is an admira- 
ble thing. The kingdom is at preſent upwards of three. 
hundred miles in diameter, and divided into thirty pro- 
vinces: there the fathers are maſters of every thing; the 
people have nothing: it is the maſter. piece of juſtice 
and reaſon. For my part, I ſee nothiog ſo divine 
as the good fathers, who wage war in this part of 
the world againſt the kings of Spain and Portugal, at 
the ſame time that they hear the confeſſions of thoſe 
princes in Europe; who kill Spaniards in America, 
and ſend them to heaven at Madrid: this pleaſes me 
above all things; let us puſh forward, you are going 
to be the happieſt of mortals. What pleaſure will ic 
be to thoſe fathers, to hear that a captain who 
knows the Bulgarian exerciſe, i is come -to offer his 
ſervice to the ſociety |! 

As ſoon as they reached the firſt barrier, Cacambo 
told the. advanced guard, that a captain wanted to 
ſpeak with my lord the commandant. Notice was gi- 
ven to the main-guard: and immediately a Paraguay- 
an officer ran and laid himſelf at the feet of the com- 
mandant, to impart this news to him. Candid and Ca- 

F cambe 


50 c 'X N'D I'D. Or 


cambo w were re immediately Uiſarmed, and their two An- 
daluſian horſes were ſeized. The ſtrangers were intro- 
duced between two files of muſqueteers ; the comman- 
dant was at the further end, with athree-cornered-cap 
on his head, his gown. tucked up, a ſword by his fide, 
and a {pontoon in his hand. He beckoned, and 
Rraitway the two new gentry were encompaſſed by 
four- and twenty Toldiers. A ſerjeant told them they 
muſt wait, that the commandant could not ſpeak to 
them, and that the revereud father provincial does not 
| ſuffer any Spaniard to open his mouth but in his 
preſence, or to ſtay above three hours in the pro- 
vince. And where is the reverend father provincial ? 
ſaid Cacambo: he is upon the parade juft after cele- 
brating maſs, anſwered the ſerjeant, and you can- 
not kiſs his ſpurs till three hours hence. However, 
| Taid Cacambo, the captain is not a Spaniard, but a 
German ; he b ready to periſh wich hunger as well 
as myſelE: cannot we have ſomething for breakfaſt, 
while we wait for his reverence? _ 

The ſerjeant went immediately to acquaint the 
commandant with what he had heard. God be 
praiſed, ſaid the reverend commandant ; ſince he is 
a German, I may ſpeak to him ; take him to my 
arbour. No ſooner ſaid, than Candid was conducted 
to a beautiful pavilion, adorned with a colonade of 
green marble intermixed with yellow, and with an in- 
tertexture of vines, abounding with parrots, humming- 
birds, fly-birds, Guiney-hens, and all other ſorts that 
were curious, An excellent — was provided in 

veſſels 


ba 


ALL- FOR, THE Busr, oe 


veſſels of gold z, and while the Paraguayans were 
eating Indian corn. out of wooden diſhes, in the' open 
fields, and expoſed to the heat of the ſun, the reve. 
rend father commandant entered the arbour. 

He was a very habdſome young man, with a 
full viſage,. fair, and freſh coloured ; he had an 
arched eye-brow,. A lily, exe, red ears, vermi- 
lion lips, a bold air, but ſuch à boldneſs, 'as 
neither reſembled that of a Spaniard, nor of a Jeſuit, 
Candid and Cacambo had their arms reſtored, together 
with the two Andaluſian horſes; Cacambo gave 
them ſome oats. to eat juſt by the arbour, having an 
eye upon them all the while for fear of a forprize. 

Candid began with kiffing the hem of the com- 
mandant's robe, and they ſat down to table. Are you 
then a German? ſaid the Jeſuit to him in that lau- 
guage. Ves, reverend. father, anſwered Candid, A 
they pronounced theſe words, they looked at each 
other with great amazement, and with ſuch an emotion 
as they. could not conceal, And from what part of 
Germany d do you come ? ſaid the Jeſuit. Tam f from the 
dirty province of Weſtphalia, anſwered Candid: Iwas 
born in the caſtle of Thunder-ten-troffckh, © O teas 
vens! is it poſlible! cried the commandant. What 
a miracle! cried Candid. Is it really you? ſaid the 
commandant. It is not poſſible, ſaid Candid. On 
this they both retired backwards; then embraced, and 
wept abundantly. What ! is it you, my reverend father? 
You, the brother of the fair Cunegund ! you, that was 
flain by the Bulgarians! you, the baron's ſon! you, 


F 2 , a Je- 


4 1 2 


* * 


5 CANDID: Or, 


a Jefuit in Paraguay ! I muſt confeſs this is a ſtrange 
world that we live in. 0 Pangloſs! Pangloſs! 
Pangloſs! how glad you would be, if you had not 
been, hanged ! © 
The commandant diſmiſſed 6. negro ſlaves, and 
the Paraguayans, who preſented them with liquors 
in cryſtal goblets. He thanked God and St. Igna - 
tius a thouſand times; he claſped Candid in his 
arms ; and their faces were all bathed with tears, 
You will be more ſurprized, more affected, and 
tranſported, ſaid Candid, when I tell you that 
miſs Cunegund your fiſter, whoſe belly you imagin- 
ed to have been ripped open, is in perfect health, 
Where! In your neighbourhood, with the go- 
vernor of Buenos-Ayres,; and I was going to fight 
againſt, you. Every word they uttered, during this 
long converſation, was productive of aſtoniſhment. 
Their ſouls fluttered on their tongues, liſtened in their 
ears, and ſparkled in their eyes. As they were Ger- 
mans, they. ſat a good while at table, waiting for 
the reverend father provincial, and the commandant 
10 to his dear Candid as follows. 


i * . 1 s Foo 7 <5 5Y. th 


CHAP. 


5 — 8 T 4 a N N 4 _—_— Fn. : . i 9 2 11 
- * , * F s 3 
1 o mV * , 


— 


5 FOR THE. bur, ; E 


* * 


2 Hog t 2 el 
e hone + HA p. n 
How Con led the gin Cpl 


1 3 55 1.3 
"HE 8 wn didn de hind 
motherbarbarouſly Killed and my fiſter raviſhed, 

will always be preſent to my memory. When the Rul- 

garians retired, my dear ſiſter could not be found 3 

but the ſlaughtered bodies of my father, mother, 

and myſelf, with two maid:ſervants, and three, lit- 
fle boys, were put in a herſ6,''to be conveyed to 

a chapel belonging to the Jeſuits, within two'leagues 

of our family ſeat. A Jeſuit ſprinkled us with fome 

holy water, which was ' confourided ſalt, and a few 
drops of it went into my eyes: the father- perceived 
that my eye-lids ſtirred a little; he put his hand up- 
on my heart, and felt it beat; upon which I had 
proper affiſtance, and at the expiration of three 

weeks I recovered.” You know, my dear Can- 

did, I was very handſome; but I grem much hand- 

ſomer, and the reverend father Didrie, ſaperior of that 

houſe, took a great liking to mez he gave me the 

habit of the order, and ſome years afterwards: I 


was ſent. to Rome. Our general had great need of 


new levies of young German Jeſuits. The ſovereigns of 
Paraguay admit of as few- Spaniſh Jeſuits as poſſible; 
they prefer thoſe of other nations, as being more 
fubordinate to their commands. The reverend father 


C as a' proper perſon, to 
F 3 labour 


* 
K Ok he 5 19: 1 
labour in this vineyard. We. ſet out upon our 
miſſion, a Polander, à Tyroleſe, and myſelf. Up- 


on my arrival I was honouted with a fubdea- 
conſhip, and a lieutenancy. Now I am colonel 


and prieſt. We ſnall giye a warm reception to the 


king of Spain's troops; I will anſwer for it, that 
they ſhall be excommunicated, and well banged. 
Providence has ſent you hither to our aſſiſtance. But 
is it true that my dear, filter Cunegund is in the 
neighbourhood, - with the governor of Buenos- 
Ayres ? Candid! ſwore. that nothing could be more 
tue: and the tears deen e een, down. 
their cheeks, 16110 2 11 

The baron could: not refrain y ice Forge Ig 
did; be called him his brother, his ſaviour.. Per- 
haps, ſaid he, we ſhall be able, my dear Candid, 
to take the town ſword in hand, and to recover my 
iſter Cunegund. That is all I want, ſaid Candid; 
for I intended to marry her, and. I ftill hope I ſhall 
be able to effect it. Thou infolent fellow | replied 


"the baron, wodldſt thou have the aſſurance to marry, 


my filter, who can ſhew ſeventy-two quarterings in 
ber coat of arms] I find thou haſt the moſt con- 
ſummate effrontery to dare to mention ſo preſump- 
tuous a deſign ! Candid, thunder-ſtruck at this 


ſpeech, ; made anfwer; Reverend father, all the 
quarterings in the world ſignify not a ſtraw ; I reſ- 
cued your fiſter out of the hands of a Jew,: and an 
inquiſitor; ſhe has great obligations to me, and 


* 


5 „ e reer , 


„ „ 8 l 1 „ t wa, 


mY 
* 
4 * 


ALL ror ru. Wick 55 


is op EG of having me for ber huſband: maſter 
Pangloſs always told me, that mankind* are by na- 
ture equal ;. I aſſure you therefore I will marry her, 
Say you ſo? we ſhall ſee, thou villain'! faid the 
Jeſuit baron Thunder-ten tronckh ; and that in- 
ſtant he ſtruck him acroſs the face with the 
flat fide of his ſword. Candid in an inſtant draws; 
out his rapier, and plunges it up to the hilt in, 
the Jeſuit's body; but in pulling it out, reeking 
hot, he burſt into tears: Good God! ſaid hey 
I have killed my old maſter, my friend, my bro- 
ther-i in-law ; I am the beſt natured creature in the 
world, and yet I have already killed three men 3 
and out of theſe three, two were prieſts. 

As Cacambo flood ſentry near the arbour, he in- 
ſtantly ran up. We have nothing more for it than 
to ſell our lives as dear as we can, ſays his maſter to 
him; there will be people preſently coming into the 
arbour; ſo that we muſt die ſword in hand. Cacam- 
bo having been in a great many ſcrapes in his 
life time, did not loſe his preſence of mind, but 
took the baron's jeſuitical habit, and put it on Can. 
did, then gave him thedead man's three cornered cap, 
and made him mount on horſeback. All this was done 
in the twinkling of an eye. Let us gallop faſt, my 
maſter, every body will take you for a Jeſuit, going to 
give directions to your men, and we ſhall have paſſed 
the frontiers before they will be able to overtake 


us. * flew as he ſpoke theſe words, crying out 
aloud 


dou Spit ak e 
verend father colonel. .. 


CO OOTY 


CHAP. "OE: 


- Ubventores of the two ts. aui 15 tabs girls, 
tao monkeys, end the ſavages called Orrillon,, 


ANDID and his valet had got beyond the 


the German Jeſuit was dead, The wary Cacambo 
had taken care to fill his wallet with bread, choco- 
late, ſome ham, fruit, and a few bottles of wine. 
With their Andalufian horſes they penetrated into a 
ſtrange country, where they perceived no beaten track. 
At length they came to a beautiful meadow, inter- 
ſected with purling rills. Here our two adventurers fed 
their horſes. Cacambo propoſed to his maſter to take 
ſome nouriſhment, and he ſet him an example. How 
can you aſk me to feaſt upon ham, ſajd Candid, af- 
ter killing the baron's ſon, and being doomed never 
more to ſee the beautiful Cunegund ? What will it 
avail me to ſpin out my wretched days, and drag 
them far from her in remorſe and deſpair? 4 What 
will the journal of Trevoux ſay ? 

While he was thus lamenting his fate, he went on 
eating, The ſun had reached the horizon, when 
the two wanderers heard ſome cries, which. ſeemed 


barrier, before it was known in the camp that 


ev _ 


FE . ˙ © „. . > _-a 


— 


oe, 00. wo = ee 


La 


OR SD = 5=—= 0 5 Þ 


ALL FOR THE BRESr. 57 
to be a female voice. They could not tell whether 0 
they were cries of grief or joy, but immediately FM 
they ſtarted up, with that inquietude and alarm, 
which every ſhadow is apt to raife'in the minds of 
perfons in an unknown country. The noiſe was 
made by two naked girts, who tripped along 
the mead, while two monkeys were patſuing them 
doſe, and biting their buttocks. Candid was moved 
with pity : he had learned to fire a gun in the Bulga- 
rian ſervice; and he was fo clever at it, that he could 
hit a filbert in a hedge without touching a leaf of the 
tree, He takes up his double barrel Spaniſh fufil, 
lets it off, and kills the two monkeys. God be praiſed, 
my dear Cacambo, I have reſcued thoſe two poor crea- 
tures from a moſt peritous fituation': if I have com- 
mitted a fin in killing an inquifitor and a Jeſuit, I 
have made ample amends by ſaving the Hives of theſe 
girls. Perhaps they are young ladies of family ; and 
this adventure may procure 1 us * n in 
this country. 
He was going on at this rate, but ſtopped ſhort wow 
he ſaw the two girls diſſolved in tears over the dead 
bodies of the monkies, embracing them in the tender- 
eſt manner, and rending the air with the moſt diſmal 
lamentations. Little did I expect to ſee ſuch good 
nature, ſays he then to Cacambo; who made anſwer, 
Maſter, you have made a fine piece of work on't ; you 
have flain the ſweethearts of thoſe two young ladies, 
The ſweethearts! is it poſſible! you are jeſting, Ca- 
cambo z I can never believe it, Dear maſter, replied 
Cacambo, 


r Er . 


„ 


x 


58 SAN DID: Or, 


Cacamboz; yon are ſurprized at every thing; why 
ſhould you thin it ſo ſtrange, that in ſome countries 
there are monkeys which inſinuate themſelves into 


the good graces of the ladies; they are the fourth 


part of a. man, as I am the fourth part of a 
Spaniard. Alas ! replied Candid, I remember to 
have heard maſter Pangloſs ſay, that the like acci- 
dents uſed to happen formerly: that theſe com- 
mixtures are productive of Centaurs, Fauns, and 


Satyrs; and that many of the ancients had ſeen. ſuch 


monſters; but L looked upon the whole as fabulous. 
Now you are convinced, ſaid Cacambo, that it is 
very true; and you ſee what uſe is made of thoſe 
creatures, by. perſons that have not had a proper 
education; all I am afraid 3 that thoſe ladies 
with play yon ſome ugly trick 
Theſe reflections were well founded ; 60 what Can- 
Ave prevailed: upon to quit the mead, and to 
- Pierce. into a thicket. There he and Cacambo ſup- 
ped; and after curfing the Portugueſe inquiſitor, 
the governor. of Buenos-Ayres, and the baron, they 
fell aſleep. on the hare ground. When they awaked 
in the morning, they could neither ſtir nor move; 
for the Oꝛeillons, who inhabit that country, and to 
whom the two ladies had given information of theſe 
ſtrangers, had. bound them with cords made of the 
bark of trees. They were encompaſſed by fifty 
naked: Oreillons, armed with. bows and arrows, with 
clubs, and: hatchets of flint: ſome were making 
. cauldron boil; athers were preparing * 
« A 


„» . Date r 


"I ay. oo and. PII yy 0 2 1 


F : A So EI I Ta MESS 28 Rin 


92 


* 


E6b . .. . IS ip 


b 


ALL ror THE BZT. 59 
6s A Jeſuit! a Jeſuit! we ſhall be revenged, -cried 
« they; we ſhall have excellent cheer; let us est 
. the Jeſuit, let us eat him up?” | 

I told you, maſter, cried Cacambo in a moſt 
ſorrowful tone, that thoſe two girls would-play-you 
ſome ugly trick. Candid ſeeing the eauldron and 
the ſpits, cried out, I fancy we are going to be ei. 
ther roaſted or boiled. Ah! what would maſter 
Pangloſs ſay, were he to ſee how pure nature is 
formed? Every thing is right; be it ſo: but 1 
own it is very hard to be bereft of dear miſs Cune- 
gund, and to be put upon a ſpit by the barbarous 
Oreillons. Cacambo had always his wits about him; 
do not deſpair, ſaid he to the diſconſolate Candid, 
I underſtand a little of the jargon of theſe people; 
and I will ſpeak to them. Beſure, ſaid Candid, yon 


make them ſenſible of the horrid barbarity of boiling 


human creatures, and how 97 711 ſuch a 1227775 
is to Chriſtianity. | 
* Gentlemen, ſaid Carnie; you ben you are 
Zoing to feaſt upon a Jeſuit ; it is all very well; no- 
thing more juſt than thus to treat your enemies. 
Indeed the law of nature teaches us to kill our 
neighbour, and ſuch is the practice all over the 
world, If we do not make uſe of the ſame privi- 
lege, it is becauſe we have much better fare than 
human fleſh: but for your part, you have not ſuch 
reſources as we; and certainly it is much -better to 
devour your enemies, than to refign them to tbe 
crows. 3 gentlemen, ſurely you would not 
chuſe 


ip Or, 


chuſe to eat your friends. You think you are going to 
ſpit a Jeſuit, whereas he is your friend and defender ; 
you are going to roaſt the very man who has been 
fighting againſt your enemies. In regard to myſelf, 
Lam your countryman ; that gentleman is my ma- 
ger; and, far from being a Jeſuit, he has juſt 
now killed one of that order, whoſe ſpoils he wears; 
and thence comes your miſtake. To convince you 
of the truth of what I have affirmed, take his ha- 
bit, and carry it to the firſt barrier of the Jeſuits 
kingdom, and inform yourſelves, whether my ma- 
ſter did not kill a Jeſuit officer. No great time is 
requiſite for this, and you may till feaſt upon our 
bodies, if you find I have deceived you. But if I 
have apprized you of the truth, you are too well ac- 
quainted with the principles of public law, humanity, 
and juſtice, not to uſe us courteouſſy. 

The Oreillons finding this ſpeech very reaſonable, 
deputed two of their principal people with all ex- 
pedition to inquire into the truth of the matter 
who executed their commiſſion like men of ſenſe, 
and ſoon returned with good news. They untied 
them both, ſhewed them all forts of civilities, of- 
fered them girls, gave them refreſhments, and re- 
conducted them to the confines of their country, 
proviaiming with joy, . He is no Jeſuit, he is no 
+« Jeſuit.” 

Candid could not help being ſurprized at the cauſe 
of his deliverance. What ſort of people, ſaid he, 
are theſe? how ſtrange their manners! if I had 

not 


a a4 eb the. 3 a> ao am 


** 


Al F OR, THE, Br zr. 6. | 
not been ſo lucky as.to run miſs Canegand s brother 
through the body, 1 thotld” have been devôured 
without redemption. But after all, pure nature is 
an excellent thing; ſince thoſe people, inſtead of 
feaſting upon my fleſh, ſhewed me a thouſand civili- 
ties, when * knew [ was Hot RIS in g 


f * 
£5 9498 
1 


ep 1 
n 8 


wo 


. 5 
1 


eee eee e en een 

Candid and his valet, arrive at . itry of lars, 
aud what they Jaw . . 6 44 

— * they had 2 reached 'the HleHs of the 


Oreillons; ; You ſee, aid Cacambo to Can- 
did, this hemiſphere i is. not a pin better than the 


rope 4 ſhorteſt way ſible.” "How go back? fad 
Candid; and where ſhall we go? to my e own cgen- 
try? the Bulgarians and the. Abares are laying it 
waſte with fire and ſword: de Portugal? there 1 ſhall 
be burnt; and if we abide here, we are every mo- 
ment in danger of being ſpitted. But how can T re- 
ſolve to quit a part of the world, where my dear | 
Cunegund reſides ? _ 3 

Let us turn towar s "Cayenne, laid Catambo; 
there we ſhall find ſome Frenchmen, for you know 
they ramble over all the parts © of the globe; perhaps 
they will aſſiſt us; ; and God will have pity on our 
diſtreſs, 


4 


Tas 7 J 9 
if of 1 * 1 * 3 * PR 4 4 4 ” 4 
Sf 
— a % 


{ 


6.  "EANDTDP: of, 


"ft was not fo egy te ge to Cayce; they knew 
eatery nearly whereabouts it lay, but mountains, ri- 
vers, a. robbers, ſavages, vbſtruged their 


paſſage. Their hdrſes were killed with fatigue, and 
their proviſions conſumed, They fed a whole month 
upon wild fruit, till at length they came to a little ri- 
ver hned with. cocoa- trees, which raiſed their ſpirits, 
and ſupplied (Hein with bourimtment. 
Cacambo, who was as good a-counſellor as the old 
woman, ſaid to Candid ; You ſee we are able to hold 
out no longer; we have travelled enough on foot; I 
ſpy an empty canoe near the river-fide ; let us fill it 
with Cocoa-nuts, and get into it ; the ſtream will carry 
us down, for a river ways leads to ſome inhabited 
place, In caſe. we do not find thirigs to our mind, 
at leaſt we ſhall meet with ſomething new. With all 
my heart, ſaid Candid, let. us recommend ourſelves 
to Providence. 6 T 
They rowed a few babe devi the river, i 
banks of which were in ſome places flowery, i in others 
barren ; in ſome parts level, in "others "Reep and 
rocky. The ſtream widened as ' they advanced; till 
at length it ran under che arch of frightful rocks, 
which reached as high as the Clouds, Under 
this arch the two travellers had the courage 
to commit themſelves to 1 the Rream. The river con- 
tracting itſelf. in this part, drove them along with 
a dreadful noiſe and rapidity. . At the end of four- 
and-twenty hours they ſaw day-light again; but 
their canoe was daſhed to pieces againſt the rocks. 
They 


- oe © = wh as © wm wW_ oO a= _ . vu tw ts AmA. oa x 


bt 
 —_— Fam, a 1 a. ti 1 dt -(l 1 


Auirop 7 THE BEST, 63 
They were obliged to creep 8 rocks the ſpace 
of a league, till at length they diſcovered a ſpacivus 
plain, bounded by inacceſſible ' mountains. Tlle 
country, was cultivated as much for pleaſure, as for 
the necefſaries of life. Tue uſeful” and the agreea- 
ble were, equally blended.” The roads were cover- 
ed, or rather adorned, with carriages. formed /of 
glittering materials, in which were men and women 
of ſurprizing beauty, drawn with great rapidity by 
red ſheep of a very large ſize, which for fleetneſs 
ſarpalſed the fineſt courſers of Ae W or 
Mequinez. 

Here is a country, however, ald Candid, key 
able to Weſtphalia, He landed with Cacambo near 
the firſt village they ſaw; and at the entrance there- 
of, ſome children, dreſſed in tattered brocades, were 
playing » at  quoits. Our two ſtrangers from the other 
hemjſphere, amuſed themſelves greatly with this fight, 
The quoits were large round pieces, yellow, red, 
and green, which caſt a furprizing jure, "The tra- 
vellers picked à few of them off che ground; and 
they proved to be either gold, emeralds, or rubies, the 
leaſt of which would have been the greateſt ornament 
to the Mogul's imperial crown, Without doubt, 
{aid Cacambo, theſe children muſt he the king's 
ſons, that. are playing at quoits, Juſt as he _ 
theſe words, the ſchoolmaſter of the vitlage 
aud called them to ſchool. There, ua e Candid, 1 
the n of the ous! family. ej 2 7 


4 , 
1 © 5 * , 
* Wy On 
- $4 þ a * « * $4. 4 * wad SFTP TY "# . 
7 . 


> 
4 
* 


64 | CANDID: Or, 


The little urchins immediately quitted their divert. 
| en, leaving the quoits on the ground, wi th all their 
other play- things. Candid gathers them up, runs to the 
maſter, and preſents them to him in a moſt humble 
manner, giving him to underſtand by ſigns, that their 
royal highneſſes had forgot their gold and their jew- 
els. The {choolmaſter ſmiling, flung them upon che 
ground; then looking at Candid with a great dear 
5 ſurprize, de went about his buſineſs. n 
Tbe travellers took care however to gather up 
the gold, the rubies, and the emeralds. Where are ge 
we? cried Candid: the king's children in ths WM .. 
country, muſt haye an excellent education, lince they an 
are taugbt to deſpiſe gold and precious ſtones. Ca- by 
- Campbo was as much ſurprized, as Candid, They then C: 
drew near to the firſt houſe in the village, which was th. 
built after the manner of an European palace. A mul- 90 
titude of people ſtood crowding at the door, and there bu 
| was 4 much greater number in the houſe, Their an 
, cars were delighted with moſt agreeable muſic; ; and 5 — 
a refreſhing ſmell came from the kitchen, Cacambo r 
went up to the door, and heard they were talking 
Peruvian, which was his mother tongue; for it is wi 
well known, that Cacambo was born in a village of hi 
Tucuman, where no other language is ſpoke, I will yo 
be your interpreter here, ſaid he to Candid; let us no 
go in; this is 2 public-houſe. "uh 4 
Immediately two waiters and two girls, dreſſed | in fl @ 
cloth of gold, and their hair tied up with'ribbonds, I m. 
accoſt the ſtrangers, and invite them to fit down to ca 


F FE A4 0.400. 


) 
p 
3 
L 
\ 
5 
: 
r 
| 
0 
= 
5 
Ff 
ll 
5 


400 Fox. THE Bys7; 65 


the ordinary. Their dinner was four ſoups, each 


ANG with two young paroquets'; | a large diſh 


of bouille, that weighed: two hundred weight; 
wo roaſted monkeys, exquiſitely well taſted; three 
hundred * birds in one diſh, and fix hun- 
dred fly- birds in another; ertellent Tagdos de. 
licious tarts; : the Whole ved up. in difties*of rock- 
cryſtal.” The ſervants of the inn þ > nd out feveral 
liquors « drawn from the ſugar-c cane. 

Mot of the company were Aer 110 wag: | 
gbners, all extremely polite ; they aſked' Cacambo 
a few queſtions with the greateſt circumſpeRion, and 
anſwered his in a moſt obligi ging and ſatisfactoty manner. 
A foon ax dinner was over; Candid 4s Well 45 
Cacambo, thought it would be very handſome to pay 
their reckoning; by laying down two of thoſe large 
gold pieces, which they had picked off the ground; 
but the landlord and landlady burſt out a laughing, 
and held their ſides a great while, Wher the fit was 
over,, Gentlemen, ſai the landlord, it is plain you 
are rangers, a and ſuch gueſts we are not accuſtomed 
to ſee: pardon us therefore if we fell a laughing, 
when you tendered us the .common pebbles of our 
high-ways, i in diſcharge o of) your reckoning. 'To be fare, 
you have none o of the coin of this kingdom; bur it 3 Þ 
not, neceſſary to have any, maney at all to dine i in 
houſe, All the inds, which are eſtabliſhed for the ci 
veniency of commerce, are maintained by che g 

ae bere, be⸗ 
cauſe * is but 4 fe oor vil ery wher elſe, 

FE n 2 3 | "you © 


— 


8 
& Candi v. 6 
* t ee 151914 - 2:96 Heri o 2c. 
meet with a reception. ſuitable. to perſons of 
Your merit. Cacambo explained this whole diſcourſe 
of the landlord with great aſtoniſhment to C andid, 
Who was equally, aſtoniſhed to hear it. What ſort of 
a,country then, is this, ſaid they one to another, 2 
country unknown. to all the world, a country of ſo 
different a,nature from ours ? Very likely this is. the 
part of the globe, where every thing is right : or 
there muſt certainly be ſome ſuch place. And for 
all hat maſter Pangloſs could ſay, I often found 
Went, Very in! in e 11 ks | 


noble vio; 21 et Dug gig L WTF * 


KI LORIN 


45 0 1 x . xVnI. 


Ng hy 


Is I hat they K the country of Eldora, ; 


Tas 


T6yq- $7 3 


- IAC C A M. B 0 diſplayed his 8 and aſked the 
4 landlord | a great many queſtions: he made an- 


| 1 — Lam very ignorant, : and therewith contented; 


however, we have in this neighbourhood. an old man 


retired | from court, who | is the moſt, learned and moſt 
- commynicative perſon in | the kingdom, © This ſaid, 


| 'he carries acambo to the old man. Candid . 


2 . 0 


— 


ed now. uy a ſecond character, and attended his 
valet. They entered a very Plain houſe, for the door 
Was nothing but filver, and the cielings were nothing 
but gold, but wrought in | ſo elegant a taſte, As to vie 
wich the richeſt, The. _ antichamber, indeed; 'w 

only 


14 


A „ tht el. 6; 
oay ineruſted with rubies and emeralds, but the or- 
der in which every thing was s arranged, N end 
for this great ſimplicity. 

The old man received the ſtrangers on his cots, 
which Was ſtuffed” with humming' birds feathers, and 
ordered his ſervants to preſent them with liquors i in 
diamond goblets; ; after which he ſatisfied 8 N curi- 
oßty i in the following term. 

Ek I am now one hundred: td ferenty lt. 
old, and I learnt of my late father; equerry 
to the king, the amazing Tevolutions' of Peru, 
of which he had been an eye. witneſs. The kingdom 
we now inhabit, is the ancient patrimony of the In- 
cab, who quitted it very imprudently to conquer ano- 
ther part of che world, and were at ge r 
by the Spaniards: * b 

More wiſe by far were the princes of their family, 
Who remained i in their native country; they ' or 
dained, with the conſent of the whole nation, that 
none of the inhabitants ſhould ever be permitted to 
quit our little kingdom: and this has preſerved our 


Innocence and happineſs. The Spaniards have had u 


confuſed notion of this country, and called it 
EI Derads; and an Englimman, whoſe name was 
Air Walter Raleigh, came very near it about a Ref.- 
dred "years ago; but' being ſurrounded by inac- 
eeſſible rocks and precipices, we have hitherto been 
 Hhekered) from the rapaciouſneſs of European na- 


"tions, who Have an inconceivable paſſion for our 
r u nen ee ein 547 4 114 Feb 


22 il 


6 CANDLD, on 


pebbles and dirt, for the, ſake of which they would 


murder us all, to the very la man. | 

The converſation laſted ſame time, and turned 
chiefly on their form. of government, their manners, 
their women, their public diyerſtons, and the 
arts. At length Candid,  baying had always a taſte 
for-metaphyſics,, made Cacambo afk dee dere 
was any religion in the country. 

The old wan zeddening a little, aid, How can 
you aſk ſuch. a queſtion.? Do you take ug for un: 
grateful wretches 2 Cacambo humbly aſked, what Was 
the eſtabliſhed religion in Eldorado ? The old man 
reddening again, made anſwer; Can there be two 18. 
ligions ? We bave, I apprehend, t religion of the 
whole world: we worſhip God from morning till night. 
Do you worſhip but one God ? ſaid Cacambo, who 
ſtill acted as interpreter: in repreſenting Candid's 
doubts... Sure, ſaid the old man, there are not two, 
nor three, nor four. I muſt confeſs, ; the people 
of your world aſk very extraprdinary queſtions. 
Candid could not refrain from aſking the good 
old man a great many more; he wanted to know. in 
what manger they prayed to Gad in Eldorado. We 
do not pray to him at all, ſaid the reverend ſage 3 we 
peed, and we inceſſantly return him thanks, Candid 
having a curioſity to ſee ſome of their: prieſts, hid 


Cacambo ak where they were ? At which; the goed 


old man ſmiling, faig: My friends, we are all of us 
prieſts: the king and the heads of families ſing ſo- 


lemn 2 


. r 


ALL rox Thr BesT. 69 
lemn capticles of thankſgiving every morning, accom- 
panied by five or fix thouſand muſicians. What! ſays 
Cacambo, have you no monks to preach, to diſpute, 
to govern, to intrigve, and to burn people that are 
not of their opinion ? We muſt be mad, indeed, if 
that were the caſe, fays the old man! Here we are all 
of one opinion, and we know not what you 1 mean' by 
monks, During this whole diſcourſe Candid was in 
raptures, and he ſaid to himſelf; this is vaſtly- dif- 
ferent from Weſtphalia and the baron's caſtle: hed 
eur friend Pangloſs ſeen Eldorado, he would no lon- 
ger have ſaid, that the taftle of Thunder-ten -tronckk 
was the fineſt thing upon earth; there is no 1 1 
any thing without travelling mY K 

This long converſation being ended, the old man 
ordered fix ſheep to be harneſſed and put to the 
coach, and ſent twelve of his domeſties to eonduc 
the travellers to court, Excuſe me, ſaid he, if my age 
deprives me of the honour ofarnding you. The king 
will receive you in fach a manner, as you will not 
complain; and no doubt but you will make an allow 
ance for the cuſtoms of the n if 8 "things 
ſhould not be to your liking. 

"Candid and Cacambo got into yh colts) the fix 
ſheep flew, and in leſs than four hours they reached 
the king $ palace, ſituated at the further end of the 
Capital. The portal was two hundred and twenty 
fee high, and one hundred wide ; but words are 
wanting to, exprefs the materials of which it 
was built.” It is 1 materials muſt have a 
3 pro- 


— 


| the cuſtom of the country. When . they drew 


put their hands upon their heads, or behind their 


occaſions. The cuſtom, ſaid the great officer, ; is to 


6% CANDID; Or, 


prodigious ſuperiority over thoſe. Irs, . ſand, 
which we call gold and precious ſtones. _ 

Twenty beautiful damſels in waiting a rea- 
dy. to receive Candid, and Cacambo, as they 
alighted from the coach, from whence they con- 
dutted them to the bath, and clad them with robe; 
wove of the down of humming birds; after which the 
great officers of the crown, both male and female, in- 
troduced them to the king's apartment, between two 
files of muſicians, a thouſand in each, according to 


bang ou o ﬆþ* => 25:23 


near to the preſence, chamber, Cacambo aſk- 
ed. one of the great officers, in what, manner he 
ſhould pay his obeiſance to his majeſty ; whether it 
was cuſtomary. to fall upon their knees, or to, pro- 
ſtrate themſelves upon the ground; whether 


"I 


backs.; whether they licked, the duſt off the toe, 
in ſhort, what was the ceremony obſeryed-on. fuck 


embrace the king, and ta kiſs, him on each cheek, 
Candid and Cacambo accordingly threw cheraſelvey 
round his majeſty's neck, who received them as gra- 
ciouſly as it was poſſible, A politely begged 
they would ſup with him. 
In the mean time they . took, a "walk. about, the 
city, and ſaw the public ſtructures rearing their loft 
heads to the clouds 3 the market places * 
with a thouſand columna; the fountains of ſpting wa- 


ter, Wa roſe e and of N al 
from 


wan oo GS ad =f = 2 


ey” 2 


. o# wii 06. + 


ALL yor Tus Bass r. 1 
from the ſugar- cane, incefſzntly flowing into the great 
ſquares, which were paved with a kind of pretious 
ſtones, from whence iſſued a delicious fragraney like 
that of cloves and.cinnamon. Candid aſked to ſee the 
parliament, and the courts of juſtice; they told him they 
vad none; and that they were RratigerstOHhaw-faits, He 
enquired whether there were any prifons, anche wits 
told there were not. But whatfurprized him moſt, and 
gave kim che greateſt pleaſure, Was che palace of ſci- 
ences, where he faw a gallery two thbiiſend Retlong, 
and filled with natural curiofities. © © 
| After rambling about the city tte whole” afternvon, 
and ſeeing bir a thoufandth part of it, they were re- 
conduſted to the royal palace. Cxridid ſat down to 
table with his tnajefty, his valet Catambo, and feve- < 
ral tadies. Never was chere a better entertainment, 
2nd never was more wit fhewn ut table, than what 
fell from his majeſty.' Cacambd explained che king's 
Aon mots th Caridid, aud notwichſtanding they were 
tranſlated, they fill appeared to be bor mars. Of 

all hs things char ſurprised Candid, "Dix n not the 
leaſt. 

In chis koſpitable reſidence they ſpent a hole 
month; during which time Candid uſed often to ſay 
to Cacanibo, I bun, my friend, oner more, that the 
caſtle where I was born is nothing, in compariſon of 
e Place whereweare it preſent; but, after all. Cune- 
gund is not hete; and no doubt but you have ſome 
fw eetheart in Europe. If we abide here, we ſhall only 
be upon 2 footing with the teſt; whereas, if we 
9 „ 


» 
— — 

— n LY — ——— — 2 r wo bs ans 

— TS - 4 - — — — — — —— — W — — 2 . - 2 
— » ud * 
5 : — * 8 81 I * 2 : —_— ww - — 2 prog 7 = _ 

- N Ic" R ” a. 
— 5 4 Þ 2 — a ann . — 8 _— -- - *_- - 


— 4 — 


— —— 
1 E: 


4 N 
1 ' 
1 
: 
t >} 4 
4:4 
i 
i f 
1 
| P 
> i 
'Y U 
an 
i 
i 
1 
ny 
4, 


1 ine our - old wt re rien ſheep laden 
with the pebbles of Eldorado, we ſhall be richer, than 
all the kings in Europe; we ſhall have no more in- 
Auiſitors to fear, and we may ear, recover miſs Cu- 
negund, C 
This ſpeech was. 4s agrecable to Cacambo; man- 
kind are ſo fond of roving, of making a figure in 
their own country, and of boaſting of what they 
have ſeen in their travels, that the two ſtrangers re- 
ſolved to be no longer happy, but to aſk Us * 
ty's leave to quit the country. 
Jou are much to blame, ſaid the Tt am ſenſible 
that my kingdom is an inconſiderable place ; but when 
A perſon is tolerably well ſettled any where, there he 
ſhould abide. I haye. no right to detain ſtrangers 
againſt their will ; this would be a degree of 
tyranny, inconſiſtent both with our manners and 
our laws: mankind are all by nature free: 
you may whenever you pleaſe, but you will 
meet with great difficulty in paſſing | the fron- 
tiers. It is impoſſible to aſcend that rapid ri- 
ver, which runs under vaulted rocks, and on which 
you were, conveyed to Eldorado in the moſt ſur- 
prizing manner. The mountains round my king- 
.dom are ten thouſand feet high, and as ere& as 
a perpendicular; they are each above ten leagues in 
breadth, and tlie deſcent from them is all a precipice. 
However, ſince you abſolutely inſiſt upon departing, 
I ſhall give orders to my engineers to conſtruct a 
machine that will convey you very ſafe. _ When 
A 8 they 


60 


th 
ta 
h 
tl 
el 
je 
P 
K 
p 
ta 
m 


5s pSOE 8B & Ex rr =Dmoa © 


Ss & = DB Þ -. 


ALL een 178 
they | ſhall have conducted yout the back of the moun- 
tains, vobody can atte | you farther; for my ſabjedts 
have made, a yow ne er to quit the kingdom, ant 
they are too wiſe to break it. Ak me whatever 
elſe you "pleaſe. "We. deſire nothing of your ma- 
jeſty, ſaid Cacambo, but a few ſheep, laden with 
proviſions, pebbles, and this country clay. The 
pleaſure' you Europeans find in our yellow clay ; but 
take as much of jt as you have, a mind to, = 


much good may it do you. 


Hereupon he gave direQians that his AEM 
ſhould conſtruct à machine, to "hoiſt theſe two ex- 
traordinary men out of the kingdom. Three thou. 
ſand mathematicians; went to work, and finiſhed 
it in fifteen. days; it did not coſt above twenty mil- 
lions ſterling in the ſpecie of that country. Can- 
did and Cacambo were put into the machine, together 
with two large red ſheep bridled and ſaddled, to ride 
upon as ſoon as they got over the mountains, twenty 
ſheep of burden laden with proviſions, thirty with pre- 
ſents of the ſeveral curioſities of the country, and fifey 
with gold, diamonds, and precious ſtones, . The king 
embraced the two adventurers, very tender: 

It was a curious ſpectacle to ſee them ſet off, 
and, the ingenious manner in which they and their 
ſheep were lung over the mountains. The mathe- 
maticians, after conveying them to a place of ſafety, 
took their leave; and Candid had no other. deſire, 
no other aim, than to preſent his treaſure to miſt - 
b | HE 29724 H 3 T3242 een 240 15 Cu» 


1 „ 


3 


„ "CANDID: Of 
Canegu 3 „ 4; ſaid he, we a are "able b to pay the 
governor of Buenos-Ayres, if mils Cunegund can be 
rated. Let us move towards Cayenne, where we may 


take Thipping, and then we ſhall 2 what N 
we 13 * wah to TORR 


en Ar. Ak. 
eee them at Harig, Lee 


[Hats . wh, Mantin. | 


wn 4 


* eee eee ee Wa 
# 'Phey weredvliziced with che notion uf poſſeſ- 
Amate Wenke mas all Müs, Busspes und Afttes, 
could ſcrape together. Candid, in his raptures, cut 
©Cunegund's name oe trees. The ſecond day two 
of thoic iſhesp ꝓluned into wincrafs,' where they und 
their burthens were loſt; two more died of fatigue 
d few days after ; ifeven-orivipht periſhed with hun- 
ger in-a-deſert;; und/ others a fe d after tumbled 
down a preeipice. At length, after travelling a 
hundred days, only wwo Theep remained. Said Can- 
did"to-Gacambo-; y du iſee how periſhable the riches 
of this woild are; chere is nothing ſolid but virtue, 
and the happineſs Vfiſeeing Cunegund once more. I 
grant all 'you>fay, ſaid Oacambo, but We have ſtill 
Iwo ſheep remaining, wich more treaſure than the 
_ king of eee of; and I eſpy a 
town, 


* * 


r ee ee 


Arb res THE, Rave. * 


town, which 1 take to be Surinam, belonging to 
the Dutch. e, IP PE Oe 
and at the beginning of happineſs. 

As they drew near Pets PF 
firetched upon the ground, with only: half of his 
habit, that is, of his blue linen drawers;- «the: 
man had loſt his left leg and his right hand 8g 
God? faid Candid, in Dutek, what art thoa d 
there, friend, in that ſhocking condition} Iam 
ing for my maſter mynkeor Vanderdondur, the farious 
merchant, anſwered the nogros. Was it 
Vanderdendur, (aid Candid; chat ufd thee; in this 
manner? Yos, fir, ſaid the negroe, it ii thoicuſtom 
of the country. They give un u pu of linen dra] 5 
for our whole garments aden d year.” When we Work 
at the ſugar-canes, and the mill fnatches hold of a2 
finger, they cut off our hand: and when we inempt 
to run away, they cut off our legi both caſes . have 
happened to me. Tt in at this exyence of cui tht you | 
ent fugar in Europe; ' Vet when a mech fold / | 
me for ten patarvons on the cbaſt of Guinda, E 
ſaid to me, my dea child, blefs dur Feüches: des 
them for ever, they will make thes live happy thou 
haſt the honour of being the'flave of ous lords the 
whites, which is e tranny heme father 
and mother. Alas! 1 not! Whether I hure 
made their fortune; this I KO, chat they havæ not 
made mine. Doge, monkeys,” and parrots, wie 3 
Hhouſand times leſs wretched hau I. The Dutch 
5 Fethe: 


„ 
. 
9 
= 
4 de > + 2 * 

\ — er - wo 9 Oe — — — . — 4 — _ * a _ — * 2 — — — — - — = * . 

— = — 2 — — - — — — — 4 — — & 
- » > 
pa T * — by — . 1 - Y - — * — 4. — 

— 2 A . — — 2 — — —— * — — — — - —— 

— — - - & — — 22 — — * * C I > Tz: . 7 = * 


— — 2 


: — — —— 
8 r 


- — 0 — —u— — — 
. — — —̃ñ H(—H— 
— — 8 * 


— —— 
n — * 


— 


— 
—— my 
— OE REN 


. ˙ » 
a „ r 


* TA? Gor eo {1 1 * 

76 CAN DID: Or, 
Fetiches, who converted me, declare every un- 
day, chat we are all of us children of Adam, blacks 
as well as whites. I am not ſkilled in genealogies, 

but if thoſe preachers tell truth, we are all ſecond 
couſins, i Now you muſt allow me, that it is im- 
poſſible to treat 11 relations in a more barbarous 
manner... lein Al Bite f Ne r bad w 
„O Pangloſe! cried Candid, Jo eue > though of 
this horrid ſcene ; there is an end of the matter; I 
ſee L muſt xenounce your Optimiſm at laſt. What is his 
Optimiſm ? ſaid Cacambo. Alas ! ſaid Candid, it is 
the: folly. af maintaining that every thing is good, 
when it is had! He ſhed tears, looking at the: ne- 
: groc, and went weeping into Surinam. antes With To 
The firſt ching they inguire after, is, whether therd 
is ever a veſſel in the harbour, which they could ſend 
$0:Bueftos-Ayres. The very perſon to whom they ap- 
plied, Was himſelf. captain of a Spaniſh veſſel, who 
offe ſervice upon [reaſonable terms. He ap- 
pointed #6. meet them at a public houſe; whither 


55 Candid and the faithful Cacambo went with —_— two 


ſheep, and waited for his coming. 

:- Candid being extremely frank and open, cold tho 
Spaniard all his adventures, and owned to him that 
he intended to ram away with-miſs Cunegund. Take 
my:wbrd for (it then, ſaid the captain, I will nqt 
carry you $0:Buenos-Aptes ; for I ſhould be hanged, 
and ſo would you; The fair Cunegund is my lord go- 
vernor 's favoutite-miſtreſs.. Candid was thunderſtruck 


«5:21 . » $ 74 


1264 aas ae e UW ww a a 


rere 


L 


Art row THe By or: 


Seer eres Ki ene I ra 
a flood of tears, ke called Cadambo aſide; cf f | 
to him thus: IM tell you, my Gear: friend, — 5 
10 l avs We have each of us in dut pockets 
to the value of five e 
ars cleverer at theſe matters chan 13 5 
and bring miſs Cunegund from e 2 
the yovernct makes any diMetlty, "give kim 4 mi- 
lon ; if this will not foften him; Efe Bin two; as 
you have not killed an inquiſitor, the will have 10 
ſuſpicion of yon, TX fit'ont another po and go and 
wait for yon at Venlee; that's al free conitry; White 
were ih vo danget either" from Bulgarians, bares, 
Jews, er ighiftofs. Cscambe. greatly dd 
this ſage reſolution. It grieved him to the very Heart 
to part with ſo good a maſter, who HO titted Him 
like an intimate friend; bur che ng of being ſer- 
viceable to him, foon got che of his forrow. 
In /ettſbrating exch-orher they ſhed" tenz; Carla 
charged him not to forget the good old woman : arid 
Cucarbo ſer out the {ate tay. This Cacainb6 Wis'a 
very honeſt fello . ee 
Candid ſtaid ſome n 8 Sn waiting 
for another captain to 'carty Rim and the two ie. 
mining ſnecp to Italy. After he ee rpgrnis 
and afed * every or a long 
. captain of 4 large 
veſſel, came and offered his ſelvice; tere 
have, ſaid he to the Dutch Kipper, to me and 
W and theft w Mb youfee | 
H 3 f here, g 


8 AN DAD Or, 
here, dieRly.to Venice, without, touching at 289 
other port. The ripper aſked ten thouſand ms; 
e le rico hoot N 
Ho, ho, ſaid the cunning Vanderdendur to iiaſel, 
this frranger. muſt be very rich, he agrees at once to 
Sire me ten thouſand , piaſtres, . Returging. a little 
while after, he let him know, that upon ſecond con 
_ Gderation, he: could not un the, voyage for. le(s 
than twenty, Fhouſand... Very, well, you, ſhall hare 
em, laid Candid. „pl at bollid 20 Vie 
Loe Av. f 


the Kipper to himſelf, this: Mga age 
o pay twe ity thouſand, -Piaſtres, wih as, mach, eaſe 
As ten. * went back to ES n,, and declared 
| He con carry him to Venice or leſs: than thirty 
- thopſa Then you ſhall hare wiry thou. 
ſand, led Candid... hom bog © bi 118 
glos ſaid the Dutch ſeipper once more io. him- 
FF, thirty ghouſand piaſtzes are. a Way e 
fer theſe. Hep) muſt be laden with an imme ue 
$4 :zreaſurs; don't let us inſiſt upon more, vt make him 
Day flown, the, thirty thouſand. piaſtres and then we 
ſhall fee, Candid ſold two ſmall diamonds, the leaſt 
of. Which was, worth more than what the ſkipper 
aged, He payed. him, before hand: the two ſheep 
es, put on poard; and Candid followed-in a ſmall 
oat, .. Pro 8 60% Join the, veſſel in the road: 
he. captain, ta his opportunity, hoiſts his ſails, and 


Puts gut t0-- bea with a favourable wind. Candid, 
ſcbnfounded and amazed, immediately loſt ſght of 
I” Alas 1. laid he, here ib wick, ſuch. a one, 


As 
27124 0 > 


£3, 


Ar Tb A Bz gm: a» 


ap. they would play in our old world1 He puts back 
,,averyhelmed with ſorrow, for, indeed. he. had been 


robbed of what would have pg. the Ae of 


twenty monarchs. . 
No ſooner was he landed, than he waited, 4 
the Dutch. magiſtrate : : being much. irritated, be 
| knocks impetuouſly at, the door, Which being .open- 
ed, be goes in, tells his caſe, and talks a little 
louder . than was peceſſary. , The. magiſtrate be- 
gan with fining him ten thouſand, piaſtres, for 
making a noiſe. Then he liſtened ;Patiently to 
What, he had to ſay, promiſed to examine into his 
affair at the | kkipper's s return, and ordered him to 
pay ten. thouſand Piaſtres for the Le! of the 
preſent hearing, 1 
Candid loſt all patience at this a 5 Te 
is true, he had met with misfortunes. a thouſand 
e more | grievous; but. the phlegmatic diſpoſition 
of the judge, and the knavery of the ſkipper, raiſed 
his choler, and flung him into a deep melancholy. 
The villainy of mankind preſented itſelf. before his 
imagination in all its deformity ; 5 and his mind har- 
boured none but ſorrowful ideas. At length hearing 
that a French captain was ready to ſet ſail for Bour- 
deaux, as he had no more ſheep loaded ith dia- 
monds to put on board, he hired the cabbin at the 
uſual price : but before he embarked, he, made it 
known! in the town, that if any honeſt man would 
favour him with his company during the voyage, be 
would pay his paſſage and board, and moreover gire | 


tl 1 2 


®* 4 


80 CAN DID: Or, | 
him ten choufand piaſtres; provided that this man 
nn the most diſſatisfied wich hiy condition, and the 
moſt unfortunate in the whote province, 
Such a multitude of candidztes appeared on this 
oecafion, that a fleet of ſhips would have been hardly 
able to contain them all. Candid, willing to make his 
choice from amon the moſt likely, felefted twenty 
who appeared'to him' the moſt fociable, and who all 
pretended to merit the preference. He invited them 
to his inn, wHets he treated them with a ſupper, on 
condition that every man ſhould ſwear to relate his 
own Hiſtory; pr omiſing to chuſe the perſon, who to 
him mould appear moſt deſerving of compaſſion, and 
molt juftly diffarisfied With lib aria of life; and 10 
gratify the reſt. rn 

They fat tin four o' ctock in the en Can - 
did, while he was hearing their adventures, recolfle&- 
ed what the old woman had aid td him in their 
voyage to Buthos-Ayres, and of her Wäger * 
there was nöt 4 perſon on board the fhip, but 
Kad met with Very Fates eiue Every adven- 
ture he heard, put him in mind of Pangloſs. My old 
| maſter, ſaid he, would be greatly puzzled to demon- 
Rrate his ſyſtem. I wiſti he was here. Certaluly if 
every thing is for the beſt, it is in Eldorado; and 
not in the other parts of the globe, At length de de. 
termined in favour of a poor ſcholar, who had labour: 
ed ten yeats for the bookſellers at Amſterdam: he 
was of AR n no e could de mere 
deteſtable. 


This 


0 ee =o nn Þ© © r 


- =_— 2 
e 


2 wo a, ws A. ©. © 


— 


©. "4 
as wed 


. rok THz BISr. 34 


This ſcholar, who was an honeſt! man, had 
bail robbed by his wife, buffeted and abuſed 
by his ſon, and forſaken by his daughter, who got 
a Portugueſe to run away with her. He had been 
alſo. deprived. of a ſmall employment, on which he 
fubliſteds;; and he was perſecuted ' by the clergy of 
Surinam, who took him for a Socinian. We muſt al- 
low that the others were at leaſt as wretched as he; 
but Candid was in hopes that a man of letters would 
relieve the tediouſneſs of the voyage. All the other 
candidates complained that Candid had done them 
great injuſtice ; but be ſtopped their mouths, Wet 
ing one hundred piaſters to each. 2; 1885 


9407 1 Son ssb od Hts ran bitt. Dot 


+ of 
1 - 4 


ant H A P. e 28 
What ene at * to Candid gud Marin. 21 


Hat be: N 
H E old philoſopher;ihoſs vatbenivant Me 
tin, embarked then with Candid: for Bour- 
ye 4 They both had ſeen, and ſuffered: a great 
deal; and if the yeſie! had been to ſail from Suri- 
nam to Japan, round the Cape of Good Hope, the 
ſubje& of moral and natural evil would have ena- 
bled 1 . entertain one aer 
. 20 $5 07 n 208 
| Candid. "wins had: one (great adyantage over 
Mandy, that he always hoped to ſee miſs Qunegund | 
* whereas Martin had nothing, at all to 


\ abate... 


3 


kope for: beſides, Candid was poſſeſſed of money 
red ſheep, laden with the greateſt treaſure upon 
earth ; though the knavery of the Dutch ſkipper 
fill ſat heavy upon his mind; yet when he reflected 
upon what he had ſtill left, and when he mentioned 
the name of Cunegund, eſpecially towards the latter 
end of 2 Tepaſt;/ he/inclined to Pangloſs's doArine, 

But what think you, Mr. Martin, ſaid he, of 
this ' whole ſyſtem 7 what is your notion of mo- 
ral and natural evil? Sir, anſwered Martin, our 
prieſts accuſed me of being a Socinian ; but 
the real fat is, L am a Manichean. You' jeſt, 
ſaid Candid, there are no Manicheans now in the 
world. 1 am one, kid Martin; but 1 exnnot 
help it; I know not how to think otherwiſe. 
Surely the devil muſt be in you, ſaid Candid. 
He is fo deeply concerned in the affairs of 
this world, anſwered Martin, that he may very 
well be in me, as well as every where ele ; but 
1 on to vb that when 1 caſt an eye on this 
globe, o rather on this globale, I cannot help 
thinking, but that God has abandoned it to ſome 
malignant being: I always except Eldorado. I ſearee 


ever knew a eity chat did not defire the deſtrucion 


of the next city to it: ſcarce a family "that did 
not wiſh to exterminate ſome other family. The 
poor in all parts of the world abominite the rich, to 
whom they are obliged to creep and cringe; and the 
rich treat the poor like ſheep, whoſe wool and fleſk 
9 a they 


een S 


1 Se 


2 7 ˙ SST OTE ae wa, Www. trac 6s 


ALL FOR TRI BE 382. 33 
they harter for money. A million of regimented 
aſſaſſins running from one extremity of Europe 
to the other, get their bread by regular depre- 
dation and murder, for want of honeſter | employ- 
ment. Even in thoſe cities, which ſeem to enjoy 
the, bleſlings of peace, and whore the: arts and fei- 
ences flpuriſh, the inhabitants are devoured wich en- 
vy, care, inquietuda, and other plagues, muck greater 
than thoſe which are felt in a toun beſieged. 
Private chagrines are ſtill more:fhooking than public 
calamities, In a word, Safe ——_— 
ſo much, that I am a Manichean, 2: 

There is ſome good, however, in this wa 
roplied Candid. That may be, ſaid Martin ; * 
know it not. 

In the middle of this difpute, chartheandthd me e- 
port of cannon, which redaubled every inſtant. 
Bach man takes, aut his glaſs; and they eſpy two 
ſhips engaged at about the diſtance of three mites. 
The wind brought them both-fo:near the French veſ- 
ſel, that the latter had the pleaſure of ſeeing the en- 
gagement with great eaſe. At length one gave the 
other a ſhot between wind and water, which ſunk her 
to the bottom. Candid and Martin could plainly per- 
ceive a hundred men upon the deck of the veſſel which 
ſank, who, with their hands lifted up to heaven, made 
moſt terrible outcries, and the next moment were 
ſwallowed up by the ſea. | 8 

Well, faid Martin, you ſee in what manner ir mankind 
treat one another. It is true, ſaid Candid, is in 

this 


+" 


„% AN D p. Or; 


this affair ſomewhat diabolical; and as he 7 cheſe 

words, he eſpied ſomething, he knew not what, red and 
glittering, which ſwam cloſe to the veſſel, They put 
out the boat, to ſee what it could be, and it proved 
to be one of his ſheep : at the recovery of this animal, 
.Candid was more rejoiced, than he had been grieved 
at the loſs of the other hundred, ng . 22 
n large diamonds of Eldorado. 

The French captain quickly perceived, hot the 
viQorious. ſhip belonged to the crown of Spain, 
that the other was a Dutch pirate, and the very 
ſame captain who had robbed Candid. The im- 
menſe plunder which this villain had amaſſed, was 
buried with him in the deep, and out of the whole 
only one ſheep was ſaved. You ſee, ſaid Candid 
to Martin, that vice is ſometimes puniſhed ; this 
villain, the Dutch ſkipper, has met with the fate 
he deſerved; Ves, ſaid} Martin; but why ſhould 
the paſſengers be doomed alſo to deſtruction? God 
has puniſhed the ay and the n een 
the reſt. 7 

The French ani Spaniſh ſhips 8 their 
courſe,* and Candid his converſation with Martin. 
They diſputed fifteen days ſucceſſively, and at the 
end of thoſe fifteen days, they were as far advanc- 
ed as when they began. However, by this confer- 
_ ence, they communicated their ideas, and conſoled 


each other, Candid made much of his ſheep : ſince 


I have found thee again, (aid he, 1 may likewiſe 
chance to find my Cunegund again, 4 
CHAP, 


| Aus FOR rn sr. 85 


nA P. XXI 


Candid and Martin draw near the coaſt o France, and 
reaſon with. each other. ; 


T length they deſcried the coaſt of France 3 
when Candid ſaid to Martin: Sir, was you 
ever in France? Les, ſaid Martin, I: have been in 
ſeveral provinces of that kingdom. In ſome, one 
half of the people are fools; in others they are 
too cunning ; in others they are, for the generality, 
either good- natured, or very brutiſh ; in others they 
affect to be witty ;- and in all their ruling paſſion is 
love, the next is ſlander, and the laſt is to talk 
nonſenſe, But, Mr. Martin, pray was you ever 
at Paris ? Yes, fir, it is a place that contains the ſe- 
veral ſpecies juſt deſcribed; it is a chaos, a confuſed 
multitude, where every body ſeeks. for. pleaſure 
without being able to find it, at leaſt as far as I have 
obſerved during my ſhort ſtay in that city. At my 
arrival I was robbed of all I had in the world, by 
pickpockets, and ſharpers, at the fair of St. Ger- 
main, I was taken up myſelf for a robber, and con- 
fined eight days in priſon. ; after which I ſerved as 
corrector of the preſs, in order to get a little money 
towards defraying my expences back to Holland on 
foot, I knew the whole tribe of ſcribblers, with the 
malecontents, and fanatics. It is ſaid that there are 
very polite people in that city ; and I-am inclined to 
believe it. 


I For 


86 CAN DID: Ot, 

For my part, I have no curioſity to ſee France, 
ſaid Candid ; you may eafily imagine, that after 
ſpending a month at Eldorado, I can defire to be- 
bold nothing upon earth but miſs Cunegund. I am 
going to wait for her at Venice; we ſhall paſs through 
France in our way to Italy: won't you bear me 
company? With all my heart, ſaid Martin: it is ſaid 
that Venice can be agreeable to none but noble Ve- 
netiam ; but that ſtrangers, however, are welcome 
if they have a good deal of money; I have none; 
you have; therefore I'll follow you all the world 
over. Now I chink of it, do you believe, ſaid Can- 
did, that the earth was originally a ſea, as we find 


aſſerted in that large book belonging to the captain? 


1 do not believe a word of it, ſaid Martin, no more 
than I do of a thouſand reveries, which have been 
publiſhed lately, But, ſaid Candid, for what pur- 
poſe or deſign was this world originally framed ? 
To plague us to death, anſwered Martin. Are not 
you greatly ſurprized, continued Candid, at the 
paſſion of the two girls, in the country of the Oreil- 
lons, for thoſe monkeys, with whoſe ſtory I made 
you acquainted ? Not at all, ſaid Martin ; 1 
find nothing extraordinary in it: I have ſeen fo 
many ſtrange things, that I wonder at nothing. Do 
you believe, ſaid Candid, that mankind uſed al- 
ways. to cut one another's throats, as they do at pre- 
ſent ; that they were always guilty of lies, fraud, treach- 
ery, ingratitude, inconſtancy, envy, ambition, and cry- 
elty ; that they were always thieves, fools, cowards, 


gluttons, 


VF a— a. So. 


ALE ron THE BIS r. 87 
fanatics, and hypocrites? Do you believe, faid Mar- 
tin, that hawks have always been accuſtomed to eat 
pigeons,” when theſe came in their way? Yes, 
ſurely, ſaid Candid, Well then, ſaid: Martin, if 
Hawks have always had the ſame nature, why 
ſhould you prefend that mankind change theirs ? 
E190 Conti ws: is a vaſt deal of difference; 
for free-will . . and n thus 2 ar- 
rived at Bourdeaux, 


— 


0 H A P. XXII. 
a, is France to-Candid aud Martins: 


ANDID made no longer ſtay at Bourdeaux, 
than was neceflary for ſelling a few of the 
pebbles of Eldorado, and for hiting a good vehicle 
to hold two paſſengers ; for he could not bear 
to be without his. philoſopher Martin, He was on- 
ly vexed to part with his ſheep, which he left to the 
academy of ſciences at Bourdeaux. The academy 
propoſed as a ſubject for this year's prize, the rea- 
fon why this ſheep's wool was red; and the prize was 
adjudged to a learned man in the North, who de- 
monſtrated by A, plus B, minus C, divided by Z, 
that the ſheep muſt be red, and die of the rot. 

In the mean time the paſſengers, whom Candid 
met in the ſeveral inns upon the road, all told him 
they were going to Paris. This general impatience of 
| 12 ſeeing 


88 CAN DID: Or, 

ſeeing the capital,” infpired him at length with the 
ſame defire'; and it was not N . of 1 war 
% Vene 

He wet Paris by the ſuburb of St. ideen, 
and thought © n in ae” aro village in frabong 
be 6s rd) cans. 

- No ſooner was Sind arrived at his inn, than 
he was ſeized by a flight diſorder, octaſioned 
by his great fatigue. As he had a very large dia- 
mond ring on his finger, and the people of the inn 
had taken notice of a prodigious heavy caſket among 
his baggage; in an inſtant he had no leſs than 
phyſicians to attend him, though he had never ſent for 
them ; ſome intimate friends likewiſe, whom he did 
not know, kept cloſe to him; and two devotees 
warmed his ptiſans. Martin ſaid, I remember to have 
been fick at Paris in my firſt voyage; but as I 

Was very poor, I had neither friends, dee, 
nor phyſicians-; yet I recovered. | 
However, what with phyſic and bleeding, Can- 
did's diſtemper was become a. very ſerious affair. The 
parſon of the pariſh came with great modeſty, and de · 
manded a ſight of his bill of credit for the other world, 
. payable to the bearer . Candid refuſed it; but the de · 
votees aſſured him it was the new faſhion, Hemade an- 
wer, that he did not trouble his head about faſhions. 
ond was going to throw ts os grove out of ou win- 


- * This alludes to the late diſpute between the ence of 
Paris and the clergy, about the certificates of confeſſion. 


dow. 


All rok THe BEST. 89 
dow. The prieſt ſwore that Candid ſhould not have 
Chriſtian burial. Martin ſwore he would bury the 
prieſt, if he- continued to be troubleſome, They 
grew warm, when Martin took hold of the prieſt by 
the ſhoulders, and turned him out of doors; which 
occaſioned great ſcandal, and an action at 6 

Candid got well again. Upon his recovery 
he had very genteel company to ſup with him: 
they played very deep; and Candid was ſurprized 
he could never throw onde to ; wo wrongs was not 
ſurprized at all. 05 

Among thoſe who 501 their ek. to kin, 
was a little abbé of Perigord, one of thoſe bu. 
ſy bodies, who are ever alert, officious, forward, 
fawning and complaifant ; who et travellers in 
their paſſage through the capital, tell them all 
the ſcandal of the town, and offer to pimp for 
them at all ſorts of prices. This man began with 
carrying Candid and Martin to the playhouſe, where 
a new tragedy was to be afted. Candid happened 
to be ſeated near ſome of the beaux eſþrits ; but this 
did not prevent his ſhedding tears at ſome ſcenes 
that were well ated. One of thoſe critics, who 
ſtood near him, ſpoke thus to him between one of the 
acts: Your tears are greatly miſplaced ; that's 
a ſhocking actreſs; the actor who plays with 
her is a worſe performer than herſelf ; and the play 
is worſe ſtill than the actors: the author does not 
utiderftand a word of Arabic, yet the Tcene is 
in mad, ; befides, he is a man that does not be- 

I 3 lieve 


/ - 


90 C AND 1D: Or, 
- lieve in innate ideas; and I'll. bring you- to-morrow 
twenty pamphlets againſt. him, Sir, ſaid the lit- 
_ tle Perigord, did you take notice of that young 
creature, with ſuch a killing countenance, and ſo 
delicate a ſhape? . You may have her for ten thou- 
ſand livres a month, and fifty thouſand crowns in di- 
.amonds, I could not ſtay with her above a day or 
two, anſwered Candid, becauſe I have an engage- 
ment that calls me directly to Venice. a 
After ſupper, the inſinuating abbe ond him- 
ſelf ſtill more officious in paying his court to 
Candid. And ſo, fir, ' you have an engagement 
at Venice? Yes, monſieur Abbe, anſwered. Can- 
did; I muſt abſolutely wait upon miſs Cunegund. 
And then the pleaſure of talking about the objeRt 
he loved, induced him to relate, according to cuſ- 
tom, part of his en with that fair Weſt- 
phalian, _ 
I believe, ſaid the abbe, miſs 88 — a 
great deal of wit, and that her letters are charm- 
ing. I never received any from her, anſwered Can- 
did: for confider, being expelled the caſtle upon her 
account, I could not write to her ; eſpecially as I heard 
ſhe was dead ſoon after; but thank God, I found 
ſhe was living. Lloſt her again after this; and now I 
have ſent an expreſs to her a thouſand five hundred 
leagues from hence, to which I wait for ar anſwer. 
The abbe liſtened attentively, and ſeemed 
to be muſing. He ſoon took his leave of the 
two foreigners, after.a moſt tender embrace. 'The 
next 


ALL FOR(THE Br. og 
next morning, when Candid awaked, he received 
a letter couched in the following terms. | 

My dear love I have. been ill theſe eight 
%% days in town; and have heard of your arrival. 
I ſhould fly to your arms, were I able to ſtir or 
„ move. I was informed of your... paſſage at 
« Bourdeaux, where I left faithful Cacambo 
and the old woman, who are to follow me very 
« ſoon, The governor of Buenos-Ayres has taken 
«« every thing from me but your heart, which ſtill 
« remains. Come to me, your preſence will either 
« give me life, or kill me with pleaſure.” _, 
At the receipt of this charming. ie er 
ter, Candid felt the utmoſt tranſports of joy though, 
on the other hand, the indiſpoſition of his dear Cu- 
negund overwhelmed him with grief. Diſtracted be- 
tween thoſe tWo paffions, he takes his gold and 
his diamonds, and gets ſomebody to conduct him 
and Martin to the houſe, where miſs Cunegund 
was lodged, Upon entering the room, he trem- 
bles in every limb, his heart flutters, his tongue 
faulters; he attempts to undraw the curtain, and calls 
for a light to the bedſide: Take care what you do, 
ſaid the ſervant-maid, the light is offenſive to. her, 
and immediately ſhe. draws the. curtain cloſe again, 
My dear Cunegynd, ſaid Candid diflolved in tears, 
how do you do? If you cannot bear the light, ſpeak 
to me at leaſt, She cannot ſpeak, ſaid. the maid. 
The lady then puts a plump hand out of bed, and 
d firſt bathes it with tears, then fills it. with 
diamonds, 


92 CAN DID: Or, 
diamoiids, leaving a purſe of gold -upon the eaſy 
chair. 
Ia the nüddle of is tranſports, in comes an 

officer followed by the abbé, and a file of muſ- 
queteers. There, ſaid he, are the two ſuſpected fo- 
reigners ; at the ſame time he orders them @ be 
ſeized, and carried to priſon. Travellers are not 
treated after this manner in Eldorado, ſaid Candid. 
I am more a Manichean now than ever, ſaid Mar- 
tin. But pray, fir, where are you going to carry 
us? ſail Candid. To a dungeon, anſwered the 
Martin having recovered himſelf ſo as to judge 
cooly, thought that the perſon who acted the part of 
Cunegund was a cheat; that monſieur 1'abbe de Pe- 
rigord was 'a ſharper, who had impoſed upon the ho- 
neſt ſimplicity - of ' Candid ; and that the officer was 
a'knave, whom they might eaſily get rid of. 

Candid, directed by Martin's advice, and impatient - 
to ſee the real Cunegund, rather than expoſe himſelf 
before a court of juſtice, propoſes to the officer to 
give him three ſmall: — each of them worth 
about three thouſand piſtoles; Ah, fir, ſaid he, had 
vou commited ever fo much villany, this would ren- 
der you in my eye the honeſteſt man in the world: 
_ three diamonds, worth three thouſand piſtoles each! 
Str, inſtead of carrying you to jail, I would loſe 
my life to ſerve you. There are orders for arreſting -- 
all ſtrangers: but let me alone; I have a brother at 
Dieppe in Normandy; I'll conduct you thither, and 

| if 


* 0 * * a. 3 EI * 
. ˙¹ —.d . œ unnd f tat. na a ͤ r rr 


1 4 
F | oY mY _.. 


OP PT YLIRES SOS OY © OT © 


KTI For TRI ByST., 9g 
if you have ever a diamond to give him, bell take 
eee r ſhould. 
And why, ſaid Candid, ſnhould all ſtrangers be 
ur The abbe de Perigord then made anſwer 
and ſaid, it is becauſe a poor devil of the county of 
duced him to commit a parricide, not ſuch as that 
of the month of May 1610, but ſuch as that of 
1594, in the month of December, and ſuch as have 
been perpetrated. in other months and years by 
other poor devils, who had heard fooliſh ſtories. 

The officer then explained what the abbe” meant. 
Horrid monſters! cried Candid aloud ; is it poſſible 
that ſuch ſcenes ſhould be tranſacted among a danc- 
ing, ſinging nation? Is there no getting immediately 
out of this country, where monkeys provoke tigers? 
I have ſeen bears in my country; but men I have 

beheld no where except in Eldorado. Ih the name of 

God, fir, ſaid he to the officer, conduct me to Venice, 
where I am to wait for miſs Cunegund. - I can con- 
duct you no farther than to Lower Normandy, ſaid 
the officer. Immediately he orders his irons to be 
ſtruck off, acknowledges himſelf miſtaken, ſends 
away his men, ſets out with Candid and Martin for 
Dieppe, and conſigus them to the care. of his brother. 
There was then a ſmall Dutch ſhip in the harbour: 
the Norman, grown the moſt. officious - man in the 
world, by virtue of the three other diamonds, ſees 
Candid and his attendants on board a veſſel that was 
juſt ready to ſet ſail for Portſmouth. This was = 


& M OAN DTD: or, 
the way to Venice; bat Candid thought he had made 
his eſcape out of hell, and he reckoned be fhould 


ſoon have an ny — to- 
Venice, i: 


CE et nde Oar) 


CHAP. XXII. 
Candid and Miri tch whos the Frghh oy an 
Pu? <vhat they fee there. 


Martin. You are acquainted with England, ſaid Candid: 


are they as great fools in that country as in France? 
Their follies are of a different kind, ſaid Martin; you 
- know that theſe two nations are at war, about à few- 


acres of barren land in the neighbourhood of Canada, 
and that they have ſpent a great deal mere in the 
of this war chan all Canada is worth. 
To tell you exactly, whether there are more inhabi- 
tants fit to ſend to a madhouſe in one country than in 


the other, is what my imperfe& intelligence will not 


permit. Fonly know in general, that the people we 


are going to ſee, are of a melancholy diſpoſition. ' 


at Portſmouth. The coaſt was lined with a multi- 
tude of people, whoſe eyes were fixed om a lofty man 


5 Who 


un Pangloſs! Panglofs! Ah Martin! Martin! 
Ah my dear Cunegund l what ſort of à world 
is this ? ſaid Candid, when he got on board the Dutch 


ſhip. Something very fooliſh and abominable, anſwered 


As they were chatting in this manner, they arrived 


r 


LY 


IMWh c c ££#> Mm... to a 


ws Www wu |#© 


e WS _ ww. _*Þu 


Auk ror” THt Besr. 96 
his. eyes, on the deck af ane of the men of war. 
Oppoſite to this man ſtood four ſoldiers, who ſhot three 
bullets each into his ſkull, with all the compoſure in 
the world ; and the whole company went away very 
well ſatisfied, What is all this? ſaid Candid ; and 
what dzmon is it that exerciſes his tyrannic ſway all 
over the world? He then aſked who was that luſty 
man, who had been killed with ſo much ceremony. 
They anſwered, he was .an admiral. And why 
mould you kill your admiral ? Becauſe he did not 
take care to kill a ſufficient number of men himſelf. 
He gave battle to a French admiral ; and it has 
been proved that he was not near enough to him. 
But, replied Candid, the French admiral was as 
far from the Engliſh admiral. There is no doubt 
of it, ſaid they; but in this country, it is proper 
now and then to kill Lanham heed fins 
encourage the others to fight. 

Candid was ſo ſhocked at what he ſaw and heard, 
that he would not ſet foot on ore, but made a 
bargain with the Dutch fkipper (were he even to rob 
him, like the captain Nr TE 
roy to Venice. 

The rn wo'days. They fail- 
ed along the coaſt of France, and paſſing within 
ſight of Liſbon, Candid trembled. From thence 
they proceeded to the Streights, entered the Mediter- 
ranean, and after a long paffage arrived at Venice. 
O80 be 8 faid. Candid, embracing Martin: 

here 


os CAN DID; K.. 

here I ſhall ſee once more my beloved Cunegund. 
I put as much truſt in Cacambo as in myſelf. All 
is well, all very well, all nnn 4d 


eee eee 


c H A N. XXIV. 
07 Paguette and friar — 


PON their arrival at 83 8 in 
ſearch of Cacambo at every inn and coffee- 
* and among all the ladies of pleaſure, but 
to no purpoſe. He ſent every day to inquire 
what ſhips were come in. No news of Cacam- 
bo. Strange! ſaid he to Martin; that I ſhould 


have had time to perform | a voyage from Su- 


rinam to Bourdeaux, to travel from thence to Pa · 


ris and to Dieppe, to touch at Portſmouth, 


to ſail along the coaſt of FPortagal and Spain, 
and up the Mediterranean, to ſpend ſome months 
at Venice ; and that my lovely Cunegund ſhould 
not be yet arrived. Inſtead of her, I only met 


with a Pariſian bite, and the abbe de-Perigord ! 


Cunegund is certainly dead; and I have nothing 
more to do but to follow her to her grave. Alas 
how much better would it have been for me to have 


remained in the paradiſe of Eldorado, chan to have 
returned to this curſed Europe ? You are in the right, 


wy dear Martin | all is miſery and deceit. 


* 22 
— b EI > 
L He 
* , 


” www TOY ww TWP © or”. Mg ⅛ũ»m». Un wr ůmͤd . oo” LS OOTY TT ET 


RK * © SS 2 


w/o , » fees 


9 1 * * S > nf 
2 N 
* * 8 * 


1 e ee 97 
He was ſeized with a deep melancholy, and nei- 
ther went to ſee the opera, nor any of the other di- 
verſions of the carnival ; nay, he was proof againſt 
the charms of the fair- ſex. Martin ſaid to him, You 
are very ſimple indeed to imagine that a mongrel va- 
let, intruſted with ſive or ſix millions, will go in ſearch 
of your miſtreſs to the other end of the world, 
and bring her to you to Venice. If he finds 
her, he will keep her to himſelf; if he does 
not find her, he will get another. I adviſe. you te 
forget your valet Cacambo, and your fair Cune- 
gund. Martin's advice Was, not very. conſoling. 
Candid's melancholy increaſed ; and Martin. conti- 
nued to prove to him, that there was very.litele vir- 
tue or happineſs upon earth, except perhaps in El- 
dorado, where no body could gain admittance, .. 
While they were diſputing on this important ſub-, 
jeR, and waiting for Cunegund, Candid ſaw a young 
Theatin friar in the piazza-di St. Marco, holding a 
girl under his arm, The Theatin looked freſh co-, 
loured; plump, and vigorous ; his eyes ſparkled; his 
air, his gait, was bold and lofty. The girl was very 
pretty, and was ſinging a ſong ; ſhe gave her Theatin 
an amorous ogle, and ſometimes pinched his fat 
cheeks. At leaſt you will allow me, ſaid Candid to 
Martin, that theſe two are happy: hitherto Lhave met 
with none but unfortunate. people in the whole habi- 
table globe, except in Eldorado ; but as to this pair, 
| I would venture to lay a wager that they are very 
happy. I lay you they are not, ſaid Martin. We 
K | need 


r 7 iy 
a : A 
* —— 1 - 1 
* = * * 
. - * 
* * * 
* — * 8 . 
700 * * * 
* 


oS CANDID: Or, 
need only ale them to dine wi us, ſaid Candid, 
and you will fee whether I am miſtaken or nor. 
| Immediately he accoſis them, and with great com- 
plaiſance invites them to his inn to eat ſome macaro- 
ni, with Lombard partridges, andeaviare; and to 
drink ſome Montepulciano, Lacryma Chrifti, Cyprus, 
and Samos wine. The girl bluſhed, the Theatin ac- 

cepted the invitation, and ſhe fallowe@ him, caſting 
her eyes on Candid with confuſion and ſurprize, and 
dropping a few tears. No ſooner had the ſet her foot 
in Candid's apartment, than ſhe-cried out; So, Mr. 
Candid, don't you know your Paquette again! Candid 
dad not viewed her as yet with attention, his thoughts 
being intirely taken up with Cunegund : but recol- 
Jefting ber as ſhe ſpoke: theſe words, Alas; ſaid he, 
poor girl, was n 
the fine condition I ſaw him in ? 

It was I, ſir, indeed, anſwered Paquette ; T find you 
have heard the whole tory. I have been informed 
of the ſad diſaſters that befel the family of my lady 
baroneſs, and the fair Cunegund. My fate, I vow, 
has been equally cruel. I was a very innocent girl, 
when you knew me. A Cordelier, my confeſſor, eaſily 
ſeduced me. The conſequences were terrible. I 
was obliged to quit the caſlle a little after the baron 
kicked you out of doors. Tf a famous doctor had 
not taken compaſſion of me, I muſt have periſhed. 
For ſome time I was this doQor's miſtreſs merely 
out of gratitude, His wife was as jealous as the 
devil, gud uſed to heat ms every day. moſt' unmerci- 

fully ; 


r 7 


4¹ ron THE Br 99 | 


fully.; the, was a very fiend of hell. The 4dofter 
was ane of the uglicft fellows I ever thaw in wy life, 
and I the moſt wretched of women, to be thus con- 
tinually buffeted and bruiſed for the ſake, of a man 
whom I did not love. You know, fir, what a dan- 
gerous thing it is for an il-natured woman to be 
married to any of the medical tribe. Incenſed at 


the behaviour of his wife, he one day gave her ſo 


effectual a remedy to cure her of a flight cold, that 
ſhe died two hours after, in moſt horrid convulſions; 
The | wife's relations proſecuted the huſband, who 


Was obliged to fiy z and I was thrown into jail; 
My innocence: would not have ſaved me, if 1 had 


not been handſome. Tbe judge acquitted me, 


on condition of this ſucceeding the doctor. F was 
ſoon ſupplanted by a, xwal, turned; out of doors 
quite deſtitute, and obliged 1 to continne this abomi- 
nable trade, which. appears ſo pleaſant to you men, 
while to us women, it is the-utmoſt pirek of miſery. 
At length I came to follow the buſineſs at Venice, 
Ab1 fir, if you did but know what it is to be 
obliged to lie with every fellow, with old; merchants, 
with : counſellors, monks, gondoliers and abbes ; to be 
expoſed to-all their abuſe and inſalence; to be often 
neceſſitated to borrow a pettycoat, only that it may be 
taken up by a diſagreeable raſcal ; to be robbed by 
one gallant of what we have earned of the other; 
to he ſubject to the extortions of civil-magiſtrates ; 
and 30 have in proſpett the frightful ſcene of old 
age, an hoſpital, an you would con- 

: clude, 


«$715 3 


”» 22 r . — 4 9 


_— 
7 Ie LY 


i 
4 
- F 4 
* 2 
.. * 
* 4 N 
17 
= 
WW. 
F;. 
11 
* « 
* 
i 
t 
6, 
3 
'F 
. 
' 
Fo 
* 
"1 
* 
|} 
4 
H 
5 7 
N 
1 


100 «CAN D1D: Or: 


clude, tat 1 am one of the moſt unhappy wretches 
upon earth. 

Thus did Paquette open ber midd to honeſt 
Candid, in his cloſet, in the preſence of Martin; 
who took occaſion to ſay *to him, YO" ee I wire 

won one half of the wager already. 

FPriar Giroflde ſtaick in the parlour, wal drank a 
glais or two of wine while he was waiting for din- 
ner. But, ſaid Candid to Paquette, you looked ſo 
gay and content when I met you; you ſung, and you 
behaved ſo lovingly to the Theatin, that you ſeem- 
ed to me as happy, as you pretend to be now miſe: 
rable. Ah ! fir, anſwered Paquette, this is one of the 
miſeries of the trade. Yeſterday I was robbed and 
abuſed by an ee 1 n put ** a 
en humour to pleaſe a friar. 

Candid wanted no more to be ee he 
owned that Martin was in the right. They ſat 
down to table with Paquette and the Theatin ; the 
entertainment was very agreeable ; and towards the 
end, they began to talk with ſome degree of frees 
dom. Father, 'ſaid Candid to the friar, you ſeem 
to me to enjoy a ſtate of happineſs, that even kings 
might envy ; your ' countenance is the picture of 
health and jollity; 3 vou have a very ptetty girl to 
divert you ; and you appear to Pe well. "falſe: 
5 your condition as à Theatinn 

Faith, fir, ſaid friar Giroflée, I W 0 iſt hal 
all the Theatins were at the bottom of the ſea, I 
have been reed a thouſand times to ſet fire to the 


592 


con- 


a __ a — n ot 


is | 

At FOR rn Bear, 1on 

convent, ' and to 30 and tum Turk. My parents 
obliged me, at the age of fifteen, to pat on this de- 
teſtable habit, only to increaſe the fortune of a 
curſed elder brother of mine, whom God confound. 
Jealouſy, diſcord, and fury, reſide in our convent. 
It is true, I have preached. a few paltry ſermons, 
whereby I got; a little money, part of which the 
prior robs me of, and the other helps to pay for my 
vent, I am ready to daſh my brains againſt the walls 
of the dormitory N 1 a * 
the fraternity. - HEM- Mo! © .c h 
"Martin trning toyrards Candid with his ſunk indis. 
ference, ſaid;- Wells what de you - think ? have I wor © 
the wager intitely 7 Candid gaye two thouſand piaſters | 
to Paquette,-and a thouſand to friar Giroflee, ſaying; 
Flll'anſwer now, that this will make them happy. 
I believe no ſuch thing, ſaid Martin; perhaps this 
money. wilF obly render chem more wretched, "Be 
that as it may, fad Candi? but one thing con- 
ſoles me ; I ſee that we oſten meet with thoſe. whom 
we expected never to find any more; ſo that perhaps, 
a5 have found my red ſheep'and Paquette, it may be 
my good fortune to meet alſo with Cunegund, I 
wih, ſaid . Martin, ſhe may one day make you 
happy; but I doubt it very much. You are hard 
of belief, Laid Candid :_ it is- becauſe, anſwered Mar- 

tin, IL have ſeen the world. 

Lou ſee thoſe gondoliers, ſaid Candid: are not they 
* ſinging? You do not ſee them, anſwered 
K 3 Martin, 


\ 


3 | „ 15 
e CAN DID: O 


Martin? ät home, with their Wives and brats. 


The doge has his chagrins, the gondoliers theirs. 


Not but I believe that upon the whole, che Bon- 
dolier's life is preferable to that of a doge; - 


however, I look upon the difference as ſo «trifling,. 
that it is not worth the trouble of examining into. 
People talk, ſaid Candid; of the ſenatot Poeocu- 
rante, who lives in that fine palace on che Brenta, 
where he entertains foreigners in the möſt polite 
manner. A pretend that this man never felt. any 
uneaſineſs. I ſhould be glad to ſee o extraor- 
dinary a phznomenon, ſaid Martin. On which 
Candid ſent his compliments to the {ptiato?, 137563 whe 
leave to wit: upon him the nett day. W D 930%. 


coder der S er er Oe 


Fon e een 


ca. — Martin hey, a viſit. to * 1 ated > wh 
; «ante; a noble Venetian. Nom 11 


; A 1 24 3871's 
AN DID and Martin went in a gondola on 


the Brenta, and arrived at the palace of the 
noble ſignor Pococurante. The gardens were laid 


out in taſte, and adorned with fine marble ſtatues: 


the palace was built according to the moſt re- 
gular architecture. Woes maſter of the houſe was 
a man of ſixty, and very rich: he received the 
two travellers with great politeneſs, and but little e- 
remony which put Candid a little out of counte- 
N but was not at all diſagreeable to Martin. 
Firſt 


J ww 1 —— ww ww ww * y_ 


Ai en ABA. 10 


Firſt two: pretty girl, very neatly - drefſed, ſery⸗ 
ed them with chocolate, which was extremely, 


well frothed. Candid could not help commend- 


ing their beauty, grace, and addreſs: the crea-; 


tures are: well enough, ſaid the ſenator; I make. 
them lie with me ſoͤmetimes, for I am - tired, 


of the ladies of the towu; I am tired, of cheir 


coquettry, their jealouſy, their . their 
humoure, their monkey-tricks, their pride, their 
folly» ; I am tired of making ſonnets, or of 
ordering ſonnets to be made for them: but; aſter 
all, theſe: two girls begin to grow at e 
ferent ta me. Nun - vi 


After | breakfaſt, Candid. walked into along wal. 
lery, where he was ſtruck with the fine paintings. 
He aſked, of what maſter the two firſt were? They 


are Raphael's,. ſaid the ſenator; I. bought, them 


at a monſtrous price ſome years ago, merely out of 
vanity; they are ſaid: to be the fineſt things in Italy, 


but they do not pleaſe me at all; the colouring 


is dark, the figures are not round, neither do they 
eome out D the drapery , is TT: bad. In 


upon e . of nature, 1 ap- 
prove of ho picture, but where I think I ſee: nature 
herſelf; and there are none of this ſort: I have 
n no manner of pleae 
wo in! ban Mas nia 19 

While they were waiting ſor dinner, 8 


ordered. a concert. Candid praiſed the muſic to 


2 the 


- IM 
': 1 
x i) 

* 
* 
1 
4 | , 7 


mz CAN DID: Or, 
we ſkies : this rioiſe, ſaid the ſenator; may amuſe 
one for half an hour; but if it was to laſt longer, 
it would grow tirefome to every body, though they 
durſt not own" it» Maſic is become the art of 
E 
ennmot be long pleaſing. - £35 . 
Perhaps I ſhould be fouder of: an n i6-they 
had not made ſuch a monſter of it, as really ſhocks 


me. Let who will go to ſes wretched tragedies fet 


to muſic; where the ſcenes are contrived for na other 


dieulous ſongs,” which ſet off the pipe of an adreſs. 


Let who will, or who can, die away with pleafore; - 
at the fight of an eunuch quavering the majeſtie part 
of Cæſar, or a Cato, and aukwardly ſtrutting along 
the ſtage: for my part, I have long ago renounced : 


thoſe paultry entertainments, which conſtitute: the glo- 
ry of modern Italy, and are ſo dearly purchaſed by 


ſovereigns, Candid diſputed the point, but he did it 
with diſeretion; as for Martin, Nor was ny 
of the ſenator's opinion; 

They ſat down: by dats aer had 
been elegantly entertained; they retired to the l. 


bock, that was onee the delight of tho great Pans 

_ gloſs, the beſt philoſopher in Germany. Hr is no 
favourite of mine, anſwered Pococurante very 
coly; they uſed heretofore” to male me believe - 


* that I took a pleaſure in reading him. But chat 
8855 | con- 


A 70 tur Ber. ks | 


eviititidia} topetition of bottles, Ib extremely Nhe ont 
another; thoſe gods that are always buſtling, - with. - 
out coming to any decifive:blow ; that Helen, who 
is the cauſe of the war, and yet hardly ads a 
fingle character in the whole performance; that 
Trey, which ſuſtains ſo long a ſiege without being 
taken; all this together renders the poem ve- 
ry inſipid to me; I have aſked: ſome learned men 
whether they were not as much · tired as myſelf with 
reading that poet? Thoſe who were ſincere, have 
frankly acknowledged to me that he made them fall 
aſleep; and yet it was proper to have him in their li- 
braries, as an ancient monument, or like hols m 
medals which are no longer of uſe in commerce. 
But your excellency, ſaid Candid, does not form 
the ſame opinion of Virgil? I grant, faid the ſe- 
nator, that the ſecond; fourth, / and fixths bock of 
the Eneid are excellent: but as for his pious 
Eneas, his ſtrong Cloanthus, his friend Achates, his 
little Aſcanius, his filly: king Latinusg his uncourtly- 
Amata, his infipid Lavinia, I chink there can be no- 
thing more flat and diſagreeable. I prefer Taſſo a good 
e ee eee eee 5 
May I preſume to afk you, fir, ſaid Candid; 
whether you do not receive a great deal of pleaſure 
in peruſing Horace? There are maxims in this 
writer, anſwered Pococurante, from which a man bf 
che world may reap ſome benefit; and being compriz- 
ed in laconie verſe; they, are more eaſily: imprinted 
in the memory. * 8 little value upon his 
8 journey 


2 PET ESE Py 


Journey to Brunduſium, and his account. of his bad 
dinner, or on his dirty low quarrel between one Ru- 
filth, and anather, whoſe language was imbued with 


nor do I ſee any merit in telling his friend Mzcenas, 
that if he will bat rank him ig the chair of lyric 


poets, his lofty head mall tonch the ſtars. Fools 


are apt to admire every thing in an author of regu- 


tation. Bor my part, I read only to pleaſe myſelf ; 


I like nothing but what makes for my purpoſe. 


Candid having been educated. with a notion of never 
judging for himſelf, was very much ſurprized at 


what he: heard ;; but Martin found thezo-wae &gp0d' 
deal: of maſoa in Pbcocurante's:; remarks. - 


01 kere i Tully, ſays Candids; here io the, de 


I never read him at all, replied. the Venetian. 
What: is it to me, whether he pleads for Rabitius 


or Clnentius & I try cauſes enough myſelf: bis phi- 


loſophicali works: are more in my taſte; but When I 
found that he doubted: of every thing. I con - 
dladed. that 1 knew as much. I OP" 


a mobs of a guide to learn ignorance. 


Ha! here are fourſcare. volumes, cried Martin; 
of tlie. academy of - ſciences : © perhaps. there is 


ſomething valuable in this collection. There 


might, ſaid Pococurante, if only one of thoſe 
rakers of rubbiſh had ſhew n us the art of pin- making: 


indelicate verſes againſt old women and witches; 


„ tHe 


F ˙ͤ.m—˙ - %, — ũãè̈Miäe oy ̃]˙ͤ ²˙ Uu WF WW OT WE Mw Aa 


W . Fx ' 


2 


Azz ron Tur BST. 07 
but in all thoſs volumes, there is nothing but chime. 
neul ſyſtems, and not done _ moors nn. 
dive to real uſe. © 
ents — 1 1 behold; Gus 
Candid, in Iralian, Spaniſh, and French! Yes; 
replied” the: feriator, there are three thouſand, and 
not three dozen of them good for any thing. Av to 
theſe huge volumes of theology, and thoſe' colle&i- 
ons of "ſermons, which all together are not worth # 
Angle page of Seneca, you may well imagine, chat 
neither myſelf nor any body elſe ever opens them. 
Martin "ſaw ſome ſhelves - filled with Englife 
books.  TIhave'a-notion; ſail he; that a'republicas 
melt bo yaſtly pleaſed with moſt of theſe books, 
which are written with a ſpirit of freedom: yes, 
anſwered Pococurante, it is noble to write as one 
thinks; this is the privilege of humanity, All over 
Ialy wewrite only what we do not think ;'fo that they 
who inhabit the country of the Cæſurs and the Au. 
toninus's, dare not acquire a fingle idea, without che 
permiſſion of a Dominican friar. I ſhould be pleaf- 
ed with the liberty of the Engliſh nation, if 'the 
good effects of it were not entirely W . 
paſſion and the ſpirit of party. 0 

Candid obſerving a Milton, aſked becker ke 44 
not look upon this author as a great man? Who? 
commentary in ten books of rough verſe on the fir? 
chapter of Geneſis; that auleward initator of the 
Cart, who disfigures the creation, wo 
M 


— 


x08 'C AN D L D: o Sb 


Meſliah take a pair of compaſſes from the armbury 
oß heaven to circumſeribe this world, whereas Mo- 
ſes repreſents the Eternal producing the univerſe by 
his fat + How can I have any eſteem for a writer 
who has ſpoiled;/Taſſo's hell and the devil; who 
transforms Lucifer, ſometimes into a toad, and other 
times into a pigmy; | who makes him repeat the 
ſame things a hundred times; who turns him into a 
ſchool divine; who, by a ſerious imitation of Ari- 
ofto's comic invention of fire · arms, repreſents the 


devils cannonading in heaven ? Neither I, nor | 


any man in Italy, can take pleaſure in thoſe 
melancholy. reveries: but the marriage of ſin and 
death, and the ſnakes brought forth by ſin, are 
enough to turn any perſon's ſtomach, that has the 
leaſt delicacy of taſte. This obſcure, whimſical, and 
diſagreeable poem, was neglected upon its firſt pub- 
lication: and I only treat the author now, as he 
was treated in his own country. by his cotemporaries. 
Vou are to obſerve; I ſay, what I think; but I trouble 
my head very little, whether oy Un with me 
nel. 

Candid was grieved at this ſpeech, hana he had 
a reſpe& for Homer, and was fond of Milton. Alas! 
ſaid he ſoftly to Martin, I am afraid this man holds 
our German poets in very great contempt. There 
would not be much harm in that, anſwered Martin. 
O, what a ſurprizing man! continued Candid 
to mumble to himſelf : what a. great genaus- is this 


Focoourante ! noting can pleaſe him. 


Aſter 


Aus, FOR; THE, BE 57. 109 

Aſter having taken a furvey of the library, 
they went down into the garden; where Cangid 
commended its ſeveral beauties. I Know nothing 
upon earth laid out in ſo bad a taſte, ſaid the 
maſter; all you ſee is childiſh and trifling: but 1 
ſhall have another laid out to-morrow, upon a 
nobler plan. 

As ſoon as the two rivellch, had taken leave « of 
his excellency ; Well, ſaid Candid to Martin, you | 
will agree that this is the happieſt of mortals ; for 
he is above every thing he poſſeſſes, But do not 
you ſee, anſwered Martin, that he has taken a 
diſlike to every thing he poſſeſſes ? Plato obſerved 'a 
long while ago, that the beſt ſtomachs are not thoſe 
which reject all forts of aliments. But is there not 
a pleaſure, ſaid Candid, in criticifing every thing ? 
in perceiving faults, where others think they ſee 
beauties? That is, replied Martin, there is a 
pleaſure in having no pleaſure. Well, well, ſaid 
Candid, I find that I ſhall be the only happy man, 
when I am bleſſed with the fight of my dear Cune- 
gund. You are in the right to hope, ſaid Martin. 

In the mean while days and weeks paſſed away, and 
no news of Cacambo : Candid was ſo overwhelmed 
with grief, that he did not reflect on the behaviour 
of Paquette and friar Giroflee, who never ſo en 
as ede to give him thanks. ; 


it ar Nee cle Hud} eee 


1 10 * - A K | a 1 4 * 
1 om 11 Or 
13 . 444.3 72 * 


2 : 
1 . : « * ow © | V3 Ps 4 


e HAP. XXI. 


Hee Candid mad Martin Lahe wong fox 2 ant 
4 grime 


\NE i omni that Candid and Martin were 

going to ſit down to ſupper with ſome fo. 
| reigners, who: lodged i in the ſame i inn, a man, whoſe 
complexion was as black as ſoot, came behind Candid, 
and taking him by the arm, ſaid, Get yourſelf ready 
to go along with us ; do not fail. Upon this he turns 
about, and ſees Cacambo. Nothing but the pre- 


ſence of Cunegund could have ſurprized or pleaſed 


him more, He was juſt ready to run mad for joy, 
After he bad embraced his dear friend, Cunegund 
is come with you, ſaid he, to be ſure; where is ſhe? 
Carry me to her, that I may die with Joy in her 
company. Cunegund is not here, anſwered Cacambo, 
the is at Conſtantinople. O heavens! at Conſtan- 
tinople ! But if ſhe was in China, I would fly thither : 
let's be gone, quick. We ſhall ſet out after ſupper, 
replied Cacambo ; I can ſay no more to you; I am 
a ſlave, my maſter waits for me, I muſt attend him 
at table; do not ſay a word ; eat your ſuppe?, and 
get ready, 

Candid, diſtracted between joy and ortet, charmed 
to ſee again his faithful agent, ſurprized to behold him 
in ſervitude, his heart palpitating, his underftand- 
ing confuſed, but firmly hoping to recover his 

dear 


re ee. gg. wFFgESLqgRemR.c_wqAG _ SEE ci 4 0052p ©, 0 ©, 


Au 20 —_ - "ot 
dear Cunegund, fat down to table along with Mar- 
tin, who ſay all theſe ſcenes quits unconcerned, 
and with fix ſtrangers vb were come to ſpend 
the \ carnival at Venice. N 

Cacambo watied at 3 upon. one of thoſe 
ſtrangers ; ; towards the end pf the repaſt he 
drem near. bis maſter, and whiſpered him in the car 
Sire, your majeſty may go when you pleaſe, the volta 
is ready. Qu ſaying theſe v words he went out. 'Thecgm- 
pany in great ſurprize looked at one another withoug 
ſ peaking a word, when another domeſtic approach- 
ed bis m maſter, and aid to him, Sire, your majeſty's 
chaiſe is at Padua, and the boat is ready. The | 
maſter gave a nod, and che ſervant went away. The 
company all ſtared at one another again, for their 
ſurprize was greatly increaſed. A third valet came 
up to a third ſtranger ; ſaying, Sire, depend upon it, 
your majeſty ought not By ſtay here any longer, f 
ay $30g to * every thi ing ready 3 and immediately 

a 
Candid and Marta "wade no manner r of doubt but 


this was a waſquer of the carnival. Then a fourth 
domeſtic ſaid to the fourth maſter, Your majeſty may 
depart whenever you pleaſe; and ſaying this he went 
away like the reſt. The fifth valet ſaid the ſame to t che 
fifth maſler. But the ſixth valet ſpoke in a different 
ſtrain to the fGixth ſtranger, who ſat near to Candid ; 
his words were; Faith, fir, they will truſt your 
majeſty no longer, nor 5 neither, and we may 

2 


-* EY 


9 * 2 7 
4 


* 


121 re 1 

n CANDID: os 

boch of us chance to be ſent to jail this very night; 

therefore I will take care of myſelf, Adieu. 
The ſervants beiovg all gone, the fix ſtrangers, 

with Candid and Martin, remained in a profound 

ſilence. At length Candid ſaid, Gentlemen, this is a 

very good joke indeed: but why ſhould you be all 


kings? For. my part I own to you that neither Mar. 


tin nor 1 have any Kingdoms. 

Cacambo's 1 maſter then gravely anſwered in Tealian, 
I am not at all joking ; my name is Achmet III. 
] was grand ſeignor a great many years; I de- 
throned, my brother; my nephew dethroned me ; my 
vizirs were beheaded; - and I am condemned to 
end my days in the old Seraglio. My nephew the 
great ſultan Mahmoud permits me to travel ſome- 
times for my health, and I am come to ſpend the 
carnival at Venice, 

A young man, who ſat next to Achmet, ſpoke 
then as follows : My name is Ivan, I was once 
emperor of all the Ruſſias; but was dethroned in 
wy cradle: my Parents were confined ; and I 
was educated in priſon: yet I am ſometimes al- 
lowed to travel, in company with perſons who keep 
a guard over me; and I am come to ſpend the car- 
nival at Venice. 

The third ſaid; I am Charles-Edward, king of 
England; my father has refigned all his regal rights 
to me. I have fought in defence of them ; and above 
eight hundred of my adherents have been hanged, 
n, and quartered. [I * myſelf been con- 

fined 


Ar FOR THE BIST. 113 
fined in priſon; I am going to Rome, to pay a 
viſit to the king my father, who was dethroned Ty 
well as myſelf and my grandfather, and gan 
come to ſpend the carnival at Venice. 

The fourth ſpoke thus in his turn: I am the king 
of Poland; the fortune of war has Kripped me of my. 
hereditary dominions ; my. father underwent the 
ſame vicifbrudes ; I refign myſelf to Providence in 
the ſame manner as ſultan Achmet, the emperor 
Ivan, and king Charles-Edward, whom God long 
preſerve ; and I am come to paſs the carnival at 
Venice. 

The fifth ſaid: I am kin of Poland wo; 1 have 
been twige dethraned ; by royidence has given me 
another- country, Where J have done more gt 
than all the Sarmatian kings were ever capab 
doing on the banks of the Viſtula: I reſign myſelf 
likewife to Providence, and am come to pals the - 
carnival at Venice. 

It was now the ſixth monarch's turn to ſpeak, 
Gentlemen, ſaid he, I am not ſo great a prince as 
any of you; however I am a crowned head, I am 
Theodore, elected king of Corſica; I had the title 
of majeſty, and now I am hardly treated as a 
gentleman. I have coined money; and now am 
not worth a farthing: I have had two ſecretaries 
of ſtate, and now I have ſcarce a valet. I was once 
ſeated on a throne, and fince that I have for ſome 
time laid upon ſtraw in a common jail in London. I 
am afraid I ſhall meet with the ſame treatment in 

L3 Venice, 


114 CAN DID: or, 


Venice, 'though I am come like your majeſties to 
divert myſelf at the carnival. 

The other five kings liſtened to this ſpeech with a 
generous compaſhon; each of them gave twenty 
tequins to king Theodore to buy him clothes and 
. - linen ; and Candid made him a preſent of a diamond 
worth two thouſand zequins. Who can this private 
perſon be, (aid the five kings to one another, who 
is able to give, and really has given, a hundred times 
2s much as any of us? 

': Jill 6s they tals from tadle, ts lade four ſerene 
highneſſes, who had alſo been ftripped of their ter- 
ritories by the fortune of war, and were come to 
ſpend the remainder of the carnival at Venice. But 

andid took no manner of notice of thoſe new- 
mers; his thoughts were intirely employed on his 
voyage to Conſtantinople, in Dae of his beloved 


WO. 
; ; 97 ö 
2 U — 
; T . 983 
4 £ 
1 * 


CHAP. 


Al rox Tur BIST. 1 


c CHAP. XXVIL. 
can, woyage to Conſtantinople; 


HE faithful Cacambo Rad already prevailed” 
with the Turkiſh captain, to take Candid 
and Martin on board his ſhip, which was to recon- 
duct ſaltan Achmet to Conſtantinople. They botit 
embarked, after paying their obeiſance to his miſe- 
rable highneſs. As Candid was on His way, he ſaid to 
Martin, You ſee we ſupped in company with fix 
dethroned kings, and' ont of thoſe fix there was one 
to whom I gave charity. Perhaps there are a great 
many other princes more unfortunate ſtill. For my 
part, I have loſt only a hundred ſheep; and now T 
am flying into Cunegund's arms. My dear Martin; 
once more I muſt ſay it, Pangloſs was in the right, 
every thing is for the beſt. I wiſh it, anſwered 
Martin. But, ſays Candid, it. was à very ſtrange 
adventure we met with at Venice. There never 
was an inſtance before, of fix dethroned kings 
ſupping together at a public inn, This is not 
more extraordinay, faid Martin, than moſt of the 
things that have happened to us. It is a very com- 
mon thing for kings to be dethroned; and as for 
the honour we have had to ſup in their company, 
it is a mere trifle, not worth our attention. 

No ſooner had Candid got on board the veſſel, - 
than he flew to his old valet and friend Cacambo, 
and tenderly embraced him, Well, faid he, what 
news 


16 CANDID: On, 
news of Cunegund ? Is ſhe ſtill the pearl of beauties ? 
Does ſhe love me ſtill? How does ſhe do? No doubt 
be purchaſed a palace for her at Conſtanti- 
nople ? 

My dear maſter, anſwered Cacambo, Cunegund 
waſhes diſhes on the banks of the Propontis, in the 
ſervice of à prince, who has very few diſhes to waſh ; 
ſhe is a flave in the family of an ancient ſovereign, 
named Ragotſky, to whom the grand ſeignor allows 
three crowns a day in his exile. But what is worſt 
of all, ſhe has loſt her beauty, and is grown con- 
founded ugly. Welt! handſome or ugly, replied 
Candid, I am a man of--hongur, and it is my duty 
do love her ſtill, But in the name of wonder, how 
enme ſhe to be reduc 
five or fix- millions that you carried to her? Ah! 
ſaid Cacambo, was not I to 
fignor Don Fernando /d'Ibaza, Y Figueora, y Maſca- 
renes, y Lampourdos, 
- Ayres, for permitting gaiſs Cunegynd to come away? 
And did not a Corſair b vely rob us of all the reft ! 


Did not this Corſair carry u>to. tapan, to 


Milo, to Nicaria, to Samos, to Petra, th the Darda- 
nels, to Marmora, to Scptari? Cunegund and the old 


woman are ſeryants to the prince I now mentioned 
to you ; and as for myſelf, I am flave to the 
dethroned ſultan. What a chain of ſhocking 


_ ealamities | cried Candid, But after all, I have 
ſome diamonds left, and I can eaſily py Cpnegund's 
ranſom. Vet W nn 0 vgly. 


Then 


o ſo ahject a ſtate, with the 
give two millions to- 


Souza, governor of Buenos- 


* 


ALL FOR Tux BIST. 117 


Then turning towards Martin, Who do you 
think, ſays he, is moſt to be pitied, the emperor 
Achmet, the emperor Ivan, king Charles-Edward, 
or I? How ſhould I know! anſwered Martin; I muff 
ſee into your breaſts, to be able to tell. Ah! ſaid Can- 
did, if Pangloſs was here, he could reſolve the queſtion. 
I know not, faid Martin, in what ſort of ſcales your 
Pangloſs would weigh the misfortunes of mankind, 
and ſet a juſt eſtimate on their ſorrows. All that I can 
venture to ſay, is, that there are millions of people 
upon earth, whoſe caſe is harder a hundred times, 
than that of king Charles-Edward, the emperor Ivan, 
or the ſultan Achmet, 'That may be, ſaid Candid. 

In a few days they reached the Boſphorus, and 
Candid began with paying a very high ranſom for 
Cacambo: then without loſing time, he and his 
| companions went on board a galley, in order to 
ſearch for his Cunegund, on the . 
pontis, notwithſtanding her deformity. 

Among the crew, there were two flaves who row- 
ed very ill, and to whoſe bare ſhoulders the captain 
would now and then apply a bull's pizzle. Candid, 
from a natural ſympathy, looked at theſe'two ſlaves 
more attentively than at any of the reſt, and drew 
towards them with an eye of pity, Their features, 
though greatly disfigured, ſeemed to reſemble thoſe 
of Pangloſs, and the unhappy Jefuit and Weſtphalian 
baron, brother of mifs Cunegund. This idea made 
him melancholy. He looked at them again more 
attentively. Indeed, ſaid he to Cacambo, if F 


M CANDID 


had not beep preſent; when * 2 was 
banged, and if I had not beep ſo unfortunate as to 


kill the baron myſelf, 1 ſhould think it was they that 


were rowing. 

Upon mentioning the name of the baron and 
| Pangloſs, the two galley-llaves gave a loud ſhriek, 
{at fill without: rowing, and let drop their oars, 


The captain ran up, to them, and applied the 


pull? pizale harder than ever. Hold your hand, 
hold your hand, fir, cried-Candid, I will give you 


what money you pleaſe, Lord] it is Candid | ſaid 


ene of the ſlaves; Lord | it is Candi! faid che 
other. Do I dream ? . Candid en te: 

Ferner ee 
| 8 ee e reer dee 


t ig we, it 
this the great 
captain, ſaid 
far. 
By 


sene! ſaid Martin, Harkee, 


Thunder: ten- tronckh, one of the 


gloſs, the prafoundeſt metaphyſician in Germa- 
? Von Chriſtian. dog, anſwered the captain, 
fince * two. dogs of Chriſtian ſlaves are ba- 
Tops, and 


give me-ffiy thouſand zequins. You ſhall have them, 
Gr ; carry me back this minute. to Conſtantinople, 
and you ſhall receive the money directly. No, carry 
me 6 But upon the firſt pro · 


poſal 


It we, anſyergd they. Well! is 
Candid, what ranſom will you aw. 
Chai barans of the empire; and for maſter Pan- 


metaphyſicians, who I make no doubt 
ue of bigh-rank. in their own country, you. ſhall 


83883 


22 A ALU os oo. fo os 


poſal made by Candid, the bad already 
tacked about, and ne made TN 
dur quicker than a bird cleaves the hir. 

Candid embraced the baron and Pangloſs A 1 
dred times. And how happened it, my dear baron, 
that 1 did not kill you? and my dear Pangloſs, how 
came you to life again, after being hanged ? and 
what has made both-of you ſlaves on board a Turkiſh 
galley? And is it true that my dear ſiſter is in this 
country? Taid the baron. Yes, anſwered Cacamba, 
Then 1 beh61d once more my dear Candid, eried 
Pangloſs. Candid preſented Martin and Cacambo 
to chem; chey embrated each ocher, and all fpoke 
at the fame time. The galley fle like lightning, 
and now they were got back to the port. Tiiſtatitly 
Candid ſent for a Jew, towhom he ſold for fifty thou- 
ſarid zequins, a diamond worth a hundred thouſand ; - 
though the fellow ſwore to him by Abraham, that 
he could give him no more. He immediately 
laid down the ranſom for the baron and for Path 
glofs. The latter threw himſelf ut the feet of his 
deliverer, and bathed them with his ters; the former 
thanked him with a nod, and promiſed to return him 
the money the firſt opportunity. But is it pol- 
Able, ſaid he, that my fiſter mould be in Tutky? 
Nothing is more poffible, anſwered Cacambs, for 
ſhe fcours the diſhes in the houſe of a Tranfylvunian 
prince. Candid fent directly for two Jews, and Told 
them fome more dinmonds; and then they all ſet out 


tie CANDID, 9 


CHAP. VIII. 


What happened to Candid, Crnrgand, bus, and 
del Ge. FF 


Aſk your ae once more, ſaid Candid: to the 

baron; your pardon, reverend father, for run- 
ning you through the body. Say no more about i it, 
anſwered the baron, I was a little too haſty I own; 
but ſince you want to know by what accident I 
came to be a galley-ſlave, I will inform you. 
After I had been cured of the wound you gave me, 
by the college apothecary, I was attacked and car- 
ried off by a party of Spaniſh troops, who con- 
fined me in priſon at Buenos-Ayres, at the very 
time my ſiſter was ſetting out from thence, I aſked 
leave to return to Rome to the general of my order, 
who appointed me chaplain to the French ambaſſador 
at Conſtantinople. I had not been eight days in this 
employment, when one evening I met with a young 
Ichoglan, who was a very handſome fellow. The 
weather was warm, the young man wanted to bathe, 
and I took this opportunity to bathe alſo. I did 
not know it was. a crime for a Chriſtian to be 
found naked in company with a#yyoung Muſ- 
ſulman. I was carried before a cadi, who order- 
ed me a hundred baſtinados, and condemned me to 
the galleys. I do not think there ever was a greater 
act of injuſtice. But I ſhould be glad to know in 
TAR manner my hſter came to be ſcullion to a 
y Tranſylvanian 


ALL FOR ras Brom. 121 


Tranſylyanian prince, who has taken ſhelter 5 among 
the Turks ! ads 4; | 

But as for you, my dear 'Pangloſs, ſaid Candid, 
by what miracle do I behold vo again ? It is 
true, ſaid Pangloſs, you ſaw. me hanged ; I'thould 
naturally have been burnt ; but you may remember 
it rained exceeding hard, when they were going to 
roaſt me: the ſtorm was ſo violent, chat they deſpaired 
of fighting the fire; ſo I was hanged, becauſe they 
could dp no better. A ſurgeon purchaſed my body, 
carried it home, and diſſected me. He began with 
making a crucial inciſion from the navel to the 
clavicle, It is impoſlible for a man to have 
been hanged in a more ſcurvy manner than I was. 
The executioner of the holy inquiſition was a ſub- 
deacon, and knew how to burn people very well, but 
he was not accuſtomed to hanging; the cord be- 
ing wet and not ſlipping properly, the nooſe was ill 
tied in mort, 1 continued to breathe, when the 
crucial inciſion made me to ſcream to ſuch a degree, 
that my ſurgeon fell flat upon his back, and ima- 
giving he had been diſſecting the devil, he ran away, 
and in his fright tumbled down ſtairs. His wife hear- 
ing the noiſe, flew from the next room, but ſeeing 
me ſtretched upon the table, The was ſeized with a 
greater trepidation than her huſband, and be- 
taking herſelf to flight, ſhe tumbled over him. 
When they came to themſelves, I heard the 
wife ſay to her huſband, My dear, how could 
you take it into your head to diſſect Fu > 
M 8 "Won 


Li I 
* Fa 
4 ? 


124 CANDID: Or, 


Don't ao "know that thofe' peopte have always 
the devil. in their bodies? I'll go and fetch 
2 prieſt this minute to exorciſe lim. At this 
propo oſal I ſhuddered, and multering up What lit- 
we fireng ch 1 had Kit nts T cried 'out, 
Have pity on me! A length the Portugueſe bar- 
ber took heart, and ſowed up my wound ; the 
wife nurſed me; and I was upon my legs again 
in fifteen days. The barber got me to be lackey 
to a knight of Malta, whe was going to Venice ; 
but finding my maler Had no money to pay me my 
wages, I entered the ſervice of a Venetian mer- 
chant, and went with him to Conſtantinople, | 
One day I took it into my head to enter a 
moſque, where 1 faw only an old Iman, and a 
very pretty young devote, who was ſaying her 
beads ; her neck was uncovered, and in her bo- 
fom me had a beautiful noſegay of tulips, roſes, 
anemones, ranunculuſes, hyacinths, and auriculas: 
the let drop her noſegay ; I took it up imme- 
diately, and preſented it to her with the moſt pro- 
found reverence. I was ſo long in delivering it, that 
the Iman began to be angry ; and ſeeing I was a 
Chriſtian, he cried out for help. They carried me 
before the cadi, who ordered me to receive a hundred 
baſtinados, and ſent me to the galleys. I was chained 
0 the very ſame galley, and the ſame bench with 
the baron. On board this galley there were four 
young men from Marſeilles, five Neapolitan prieſts, 
and two monks of Corfu, who told us that the like. 
4 adventures 


_—— ape aver ped 


7 


Abr roa int BIS. 123 


adventures happened daily. The baron pretended 
that he had undergone a more pt treatment than 
myſelf; and I inſiſted, that 
to take up a — . = pur it 282181 into a woman 8 
boſom, than to be found ſtark naked. w ith an Jcho- 
glan. We were coutinually dif puting, Fa. received 
twenty laſhes a day with a bull's pizzle, When the 
concatenation of ſublunary events brought vou on 
board our galley, to ranſom us from flavery. 

Well, my dear Pangloſs, ſaid Candid to him, 


when you. was banged, diſſected, whipped, and tug 


ging at the oar, did you. always think that every 


thing in this world happens for the beſt? Iam 


Rill of my . firſt opinion, anſwered Pangloſs : for 
after all, I am a philoſopher, and it does not be- 


come me to retract; eſpecially as Leibnitz could never 


be in the wrong z and beſides, the pre-cliabliſhed 
harmony is the fineſt thing in the world, and 1 is 


1 141 * 2742 is 

| | 4 | 4 FA 2 . 8 . Fg 4 . * " a. 4 
| 0 3004 HSE IST EO! DIIAEY 
. 75 — 5 
. 340 

18 8 . po ex 
} E WIC UNS, aALAARYDY IHIR' ; PEINRQ'S MO v4t 

* 4 # © 


„ 
a © 


TS rh of © 45 F< 4 A 12 f . "7 8 2 
% 8 221 o CT 14 »4# * 110 4x4 13-34 5% 


F o t AQ * . - 

F of bogey outs Hoes doide 
* * 4 N 

* 1 „„ 
'% b 5 N 20 Li en icht 
be \ Torfasra 11% £ of 
100 Ie den 000 101 y Frog, foo £07 

a . #F 
| f | N | 
4 2 3; - 7 6 
1 5 = ; wy 
= 
M2 "CHAP, 
F 


124 "CANDID: Or, 


cr anger © u A r. xx. 
Beau Candid found Cunegund and the old women again. 
We ILE Candid, the REY Pangloſs, Mar. 
tin, and Cacambo, were relating their ſeveral 
adventures, and reaſoning on the contingent or non- 
contingent events of the univerſe; on effects and their 
eauſes; on moral and phyfical evil; on liberty and 
veceſſty, and on che comforts à flave may feel 
en board a Turkiſh galley, they arrived at the houfe 
of the Tranſylvanian prince on the banks of the 
Propontis. The firſt thing they ſaw was Cunegund 
and the old woman, who were — out ſome 
2 table linen to „ de AQ 6 
Tue baron grew pale at wits fight. Ebb "Can- 
did, the tender lover, upon ſeeing his fair Cune - 
gund thus changed into a tawny Moor, with blear 
eyes, withered neck, wrinkled face, and red ſcaly 
arms, was greatly ſhocked, and drew back ; but ad- 
vanced towards her afterwards out of good manners. 
She embraced Candid and her brother; they embraced 
the old woman; and Candid ranſomed them both. 
There was a fmall farm in the neighbourhood, 
which the old woman propoſed to Candid to make a 
ſhift with, till the company could be provided for 
in a better manner. Cunegund did not know ſhe 
was grown ugly, for nobody had told her of it: 
and now ſhe reminded Candid of his promiſe in ſo 
Foe a tone, that the TOM man durſt not refufe 
75 ber, 


Arr rot ru BAsr. 1295 


. Her, He therefore ingzagted' tq the baron, that 

be would bew my his ale. I will wor fuller, © 
ſaid the baron, "ſuch meanneſs on her part, and ſuch 
inſolence on yours: it ſhall never be faid to 
me by way of reproach, chat my nephews | are not 
qualified for the firſt eccleſiaſtical dignities in Ger- 
many. No; my. fiſter ſhall never marry any per- 
ſon lower than à barbti of the Empire, re. Canna 
"flung herſelf at his feet, and bedewed then 
her tears; fill he.was inflexible. Thou fooliſh fel. 
low, ſaid Candid, I have delivered thee out of che 
galleys, I have 3 nes oy Geeks 
| alſo; ſhe: was 4 fcattion, and is et 1 
am” ſo” tndeſcending 46 to mai awd delt 
thou pretend to oppoſe the match 4 I Kur 
thee again, were I only to conſult my Fr Thou 
may it kill me gain, ſaid the baron, but thou ſhale 
not marry my Aller, at leaſt while T am 2 BE, 


4 9 11 - 
YR -1k& £#310- 210 rene 1. 07 n 


A1 nnn bid 2d: 135013397 thu ei 2214 26 1 


a + io . - | 8 * 4 
* 3044 CS $5 144d & LF 5 181 111 * 102 7 15 9. g 
* * 
ne” IE 
a 2 ; 
* * 
nn 15 ' 
* "A +4 C> # 
— — 12 £ - . "© $. F N : 
”- « y $3.7 C .. * N 
C 3 : 1,4 * ; * 4 7 þ 
« 0 1 + " * br ws — » 19 £ \ $4 1 * 8 
9907 432 * — a 0-57 "4 $1 Cs: 265% +44 A N. av ue 4.4 3 > = 
| , N L b , 
1 ma — 1 14 1 4 1 8 * 58 51442 1.0 * 6 . 
7 Neis 12 K's) 4 14 4 # 
4 7 - 


M3 © HA r. 


226 ANI De Or, 
2643 ,no186 en 1 H A. BY: uH 121 


Rü! 201 III | eff rc * hon 24 
Air En The, C,O.N\CL,U81,0..N, . «4 Fat 
01 I 5 IB Med 4; > win _ 09 ee 


PAM, E. e eee 


rd, that he could not go back from his 


Word., * However, he conſulted. Pangloſs, „Martin, 
2 che faichful Cacambo.  Pangloſs drew up an 


lent memorial, whereip he proved that the ba- 


-— had no right over his fiſter, ; and that, according 
vo. the Jawa, of che empire, ſhe might marry, Can- 
did with ber leſt hand. Martin, was for throwing 


the baron into the fea : "A Cacambo determined it 


would be better to deliver him up again to the cap- 
tain of the galley, with directions to ſend. him by 
the firft ſhip to the general of the order at Rome. 

The advice was well received, the old woman ap- 
proved of it; they ſaid not a word to his ſiſter; 
dhe thing was executed for a little money, and they 
had the pleaſure of outwitting a Jeſuit, and puniſh- 

ing the pride of a German baron. 

It is natural to imagine, that Candid, after ſuch 
viciſſitudes of life, being now married to the woman 
he had long adored, and living under the ſame roof 
with the philoſophers Pangloſs and Martin, the pru- 
dent Cacambo, and the old woman, and eſpecially 
as he had n ſo many diamonds with him from 


SS 


5 e 15 *. fo on che other hand preſſed 


ALL #0R(THe BrsT: 127 
the country of the ancient Incas, muſt have led a ve 
happy life. But he was ſo greatly impoſed; upon hy 
theJews, that he had nothing left except his {mall farm; 
his wife grew uglier every day, and-was withal grown 
intolerab'y-peeviſh.z the old woman was infirm,” and 
even more fretful and ill humoured than Cung- 
gund herſelf. Cacambo worked in the garden, 
and ſold the produce at Conſtantinople; but f- 
tigued with the dradgery, he often curſed his hard 
fate. Pangloſt was ready. to deſpair, hecauſe he did 
not make a figure.in ſome German univerſity, As 
to Martin, he was firmly ,perſpaded. that all, was. 
equally bad throughout; ſo that he took, things 
patiently. Candid, Martin, and Pangloſs, ſome- 
They often ſaw under the farm windows boats full 
of effendis, baſhaws,, and cadis, who were going 
into baniſhment to Lemnos, Mitylene, or Erzerum : 
and they ſaw: other cadis,  baſhaws, and eſfendis, 
coming to ſupply the place of che / exiles, and af- 
terwards exiled in their turn. They ſaw heads de- 
cently. wrapped up in ſtraw, which were to be pre- 
ſented to the ſublime port. Such ſpectacles as theſe in- 
creaſed their diſputations ; and when they did not 
diſpute, time hung ſo. heavy upon their hands, | that 
ane day the old woman ventured to {ay to them: 
I, want ta know, which, is, worſe, to be raviſhed 2 
hundred. times. by. negro pirates, to have a buttock 
cut off, to run tho gauntlet among the Bulgarians, to 


be whipped and hanged at an Auto-da-fe, to be diſ- 
— ſected, 


. 


128 AND 1D: Or, 


ſole, 0 be x galley-ino; in (hot, ta go throu 
all the miſeries that we have undergone, or to Ray 
here and have nothing to do? It e eg 
R faid Candi. 

This diſcourſe- gave rife to new refleQions, and 
Martin eſpecially concluded, that man was born to 


ne either in a ſtate of diſtracting inquietude, or of 


lethargic diſguſt: Candid did not quite agree to that, 
but he affirmed nothing, Pangloſs owned that he 
had gone through a terrible deal of hardſtip ; but as he 
bad once aſſerted: that every thing went wonder. 
fully well, he tilt maintained the ſame opinion, 
ba jo did not believe it to be true. 

What helped to confitti Martin in his deteRtable 
princely; to ſtagger Candid more than ever, and 
to puzzle Pangloſs, was, that one day they ſaw 
Paquette; and friar Giroflee land at the farm in the 
greateſt miſery imaginable. They ſoon ſquandered 
their three thouſand piaſtres, parted, were ' recon- 
ciled, quarrelled again, were thrown' into jail, had 
made their eſcape, and friar Giroflee at length 
Had turned Turk. 


of money, you and Cacambo ; and yet you are not 


happier than friar Giroflée, and Paquette.” Ha! faid 
Pangloſs to Paquette, Providence has then brought you 


amongſt us again, my poor child i do you know'thar 
* 


Paquette continued her trade 
wherever ſhe went, but made nothing of it. I fore- 
ſaw it, ſaid Martin: to Candid, that your preſents 
would ſoon be ſquandered away, and only make. 
them more miſerable. Vou have rolled in millions 


A 8. T FA 


ALL Fox Tat BEST. 129 


you coſt me the tip of my noſe; an eye, aud an 
ear, as you may behold? What a world is this 
And now this new adventure nenn {ey 
ne more chan erer 148.2 4 
In the neighbourhood lived a famous i, 

oy was eſteemed the beſt” philoſopher in all Tur- 
ky, and him they went to conſult. ' Pangloſs was the 
ſpeaker :* Maſter, ſaid he, we are come to beg you 
will let us know for mW any ane an animal 
as man was formed? W . 2: 1E brut 

What is that to a ren, is it any 
buſineſs of yours ? But, reverend father, ſaid Candid, 
there is a horrid deal of evil in this world. What fig- 
niſies it, laid the: dervis, whether there be good or 
evil? When his highneſs ſends a ſhip to Egypt, does 
he trouble his head, whether the rats on board are at 


their eaſe or not? What then muſt we do? ſaid Pan- 


gloſs. Hold your tongue, anſwered the dervis. I 


was in hopes, ſaid: Pangloſs, that 1 ſhould reaſon 


with you «little about cauſes and effects, about the 


beſt of poſſible worlds, the origin of evil, the nature 


of che ſoul, and the pre- eſtabliſned harmony. At 


theſe words the dervis ſnut the door upon them. 
During this converſation, the news was ſpread that 


two vizirs of the bench, and the muphti, had been ſtran- 
gled at Conſtantinople, and that ſeverab of their friends 


had: been impaled. I his cataſtrophe made a great noiſe 
for ſome hours. Pangloſs, Candid, and Martin, re- 


torting to the little farms; ſaw/ a. good looking old 


mail taking the freſtvair at his door under a bower of 


r orange - 


730 CANDID: Os, 


orange trees. Pangloſs, who had as much curioſity 
as learning, aſked the old man, what was the name 
of the ſtrangled muphti? I do not know, anſwered the 
good man; and what's more, I never knew the name 
of any muphti, or of any vizir. I am entirely igno- 
rant of the event yon have been mentioning; I pre- 
fume in general that they who meddle with the ad- 
miniſtration of public affairs, die ſometimes miſerably, 
and that they. deſerve. it: but I never trouble my 
head about what is tranſacting at Conſtantinople. I 
content myſelf with- ſending my fruits thither, the 
produce of my garden, which. I cultivate with my 
own hands. He had no ſooner ſaid theſe words, 
than. he invited the ſtrangers into his houſe : his 
two ſons and two. daughters preſented them with 
ſeveral- ſorts of ſherbety,, which they made them- 
ſelves, befides Caymac enriched with the peels 
of candied citrons,, oranges, lemons, ananas, 
piſtachio. nuts, and: Macho, coffee, unadulterated 
with the bad coffee of Batavia, or the American 
iſlands. After which the two daughters. of the bo - 
You-muſt have a. very large eſtate, {aid Candid to 


the Turk: I have no more than twenty acres of 


land, anſwered the old man; I cultivate the whole 
- myſelf, with the help of my children; and our la- 
hour preſerves us from res ideals Mets, 
_ and want. bil 5 

- Candid in RES WP TOI 
en the old man's converſation. T his. honeſt . * 


ALL rox TRE BIST. 131 

faid he to Pangloſs and Martin, ſeems to be in u 
ſituation preferable to that of the fix kings, with 
whom we had the honour of ſupping. Human 
grandeur, ſaid Pangloſs, is extremely precarious, ac- 
cording to the teſtimony of philoſophers. For, in 
ſhort, 'Eglon king ef "Moab was ' afſaflinated by 
Ehud; ' Abſalom was hanged by the hair of the 
head, and pierced through with three darts, King 
Nadab, the ſon of Jeroboam, was killed by Baaſa ; 
king Ela by Zimri ; Ahaziah by Jeha 5 Athaliah 
by Jehojada ; the kings Jehoiakim, 1 and 
Zedekiah, were led into eaptivity. You” know 
what was che Fate of Creœſus, Aſtyages, Darius, 
Dionyſius of Syracuſe, Pyrrhus, Perſes, Hannibal, 
Jugartha, Arioviſtus, Cæſar, Pompey, Nero, Otho, 
Vitellius, Domitian, Richard II. of England, Ed» - 
ward II. Henry VI. Richard III. Mary Queen 
of Scots, Charles I. the three Henries of France, 
the emperor Henry IVth? You know...., 1 
know alſo, ſaid Candid, that we muſt take care of 
our garden: you are in the right, {aid Pangloſs; for 
when our firſt” parent was placed in the garden of 
Eden, he was put there at aperaretur eum, to dreſs it and 
fo keep ir; which ſhews that man was not born 
to be idle, Let us work, ſaid Martin, without diſput- 
ing, it is the only way to render life tolerable. 

Hereupon the whole ſociety entered into this laud- 
able deſign, according to their different abilities, 
Their little piece of ground produced them a plentiful 
crop. Cunegund indeed was very ugly, but ſhe be- 

came 


1322 CAN DID: &c. 


oame an excellent paſtry- cook, while Paquette worked 
at her needle, and the old woman looked after the 
linen. They were all, not excepting friar Giroflee, 
of ſome ſervice or other; for he made a good car. 
penter, and became a very honeſt man. Panglofy 
uſed ſometimes to ſay to Candid, There is a conca- 
tenation of events in this beſt of all poſſible worlds; 
for if you had not been kicked out of a magnificent 
caſtle, on account of miſs Cunegund ; if you had not 
been thrown into the inquiſition ; if you had not 
rambled all over America on foot; if you had not 
run the baron through the body ; if you had not loſt 
all your fine ſheep of Eldorado, you would not be 
here to eat preſerved citrons and piſtachio nuts. All 
that is very well, anſwered Candid, but let us take 
care of our garden. 


L OE 0 


