— 3 


CANDID) . — 


O RX. 


ALL FOR THE BEST. 


Tranſlated from the Fagncy of 
KK D&S VOLT alnkk 


EFF 


LL OO kk D © W; 
Printsd ſor M, COOPER in Pater Noſter Row. 


- 


* , 
n — —— — ———j—äSäʃivVb b ̃ I· V on — — . — —- . a — —. . — 
— — 


2 —_— 


CONTENTS 


FAR FT: 


CHAP. L 


1” Candidu was brought up in a fine caſtle, and 
2 bw he was expelled from thence Page 1 


What became of Candidus aming the Bulgarians. 4 
CHAP. Ill. 


Fow | Condidus eſcaped from the Bulgarians, and ut 
afterwards happened to him. 6 


Flow Candidus met with his old maſter of philsfoþtv, 
Dr. Panglsſs, and what befel them, 9 


en AP. v. 


Tempeſt, ſhipwreck, earthquake, and what became of 
Dr. Pang los, Candidus, and James the Anabaptift, 
| 3 12 
CHAP, VI. 


ew a fine auto · da ſe was celebrated, ts prevent earth - 
guares ; and how Candidus was whipped, 15 


: 
4 © 3 


e O nr nr 
CHAP, vll. 


| How an old woman tool care of Candidus, and how h: 
found the object he loved. 17 


CHAP, VIII. 


The hiſtory of Cunegonda. 19 
"Wap. mW. 

Wiat befel Cunegonda, Candidus, the grand inguiſi- 

tor, and the Few, 23 
CHAP. X. 


In what diſtreſs Candidus, C unegonda, and the old wwe- 
man arrived at Cadiz, and of their imbarkation. 25 


Tan mm - 
The hiflory of the eld woman, 27 
CHAP, XII. 
The ſequel of the old woman's adventures, 31 
na r. XII. 


How Candidus was obliged to part from the fair Cite 
negonda and the old woman, 19 2 


CHAP. MV. 


How Candidus and Cacambo were received by the Je- 
ſuits of Paraguay. 9 


CHAP, XV. 


Hoa Candidus killed the brother f his dear Cure. 
Senda. 4 


CouTTuTCTi 
CHA P. XVI. 


What paſſed between our two travellers, and two 
girls, tus monkeys, and the ſavages called Oreil- 
lons. | | 44 

CHAT. . 


Candidus and his man arrived at the country of EIda- 
rado, and what they ſaw there, — M 


Cl AFP. xv. 
What they ſaw in the country of Eldorado, 53 
CHAP. XIX. 


[hat befel them at Surinam, and how Candidus became 
acquainted with Martin, $9 


hat befel to Candidus and Martin at ſea, 65 
CHAP. III. 


Candidus and Martin. approach the coaft of France, 
and diſpute. . 68 


I hat befel Candidus and Mat tin in F rance. 70 
C HAP. . 


Candidus and Martin ge to the Engliſh coaſt, and 
what they ſaw there. 5 70 


CHAP. XXIV. 


concerning Paquztta, and Father Giraſſee. 78 


„ 


CONTENT S. 
CHAP. XXV. 
The viſit to Seignior Pococurante, the Neble Venetian, 
CHAP. XXVI. * 


Of Candidus and Martin“, Supping with fix ſt rangers, 
and who they ere. 89 


C HAP. XXVII. 


The v:yage of Candidus to . 92 


CHAP. xxviII. 


That 6570 Candidus, cage Panglaſt, Mar- 


Sr. . | | 


How Candidus found Cunegonda and the old woman 


again, 100 
CHAP, XXX, 
The concluſion. 101 


. oÞ 36 >Þ> od v oÞi> 3Þm vÞ> ode dts 8 odd 3Þe dom vpn > 
SAT WK 


= F E 8 


Hon Candidus parted from his company, and what re - 
ſalted from it. | 107 


hat befel Candidas in this houſe, and how he J vY 1. 


111 


£ONTEN T Ss. 
CHAP. III. 
Candidus's reception at court, and what followed, 114 
CHAP, IV. 


Candidus receives new favours, His elevation, 110 


CHAP. V. 
As how Candidus was a great prince, but not ſatif- 
fied, EE Ho 113 
CHAP. VL 
Candidusrs pleaſures. 119 


C Tl 4 DP. VII. 
The hiftory ef Zirza, 123 


Candidus's diſanſtl. A meeting which he did not ex- 
Peet. ä 126 
CHAT K. 


CVandidus's diſgrace, travels, and adventures, 129 
. 

The arrival of Candidus and Pangloſ in Propontis, 

what thor ſaw there, and what became of them, 132 


CHAP. XL 


Candids continues his journey; and in what capacity. 
134 
Vardilus continues his frurneys New adventurer, 136 


ED WW IT EH FT A 


The fiory of Zencide. —— How Candidus became in 


ode with her, and the conſequences. 141 
CHAP, XIV. 
Continuation of Candidus's amour. 144 
C HAP. XV. 
The arrival of Valhall, Tourney to Copenhagen, 147 
CHAP. xvi. 


How Candidus found his wiſe again. Hu he was 
deprived of his miſtreſs. - 149 


- H A P. XVII. 


| How Candidus intended ts kill himſelf, and did not 
efedtuate it. What happened to him in an inn. 152 


CHAP. XVII. 


Candidu and Cacambo retire to an hoſpital, Adven- 
ture there, | 155 
CHAP. III. 


| New adventures. pay 
CHAP. XX. 
The concluſion of Candidus's misfertunes : bea he 


ſound his miſtreſs again, and what was the conrfe- 


+ K * 


C AN W 100 Wu BW 
OR, 
 ALLFOR THE BEST. 


— 5Þw +Þ)6 js oÞv jw oÞ> $56 oÞÞ> >d> 0d tn oÞ in oÞim oÞ mon 
DS ak 1L 


CH AP, I. 


H v Candidus was brought up in a fine caſtle, and how 
he was expelled from thence. 


N the caſtle of my Lord the Baron of Thunder- 
ten- tronckh in Weſtphalia, there lived a young 
man, on whom nature had bettowed the moſt a- 
greeable parts. His face was the index of his 
mind. He had an upright heart, with an eaſy frank- 
neſs ; for which reaſon, I believe, he got the name of 
Candidus. He was imagined by the old ſervants of 
the family to be the ſon of my Lord the Baron's ſiſter, 
by a good worthy gentleman of the neighbourhood, 
whom that young lady declined to marry, becauſe he 
could only produc- ſeventy one armorial quarterings, 
the reſt of his genealogicai tres having been deliroy- 
ed by the injuries of time 
The Baron was one of the moſt powerful lords in 
. A | 


2 CANDIDUS; or, Chap. 1. 
Weſtphalia; for his caſtle had both a gate and win- 
dows; and his great hall was even adorned with tape- 


firy, The dogs of his outer yard compoſed his pack 


„pon occaſion ; his grooms were his huntſmen; and 
the vicar of the pariſh was his great almoner. He was 
called by every body, My Lord; and every one would 
loch when he told his ſtory. 

My Lady the Baroneſs, who weighed about three 


hundred ard fifty pounds, attracted by that means ve - 


ry great regard, and did the honours of the houſe 
with a dignity that rendered her ſtill more reſpectable. 
Her davghter Cunegonda, aged about ſeventeen years, 
was of a high complexion, freſh, plump, and the ob- 
ject of deſire. The Baron's ſon appeared to be in eve- 
ry reſpect worthy of his father. The preceptor, Pan- 
gloſs, was the oracle of the houſe, and little Candi- 
dus hearkened to his lectures with all the fimplicity 
that was ſuitable to his age and his character. 
Pangloſs taught metaphy ſico- theologo · coſmoloni · 
gology. He proved molt admirably, that there could 
not be an effec without a cauſe; that, in this beſt of 
poſſible worlds, my Lord the Barcn's caſtle was the 
molt magnificent of caſtles, and my lady the beſt of 
Baroneſſes that pc ſſibly cou'd he. 
Veet is demonſtrable,” ſid he, ** that things cannot 
be otherwiſe than they are: for all things having 
been made for ſome end, they maſt neceſſarily be in- 
tended for the bet end, Obſerve well that the noſe 
Las been mad: ler carrying ſpectacles, therefore we 
have fpetacl's. The legs are viſibly defizned for 
Bockin:s, and therefore we have ſtockings. Stones 
have been formed to be hewn, and to make caſtles; 


thereſore my lord has a very fine calt'e; and the great- 


cit baren of the province ongEt to be the belt lodged. 
Swine were made to be eat; therefore we eat pork all 
the year round: conſequently, thoſe who have aſſert 
el, that all is good, have ſaid a fooliſh thing; they 
Gould have fail, that ul is for the belt,” 


/ ˙ ² A A a6 a as Ciao a 


Ge a a ee aw en mA a. a. 269 on Ca 


LE ie hs. * 


wry 


FJC &. , A... 


Chap. 1. ALL ror TRE BE3r, 3 

Candidus liſtened attentively, and believed impli- 
citly; ſor he thought Mils Cunegonda extremely 
handſome, though he had never had the courage to 
tell her ſo. He concluded, that next to the good for + 
tune of being born Baron of Thunder ten-tronckh, 
the ſecond degree of happineſs was that of being Miſs 


__ Cunegond 1, the third to ſee her every day, and the 
fourth to hear Maſter Pangloſs, the greateſt philoſo- 


pher of the province, and conſequently ot the whole 
world, 

One day Cunegonda having taken a walk hard by 
the caſtle, in a little wond, which they cailed the 


park, eſpied among the buſhes Doctor Pangloſs, giv+ 


ing a lecture in experimental philoſophy to her mo- 
ther's chambermaid, a little brown wench, very hand- 
tome, and very tractable. As Miſs Cunegonda had 
a ſtrong inclination for the ſciences, ſhe obſerved, 
without making any noiſe, the experiments repeated 
before her eyes; ſhe ſaw very clearly the ſufficient 
reaſon of the Doctor, the effects and the cauſes; and 
ſhe returned greatly flurred, quite pen ſive, and full of 
defire to be learned; unagining, that ſhe might be a 
ſufficient reaſon for young Candidus, as he alſo might 
be the ſame to her. 

In her return to the caſtle ſhe met Candidus, and 
bluſhed ; Candidus alſo bluſbed: the withed him good 
morrow with a faltering voice; and Candidns made 
anſwer, without knowing what he ſaid, The next 
day, aſter dinner, as they roſe from table, Cunegon · 
da and Candidus happened to get behind the ſcreen. 
Cune gonda dropt her handkerchief, and Candidus 
took it up; the, not thinking any harm, took hold of 
his hand; and the young man, not thinking any ham 
neither, kiſſed the hand of the young lady, with an 


eagerneſs, a ſenſibility, and grace, wholly ſingular; 


their mouths met, their eyes ſparkled, their knees 

trembled, their hands ſtrayed.— The Baron of Thun 

der ten · tronckh happening to paſs cloſe by the ſereen, 
F A 2 


- 
— U—j—ↄ—5 — * 
a — 


4 CAN DID US; or, Chap. 2. 
and obſerving this cauſe and eſſect, kicked Candidus 

out of the caltle, with luſty blows on the backſide, 
Cunegonda fell into a ſwoon ; and as ſoon as ſhe came 
to herſelf, was heartily euffed on the ear by my Lady 
the Baroneſs. Thus all was caſt into confuſion in 
the fineſt and moſt agreeable caſtle in the world. 


<I> —— — DO YI 2 , 
2 


il hat became of Candidus among the Bulgarians. 


Andidus being driven from the terreſtrial paradiſe, 
rambled a long time without knowing where, 
in tears, lifting up his eyes to heaven, and ſometimes 
turning them towards the fineſt of caſtles, which con- 
taiaed the moſt handſome of baronefſ:s. He laid himſelf 
down, without his ſupper, in the open fields, between 
two furrows, while the ſnow fell in great flakes. Can- 
didus, almoſt frozen to death, crawled next morning, 
to the neighbouring village, which is called I#ald- 
bergheff trarbi dikdorfſ. Having no money, and dy- 
ing with hunger and fatigue, he ſtopped in a dejected 
poſture, before the gate of an ina. Two men dreſſed 
in blue, obſerving him in ſuch a ſituation, © Brother,” 
Tiys one of them to the other, there is a young fel- 
low well built, and of a proper height.” They ac 
colted Candidns, and invited him very cwilly to din- 
ner. Gentlemen, replicd Candidus wich an agree- 
able modeſty, ** you do me much honour, but I have 
no money to pay for my (hot.” O Sir,“ faid one of 
the blues, * perſons of your appearance and merit 
never pay any thing: are you not five feet five inches 
high?“ „ Yes, Gentlemen, that is my height,“ re: 
turned he, making a bow. * Come, Sir, fit down at 
table: we will not only treat you, but we will never 
let ſuch a man as you want money: men are made to 


C 
q 
( 
e 
. 


_—_— rn n - ml. as 


AF 


Chap. 2. 
aſſiſt one another Lou are in the right,” faid 
Candidus; that is what Pangloſs always told me, 
and I fee plainly that every thing is for the belt.” 
They intreat him to take a few crowns; which he 
accepts of, and would have given them his note, but 
they refuſed it, and ſat down to table. Do you not 


love tenderly Miſs Cunegonda.”” 
the gentlemen; ** we alk you if you co not love ten- 


ALL ror THE BF r. 1 


2 „ 6 yes,” replied he, 1 
+ No,” ſaid one cf 


love tenderſy——— 


derly the King of the Bulgarians ??” Not at all,” 
ſaid he, for [ rever ſaw him.“ How! he is the 
moſt charming of kings, and you muſt drink his 
health.“ ©, with all my heart, Gentlemen,” and 
drinks. That is enough,” ſaid they to him; 50 
are now the bulwark, the ſupport, the defender, the 
hero of the Bulgarians; your fortune is made, and 
you are certain of glory,” Inſtantly they clap him 
in irons, and carry him to the regiment, He is made 
to turn about to the right and to the left, to draw the 

rammer, to return the rammer, to preſent, to fire, to 


double; and they give him thirty blows with a cud- 


gel. The next day he performs his exerciſe not quite 


ſo bad, and receives but twenty blows; the third day 


the blows are reſtricted to ten, and he is looked upon 


by his fellow-foldiers as a k nd of prodigy. 


Caudidus quite ſtupiied, could not well conceive 
how he had become a hero, One fine day in the fpring 
it came into his head to take a walk, geing firaight 
forward, imagining that the human, as well as-the a- 


nimal ſpecies, were intitled to make whatever uſe they 


pleaſed of their limbs, He had not travelled two 
leagues, when four other heroes, ſix feet high, came 
up to him, bound him, and put him into a dungeon. 
He is aſked by a court-martial, whether he chufes to 
be whipped fix and thirty times through the whole 
regiment, or receive at once twelve bullets through 
the forehead? He in vain argued that the will is fiee, 
and that he choſe neither the one nor the other; be 
A 3 


6 CANDID US; or, Chap. 3. 
was obliged to make a choice: he therefore reſolved, 
in virtue of God's gift, called free quill, to run the 
gaunlet ſx and thirty times. He underwent this 
diſcipline twice, The regiment being compoled of 
two thouſand men, he received four thouſand laſhes, 
which laid open all his muſcles and nerves from the 
nape of the neck to the poſteriors. As they were pro- 
reeding to the third operation, Candidus being quite 
ſpent, begged as a favour, that they would be fo kind 
as to ſhoot him: he obtained his requeſt ; they hood- 
wink him, and make him kneel; the King of the Bul- 
garians paſſing by, inquired into the crime of the de- 
linquent; and as this prince was a perſon of great pe · 
netration, he diſcovered from what he heard of Can- 
didus, that he was a young metaphyſician, quite 1g- 
norant of the things of this world; and he granted 
kim his pardon, with a clemency which will be prait- 
ed in all hiſtories, and throughout all ages. An ex- 
perienced ſurgeon cured Candidus in three weeks, 
with ointments preſcribed by no leſs a maſter than 
Dioſcorides. He had now acquired ſome ſkin, and 
was able to walk, when the King of the Bulgarians 
gave battle to the Tag of the Abares, 


C H A P. II. 


* a Candidus —— hues from the Bul. gariant, and what 
afterwards en to him, 


Othing could be fo fine, fo neat, ſo ſplendid, fo 

well diſpoſed, as the two armies. The trum- 
pets, fifes, hautboys, drums, and the cannon, formed 
an harmony ſuperior to what hell could invent. The 
cannon ſwept off at firſt about fix thouſand men on 
each fide; afterwards the muſketry carried away from 
the beſt of worlds, about nine or ten thouſand rica! 


47 


Chap. 3. ALL Fort THE Besr, 7 
that inſected its ſurface, The Layonet was likewiſe 
the ſufficient reaſon of the death of ſome thouſands ot 
men. The whole number might amount to thirty 
thouſand ſouls. Candidus, who trembled like a phi: 
loſopher, hid himſelf as well as he could during this 


heroic butchery. 


In ſhort, while each of the two Kings were cauſigg 
Te Deum to be ſung in their reſpect:ve camps, he re- 
ſolved to go ſomewhete elle, to reaſon upon the effects 
and cauſes, Ille wai-ed over heaps of the dead and 
dying: he came at fleſt to a neighbouring v itage be 
longing to the Abires, but found it in aſhes; for it 
had been burnt by the Fulparians according to the 
law of nations, Here were to * en old men ful! 


_ of wounds, calting their eyes on their murdered wives, 


who were holding their int nts to their bloody breatts, 
You nig t fee in angther place, virgins having their 
bellies ripped up, after they had ſatisfied the natura! 
deſires of forme of thoſe heros, breathing out their 
laſt ſighs. Others helf-burnt prayed encneRtly for in - 
ſtant death. The whole feli was covered with brains, 
and with legs and arms lopped otr, | | 

Candidus betook himſelf with full ſpeed to another 
village. It belonged to the Balgacians, and had me. 
with the fame treatment from the Abarian heroes. 


Candidus walking fill forward over qirering lumbs, 


or through rubbiſh of houſes, get at laſt cur cf the 
theatre of war, having fome ſina'l quantity of provi- 
ſions in his knapſack, and never ſorgetting Milfs Cu- 
negenda, His proviſians failed hin when he arrived 
in Holland; but having heard that every cne was 
rich in that country, and that they were Chriſtians, 
he did not Contt but he ſhould be as well treated 
there as he had been ia my Lord the Baron's caſtle, 
defore he had been expelled thence on account of Miſs 


Cunegonda's ſparkling eyes, 


He aſked alms from ſeveral grav--looking perſons ; 
& ho all replied, that if be continaed that trade, they 
o A 4 


whole hour had been diſcour 
rity, before a large aſſembly. This orator looking 


Here ? are you for the good cauſe ?” There is no 


8 c Anu Dip us; o, Chap. 3. 
would confine him in a houſe of correction, where he 
ſhould learn to get his bread. | 
He applied himſelf afterwards to a man, who fora 
ourſing on the ſubje& of cha- 


on him aſkance, ſaid to him, What are you doing 


effect without a cauſe,” replied Candidus modeſtly ; 
all is neceſſarily linked, and ordered for the beſt. 
A neceſſity baniſhed me from Cunegonda; a neceſſity 

forced me to run the gauntlet ; and another neceſſity 
makes me beg for my bread, till I can fall on a buſi- 
neſs to earn it. All this could not be otherwiſe.” 
*© My friend,” ſaid the orator to him, do you be- 
lieve that the Pope is Antichriſt ?” I never have 
heard whether he is or not,” replied Candidus; ** but 
whether he is, or is not, I want bread.” * You do 
not deſerve to eat any, ſaid the other; get you 
gone, you rogue, get you gone, you wretch ; never 
in thy life come near me again.“ The orator's wife, 
having popped her head out of the window, and ſee- 
ing a man who doubted whether the Pope was Anti- 


_ chriſt, poured on his head a full————0O heavens! 


2 28. 24» 
ſex! 


A man who had not been baptized, 26d, a good Ana- 


baptiſt, named James, ſaw the barbarous and igno- 


minious manner with which they treated one of his 
brethren, a being with two feet, unfeathered, and en- 
dowed with a rational ſoul, He tock him home with 
him, cleaned him, gave him bread and beer, made 


him a preſent of two florins, and offered to teach 


him the method of working in his manufactories of 
Perfian ſtuffs, which are fabricated in Holiand, Can- 
didus proſtrating himſelf almoſt at his knees, cried 
out, Mr, Pangloſs argued well when he ſaid, that 
every thing is for the beſt in this world; for I am in- 


finitely more affected with your very great, generoſity, 


_ replied the other, Candidus faint 


Chap. 4- ALL For THE BEST. * 
than by the hard- heartedneſs of that gentleman wita 
the vleck cloak, and the ad; his wife.“ 

As he was taking a walk next day, he met a beggar 
all covered over with fores, his eyes dead, the tip of 
his noſe eat off, his mouth turned to one ſide of his 
face, his teeth black, ſpeaking through his throat, 
tormented with a violent cough, and ſpitting a tooth 
at every time he attempted to draw his — 


S SSSSSSSGSS SSS 


CHAP, lv. 


How Candidus met with his old maſter of philofepty,. 
Dr. Pangloſs, and what befel them. 


YAndidus, moved more with compaſſion than hor- 
; ror, gave this frightful ſuppliant the two flo · 
rins which he had received of his honeſt Anabaptiſt. 
James. The ſpectre fixed his eyes attentively upon 
him, dropt ſome tears, and was going to fall upon 
his neck. Candidus affrighted, drew back. Alas!” 
ſaid the one wretch to the other, do you. not 
know your dear Pangloſs any longer? What do I. 
hear! ls it you, my dear maſter! you in this fright-⸗ 
ful condition! What misfortune has befallen e 
Why are you no longer in the moſt magnific _ 
caſtles? What is become of Miſs Cunegond- 
pariel of the fair ſex, the maſterpiece © ; 
have no more ſtrength,” ſaid Pang 
dus immediately carried | him to the Ana 
where he gave him a little bread to 
gloſs was refreſhed a little, Well 
what is become of Cunegonda ?” 


word: but his friend recovered his 
dad vinegar wl. ich he found by 
. 4 5, 


13 CAN DID US; or., Chap. 4. 
Candidus opening his eyes, cried out, Cunegonda 
is dead ! Ah, beſt of worlds, where art thou? But of 
what diſtemper di i the die? Was not this the cauſe, 
her ſeeing me d'iven out of the caſtle by my Lord, 
her father, with great kicks on tlie breech ?” „No,“ 
faid Panglofs, ** the was gutted by fome Bulgarian 
foldiers, after having been barbarouſly ravithed : they 


knocked my Lord the Baron on the head, for attempt- 


ing to protect her; my Lady the Baroneſs was cut in 


pieces; my poor pupil was treated preciſely like his 


ſiſter; and as for the caſtle, there is not one flone left 
upon another, ncr a barn, nor a ſheep, nor a duck, 
nor A tree. But we have been ſufficiently revenged ; 
for the Abarians have done the very ſame thing to a 
neighbouring baro!y, which belonged to a Bulgarian 
lord. 

At this diſcourſe Candidns fainted away a ſecond 


time: but coming to himſelf, and having ſaid all that 


he ought to ſiy, he inquired into the cauſe and the ef- 
ſect, and into the ſufficient reaſon that had reduced 
Pangloſs to fo deplorable a condition. Alas,” 
_ ſaid the other, it was love; love, the comforter of 


the human race, the preſerver of the univerſe, the ſou! 


of all ſenfible beings, tender love.” Alas!“ ſaid 
Candidus, I know this love, the ſovereign of hearts, 


and twenty kic's on the breech. But how could 
harming cauſe produce in you fo abominable an 


made anſwer as follows, ©* O my dear 
kaew Paquetta, that pretty attendant 
neſs; 1 taſted in her arms the de- 

v hich produced thoſe tot ments of 
oa fre me devoured, She was in- 
aps ſhe is dead, Paquetta received 
2 learned cordelier, who hai traced 
for he had it from an old counteſs, 


i the foul of our ſoul; yet it never coſt me more than a 


it from a captain of horſe, who was 


83 2 828˙ 8 


Chap. 4. ALt FOR THE BEST, 11 
indebted for it to a marchioneſs, who got it from 4 
page, who had received it from a Jeſuit, who in his 
noviciate had it in a direct line from one of the com- 
panions of Chriltopher Columbus. For my part, 1 
will give it to nobody, for I am dying.“ 

« © Pangloſs!” cited Candidus, what a ſtrange 
genealogy ! Has not the devil given riſe to it?“ “Nor 
at all,” replied this great man; it was a thing init 
penſable, a nec. (ſary ingreviznt, in the belt ot world 
for if Columbus had not catched, in an iſlind of A 
merica, this diſtemper, which poiſons the fource 64 
generation, frequently hinders generation, and is cvi- 
dently oppolite to the great deſign of nature, ve 
ſhould have had neither chocolate noc cochineal. I: 
may alſo be obſerved, that to this day, upon our con- 
tinent, this malady, like a point of controverſy, is pe- 
culiar to us. The Turks, the Indians, the Perllans, 
the Chineſe, the Stameſe, and te Japanetie, known 
thing of it yet, But there is a {uflicient reaſon why 
they, in their turn, ſhould become acquainted with ir, 
a few c2n'uries hence, In the mean time, it has made 
a marvellous progreſs among us, and eſpecially in 
thoſe great arm.ies compoſed of honeſt hirelings well 
_ Gitciphiced, who decide the fate of ſtates; for one may 

de affured, that when thirty theuſand men in a pitch» 
ed battle fight againſt troc ꝓs equal to them in number, 
there are about rwenty thouland of them poxed on 
each fide,” 

That is ſurpriſing,” ſaid Candidus: * but you 
muſt be cured,” * Ah! how can I ?” ſaid Pangloſs; 
„have rot a penny, my friend; and thronghout the 
whole extent of this globe, one cannot be let blood, 
nor get a gliſter, without paying for it, or ſome other 
perſcn doing that office for us. 

This laſt ſp:ech determined Candidus. He went to 
throw hiqſelf at the feet cf Bis charitable Anabaptiſt 
James; and gave him ſo ſtriking a deſcription of the 
Kite his fiierd was reduce 7 ro, tuat the good man did 
a AH | 


12 CANDIDUS; or, Chap. 5. 
not heſitate to entertain Dr. Pangloſs; and he had 
him cured at his own expence. During the cure, Pan- 
gloſs loſt only an eye and an ear. As he wrote well, 
and underitood arithmetic perfectly, the Anabapriſt 
James made him his book-keeper. At the end of two 
months, being obliged to go to Liſbon about the affairs 
of his trade, he took the two philoſophers with him in 
| His ſhip. Pangloſs explained to him how every thing 
was ſuch as it could not be better. James was not 
of this ſentiment. ** Mankind,” ſaid he, mult have 
a little corrupted their nature; for they were not 
born wolves, and yet they are become wolves: God 
has given them neither cannon of twenty-four pounds 
nor bayonets; and yet they have made cannon and 
bayenets to deſtroy one another, I might throw into 
the account bankrupts; and the law which ſeizes on 
the effects of bankrupts, only to bilk the creditors.” 
All this was indiſpenſable,” replied the one-eyed doc- 
tor, and private misfortunes conſtitute the general 
good; fo that the more private misfortunes there are, 
the whole is the better.” While he was reaſoning, 
the air darkened, the winds blew from the four quar- 
ters of the world, and the ſhip was attacked by a moſt 
dreadful ſtorm, within fight of the harbour of Liſbon, 


BEES ˙ BEECH. I 3% IT; 


CHAP. v. 


Tempeſt, fſhipmereck, earthquake, and what became of 
* Pang los, Candidus, and James the Anabaptiſt. 


O half of the paſſengers being weakened, and 
ready to breathe their laſt, with the incomprehen- 
fivle anguiſh which the toſſing of the ſhip conveyed 
through the nerves and all the humours of the body, 
which were quite diſordered, were not capable of be- 


wg alarmed at the danger they were in. The other 


Chap. 3. ALL For Tur BB . LF 
reat, the maſts broken, and the ſhip became leaky. 
Every one worked that was able; no body regarded 
any thing, and no order was kept. The Anabaptiſt 
contributed his aſſiſtance to work the ſhip. As he 
was upon deck, a furious failor rudely ſtruck him, 
and laid him tprawling on the planks ; but with the 
blow he gave him, he himſelf was fo violently jolted 
that he tumbled overboard with his head foremoſt, 
and remained ſuipended by a piece of a broken malt. 
Honelt James runs to his aſſiſtance, and helps him to 
get up again; but in the attempt is thrown into the 
ea, in the fight of the ſailor, who ſuffered him to 
periſh without deigning to look upon him. Candidus. 
draws near, and fees his benefactor one moment e- 
merging, and the next ſwallowed up for ever, He 
was jult going to throw himſelf into the ſea after him, 
when the philoſopher Pangloſs hindered him, by de» 
monſtrating to him, that the road of Liſbon had been. 
made on purpoſe for this Anabaptiſt to be drowned 
there, While he was proving this @ priori, the veſ- 
fel foundered, and all periſhed except Pangloſs, Can - 
didus, and this brute of a ſailor, who drowned the 
virtuous Anabaptiſt. The villain luckily ſwam a- 
ſhore, whither Pangloſs and Candids were carried on 
a plank, 
When they had recovered themſelves a little, they 
walked towards Liſboa, They had ſome money left, 
with which they hoped to ſave themſelves trom hunger, 
after having eſcaped from the ſtor m. 
Scarce had they ſet foot in the city, bewailing the 
death of their benefactor, when they perceived the 
earth to trembie under their feet, and faw the fea 
well and foam in the harbour, and daſh to pieces the 
thi, s that were at anchor. The whirling flames and 
aſhes covered the ſtreets and public places, the houſes 
tottered, and their rooſs fell under the foundations, 
and the foundations were ſcattered; thirty thoufand 


14 CANDIDUS; or, Chap. 5. 
inhabitants of all ages and ſexes were cruſhed to death 
in theruinas, The ſailor whiſtling and ſwearing, ſaid, 
« There is ſome booty to be got here.” © What can 
be the ſufficient reaſon of this phznomenon ?” faid 
Pangloſs. This is certainly the laſt day of the 
world,” cried Candidus, The failor ran immediate- 
ly into the midſt of the ruins, encountered death tw 
find money, found it, laid hold of it, got drunk, and 
having flept himſelf ſober, purchate | the tavonrs of 
the ficlt good natured girl he met with, upon the 
ruins of the demoliſhed houſes, and in the midſt of th: 
dying and the dead. In the mean time, Pangloſs pul- 
led him by the ſleeve: ©* My friend,” ſaid he, this 
is not right; you treſpaſs againſt univerſal reaſon, 
vou improve your time badly.“ Braius and blood!“ 
anſwered the other; I am a ſailor, and was born 
at Batavia; four times I have trampled upon the cru- 
cifix in four voyages to Japin; thou mayeſt go ſeek 
for thy man with thy naiverſal reaſon.” 
Some pieces of ſtone having wounded Candides, he 
lay ſtretched in the ſtreet, and covered with rubbiſh. 
„Alas! faid he to Pangloſs, get me a little wine 
and oil, I am a-dying.” This trembling of the 
earth is no new thing,” anſwered Pangloſs. The 
city of Lima, in America, experienced the ſame con- 
cuſſions laſt year; the ſame cauſe has the ſame effects; 
there is certainly a train of ſulphur under the earth 
from Lima to Liſbon.“ Nothing is more probable,” 
ſaid Candidus ; but, for God's ſake, a little oil and 
wine.“ How probable!” replied the piilofſopher ; 
„ I maintain that the point is demonſtrable.” Can- 
didus loſt all ſenſe; and Pangloſs brought him a little 
water from a neighbouring fountain. . 
The day following, having found ſome proviſiors 
in rummaging through the rubb ſh, they recruited 
their ſtrength a little. Afterwards they employed 
themſelves, bke others, in adminiſtering relief to the 
inhabitants that had eſcaped from death, Some ci 


Chap. 6. ALL FOR THE BEST, 15 
tiz-ns that had been relieved by them, gave them as 
good a dinner as could be expefted amidit ſuch a dit- 
aſter. It is true, that the repalt was mourntul, and 
tlic gueſts watered their bread with their tears, But 
Panglofs conſoled them, by aeming that things could 
not be otherwile : ** For,” faid he, it an univerie 
exiſt, that un verſe mutt neceſſarily be the beit. Now, 
in the belt of worlds, aii is good, all is well, all is 
for the belt: corntort yourielves, be merry, and let 
us take a glaſs,” Ali tle man clad in black, who 
belonged to the inquiſition, and lat at his fide, took 
him up very politely, and taid, ** In all appearance, 
the gentleman does not believe original fin; tor it all 
is for the belt, then there has been neither fall nor pu- 
niſhnent.” 

I molt humbly aſk your excelleacy's pardon,” an - 
ſwered Pangloſs (till more politely; “ tor the fall of 
man and the curſe neceſſarily entered into the beſt of 
worlds pofſible.” * | hen the gentleman does not be- 
lieve there is liberty,” ſaid the inquiſitor. Your 
excellency will excuſe me,” ſaid Panglois; liberty 
can conſiit with abſolute neceſſity; for it was neceſſiry 
we ſhould be tree; becau.e, in ſhort, the determinate 
Will—” 

Pangloſs was in the middle of his propeſition, when 
the inquiſitor ſigned with his head to his lacquey 
who attended him, to bring him a glaſs of port 


wine. 


KIKXIXI KINO ENR NN NN NON 
CHAP, VI. 


How a fine auto-da-fe was celebrated, to prevent earth- 
quakes ; and. how Candidus was whipped. 


Fter the earthquake, which had ruined three 
| feurths of Liſbon, the ſages of the country could 


56 C ANDID US; or, Chap e 
not find any means more effeHuai to prevent 2 tot l 
deſtruction, than to give the people a hri Mant auto- 
da te. It had been decided by the aniverfity of Co- 
imbra, that the ſigbt of ſome perſons burat by a 
flow fire, with great ceremony, was an infallible not. 
trum to prevent the eart from quaking. 
In conſequence of this reſolution, they had ſeized 
a Biſcayner, convicted of having-married his god-mo- 
the”, and two Portugueſe, who, in eating a pullet, had 
_ ripped off the Jard After dinner they came and ſe - 
cured Dr. Pangloſs, and his diſciple Candidus, the one 
for having ſpoke too freely, and the other for having 
heard with an air of approbation. They were both 
conducted to ſeparat: apartments, extremely freſh, 
and never incommoded with the ſun. Eight days af- 
ter, they were both clothed with a /anbenito, and had 
their heads adorned with paper mitres. Candidus's 
mitre and ſanbenito were painted with inverted flames, 
and with devils that had neither tails nor claws : but 
Pangloſs s devils had claws and tails, and the flames 
were pointed upwards. Being thus dreſſed, they march- 
ed in proceſſion, and heard a very pathetic ſermon, 
followed with fine muſic on a ſqueaking organ. Can 
didus was whipped in cadence, while they were fing- 
ing: the Biſcayner, and the two men who would not 
eat lard, were burnt; and Pangloſs, though it was 
contrary to cultom, was hanged. The ſame day the 
earth ſhook anew with a molt dreadful noiſe. 
Candidus, affrighted, interdicted, aſtoniſhed, all 
bloody, all panting, faid to himſelf, © If this is the 
beſt of poſſible worlds, what then are the reſt ? Sup- 
poſing 1 had not been whipped, I have been among 
the Bulgarians : but, O my dear Pangloſs ? thou great - 
eſt of philoſophers, that it ſhould be my fate to ſee you 
hanged without knowing for what! O my dear Ana- 
baptiſt: thou beſt of men, that ic ſhould be thy fate 
to be drowned in the harbour! O Miſs Cunegonda 


Chap. J. ALL ror THs B r. 19 
the jewel of ladies, that it ſhould be thy fate to have 
thy belly cut open! 

He returned, with difficulty ſupporting himſelf, af- 
ter being leftured, whipped, abſolved, and bleſſed, 
when an old woman faluted him, and ſaid, Child, 
take courage, and follow me.” 


A E K SONS 


How an old woman took care of Candidus, and how h: 
found the object he loved. 


YAndidus took not courage, but followed the 
old woman into a ruinated houſe, She gave him 
a pot of pomatum to anoint himſelf, left him ſome- 
thing to eat and drink, and ſhewed him a very neat 
little bed, near which was a compleat ſuit of cloaths. 
Eat, drink, and ſleep,” faid ſhe to him, and may 
our lady of Mocha, our Lord St. Antony of Padua, 
and our Lord St. James of Compoſtella, take care of 
you, I will be back to morrow.” Candidus aſtonith- 
ed at all that he had ſeen, at all he had ſuffered, and 
ſtill more at the charity of the old woman, offered to 
kiſs her hand. You muſt not kiſs my hand,“ faid 
the old woman; I will be back to-morrow. your- 
ſelf with the pomatum, eat, and take reſt.” 
Candidus, notwithſtanding ſo many misfortunes, 
eat, and went to fleep. Next morning the old wo- 
man brought him his breakfaſt, looked at his back, 
and rubbed it herſelf with another ointment: the af - 
terwards brought him his dinner; and the returned 
at night, and brought him his ſupper. The day fol- 
lowing ſhe performed the ſame ceremonies. ** Who, 
are you?“ would Candidus always fay to her: Who, 
has inſpired you with ſo much goodneſs ? What thanks, 


„* 
=, 


18 G AN DID US; or, Chap. 3. 
can I render you?” The good woman made him no 
anſwer; ſhe returned in the evening, but brought 
him no ſupper. * Come along with me,” ſaid the, 
% and fay not a word.“ She took him by the arm, 
and walked with him into the country about a quar- 
ter of a mile : they arrived at a houſe that ſtood by 
itſelf, furrounded with gardens and canals. The old 
woman knocked at a little door; which being open- 
ed, ſhe conducted Candidus by a private ſtair · caſe in- 
to a gilded cloſet, and leaving him on a brocade couch, 
ſhut the door and went her way. Candidus thought 


de was in a revery, and looked upon all his life as an 


unlucky dream, but on the preſent moment as an a 


The old woman returned very ſoon, ſupporting with 
difficulty a woman trembling, of a majeſtie port, glit- 
tering with jewels, and covered with a veil. ** Take 
off that veil,” ſaid the old woman to Candidus. I he 
young man approaches, and takes off the veil with a 
trembling hand, What joy! what ſurpriſe ! he 
thought he ſaw Miſs Cunegonda ; he ſaw her indeed, 
it was ſhe herſelf, His ſtrength fails him, he cannot 
utter a word, but falls down at her feet. Cunegonda 
falls upon the carpet. The old woman applies aro- 
matic waters; they recover their ſenſes, and ſpeak to 
one another. At firſt their words were imperfect, their 
queſtions and anſwers were carried on croſs- wife, with 
fighs, tears, and cries. The old woman recommend-_ 
ed to them to make leſs noiſe, and then leit them to 
themſelves. How? is it you!“ ſaid Candidus to 
her: Are you alive? do I find you again in Portu- 


gal? was not you raviſhed then? was not your belly 


ripped up, as the philoſopher Pangloſs aſſured me?“ 
« Yes, the caſe was ſo,” faid the lovely Cunegonda ; 
« but death does not always follow from theſe two 
accidents.” * But your father and mother! were 
not they killed? It is but too true,” anſwered 
Cunegonda, weeping, ** And your brother? © My 


way 8. ALL For THE BEST. 19 
brother was killed too.“ And why are you in Por- 
tugal? and how did you know that I was here ? and 
by what ſtrange adventure did you contrive to bring 
me to this houſe ?” ** I will tell you that,” replied 
the lady: © bur firſt you muſt inform me of all that 
has happened to you fince the harmleſs kiſs you gave 
me, and the rude kicking which you received.” 

Candidus obeyed her with the moſt profound re- 
| ſpe; and though he was forbidden to ſpeak, though 
his voice was weak and faltering, and though his 
back ſtiil pained him, yet he told her, in the moſt 
genuine manner, every thing that had happened to 
him ſince the moment of their ſeparation. Cunegonda 
raiſed up her eyes to heaven; the ſhed tears at the 
death of the good Anabaptiſt, and of Pangloſs; after 
which ſhe thus ſpoke to Candidus, who loſt not a 


word, but dwelt upon her eyes as if he would devour 
them, 


2©SSSSSSSSESESSSHS 


CHAP. VIII. 


„f Was in my bed and faſt aſleep, when heaven 
was pleaſed to fend the Bulgarians to our fine 
caſtle of Thunder ten- tronckh: they killed my father 
and my brother, and cut my mother in pieces. A 
huge Bulgarian, fix feet high, obſerving the fight had 
deprived me cf my ſenſes, ſet himſelf to r:vith me, 
This abuſe made mie come to myſelf; I recovered my 
ſenſes, I cricd, I ſtruggled, I bit, 1 ſcratched, I want- 
ed to tear out the huge Bulgarian's eyes, not conſider - 
ing that what had happened in my father's caſtle was 
a common thing ia war. The brute gave me a cut 
with his hanger in the left flank, the mark of which 
I (411 bear about me. Ah! I hope I ſhall fee it, 


20 CANDIDUS; or, Chap. 8. 
" ſaid the fimple Candidus. You ſhall,” anſwered 


Cunegoada; but let us continue.” * Do ſo, re- 
Plied Candidus. 

She then reſumed the thread of her ſtory in this 
manner. A Bulgarian captain came in, and ſaw 
me bleeding; but the ſoldier was not at all diſcon- 
certed, The captain flew into a paſſion at the little 
reſpect the brute ſhewed him, and killed him upon my 
body. He then cauſed me to be dreſſed, and carried 
me as a priſoner of war to his own quarters, I wath- 
ed the little linen he had, and dreſſed his viduals. 
He found me very pretty, I muſt ſay it ; and I cannot 
deny but he was well ſhaped, that he had a white, 
ſoft ſkin; but otherwiſe he had little ſenſe or philoſo- 
phy; one might evidently ſee that he was not bred 
under Dr. Pang loſs. At the endof three months hav- 
ing loſt all his money, and being grown out of con- 
ceit with me, he fold me to a Jew, named Den I 
char, who traded to Holland and Portugal, and who 
had a moſt violent paſſion for women. This ]:w laid 
cloſe ſiege to my perſon, but could not trrumph over 
me; I have reſiſted him better than I did the Bulga- 
rian ſoldier, A woman of honour may be raviſhed 
once, but her virtue gathers ſtrength from ſuck rude- 
neſs. The Jew, in order to render me more tractable, 
brought me to this country houſe that you ſee. Lal 
ways imagined hitherto, that no place on earth was 
ſo fine as the caſtle of Thunder ten tronckh but I am 
now undeceived, 

The grand inquiſitor obſerving me one day at mals, 
ogled me pretty much, and got notice ſent me that he 
wanted to ſpeak with me upon private buſineſs. Be- 
ing conducted to his palace, I informed him of my 
birth; upon which he repreſented to me, how much 
it was below my family to belong to an Iſraelite. A 
propoſal was then made by him to Don Iflachar, to 
yield me up to my Lord, But Don Iſſachar, who is 
the court-banker, and a man of credit, would not 


Chap. 8. ALL yor THE B16 r. 2! 
him with an auto-da-fe. At laſt the Jew, being af- 
frighted, concluded 2 bargain, by which the houſe 
and myſelf ſhould belong to them both in common; 
that the Jew ſhould have Monday, Friday, and Satur» 
day, and the inquifitor the other days of the week. 
This agreement has now ſubſiſted fix months. It has 
not however been without quarrels; for it has been 
often diſputed whether Saturday night or Sunday be- 
longed to the old or the new law. For my part, I 
have hitherto reſiſted them both; and I believe that 
this is the reaſon I am ſtill beloved by them. 

At length, to avert the ſcourge of earthquakes, and 
to intimidate Don Iſſachar, it pleaſed his Lordſhip the 
Inquiſitor to appoint an anto-da-fe. He did me the 
honour to invite me to it. I got a very fine ſeat; and 
the ladies were ſerved with refreſhments between the 
maſs and the execution. I was really ſeized with hor- 
ror at ſeeing them burn the two Jews, and the honeſt 
Biſcayner who married his godmother: but how great 
was my ſurprize, my conſternation, my anguiſh, when 
I ſaw in a ſanbineto and mitre a perſon that ſome- 
what reſembled Pangloſs! I rubbed my eyes, I look- 
ed upon him very attentively, and I ſaw him hanged : 
I tell into a ſwoon ; and ſcarce had I recovered my 
| ſenſes, when I ſaw you ſtripped ſtark naked; this was 
the height of horror, conſternation, grief and deſpair. 
I will frankly own to you, that your ſkin is ſtill white 
er, and of a better complexion than that of my Bul- 
garian captain, This fight increaſed all the ſenſati - 
ons that oppreſſed and diſtracted my foul. I cried 
out, I was going to ſay, Stop, barbarians; but my 
voice failed me, and my cries would have been to no 
purpoſe. When you had been ſeverely whipped, How 
is it poſſible, faid I, that the charming Candidus, and 
the ſage Pangloſs, ſhould both be at Liſbon, the one 
to receive a hundred laſhes, and the other to be hang- 
ed by order of my Lord the Inquiſitor, by whom Iam 


a2 CANDIDUS: ar, nay. 6 


cents. when be wid me that every thing is for the 


beſt in the world, 

Being agitated, aſtoniſhed, ſometimes beſide myſelf, 
and ſometimes ready to die with weakneſs, I had my 
head filled with the maſſacre of my father, my mo- 
ther, and my brother; the infolence of the vile Bul- 
garian ſoldier, the ſtab he gave me with his hanger ; 
my abje& ſervitude, and acting as cook to the Bulga- 


rian captain; the raſcally Don Iffichar, my abomin- | 


able inquiſitor, the execution of Dr. Pangloſs, the 
grand Miſerere on the organ while you was whipped, 
and eſpecially the kiſs I gave you behind the ſcreen, 
the laſt day I faw you. I praiſed the Lord for hav- 


commiſſion very well; I have taſted the inexpreſſible 
pleaſure of ſeeing you, hearing you, and ſpeaking to 
you. You muſt have a ravenous appetite by this time; 
I am hungry myſelf too; let us therefore fit down to 
On this they both ſat down to table; and after ſup- 
per they ſeated themſelves on the *. couch which 
vas mentioned before. They were there when Sig- 


nor Don Iſſachar, one of the maſters of the bon ſe, came 


thither. It was his ſa bath day; ard le came to en- 
joy his right, and to erpreſs his tender love, 


ing reſtored you to me after fo many trials, Icharg- 
ed my old woman to take care of you, and to bring 
you hither as ſoon as ſhe could. She has executed her 


Chap. 9. ALL FOR THE BEST, 23 
CHAP, IX. 


il hat be fel Cunegonda, Candidus, the grand inguiſi- 
tor, ond the Few. 


HIS Iſſachar was the moſt paſſionate Hebrew that 
had been ſeen in Iſrael ſince the captivity in Ba- 
bylon. What,” ſays he, you bitch of a Galilean, 

is it not enough to take in Maſter Inquifitor ? but 

muſt this varlet alſo ſhare with me?“ When be had 
thus ſpoke, he drew out a long poinard, which he al- 
ways carried about him, and not ſuſpecting that his 
antagoniſt had any arms, fell upon Candidus; but 

our honeſt Weſtphalian had received a fine — 
the old woman, along with his full fuir. He drew 
his rapier, and though he had the molt agreeable tem- 

per, he laid the Iſraelite dead upon the ſpot, at Cu · 

negonda's feet, 

„Holy Virgin!“ cried ſhe; ** whaa will 8 
of us? a man murdered in my apartment! If the 
peace officer come, we are ruined,” * If Pangloſs 
had not been hanged,” ſaid Candidus, he would 
have given us excellent advice in this emergency; for 
he was a great philotopher. In this extremity let us 
conſult the old woman.” ——S'he was a very prudent 
woman, and began to give her advice, when another 
little door cpeued, It was row about one o'clock in 
the morning, and conſequently the beginning of Sun- 
day, This day was allotted to my Lord the Inquiſi · 
tor. Entering, he ſaw the whipped Candidus with a 
ſword in his hand, a dead body itretched out on the 
floor, Cunegonda in a mighty fright, and the old wo 
man giving advice. | 

See now what p ſſed in Caociins's mind at this in - 
dont, and how he reaſoned, ** If this holy man calls 


me be whipped without mercy ; he is my rival; I am 
in the way of killing, there is no time to heſitate.” 
This reaſoning was clear and precipitate; and, with- 
out giving time to the inquiſitor to recover from his 


by the fide of the Jew. ** Behold, here is a ſecond 
killed,” ſaid Cunegonda ; ** there is no pardon for 
us; we are excommunicated, our laſt hour is come. 


How could you, that was born ſo gentle, kill in two 


minutes time a Jew and a prelate?” My fair La- 
dy, anſwered Candidus, when one is in love, jea- 
lous, and whipped by the inquiſition, one does not 
know what one does.” 

The old woman then put in her word, and faid, 
«© There are three Andaluſian horſes in the table, with 
their ſaddles and bridles, which the gallant Candidus 
may get ready; Madam has fome moidores and jew- 
els; let us get on horſeback without delay, though I 
cannot fit but on one buttock z and let us go to Cadiz: 


it is the ſineſt time in the world, and very pleaſant it 


is to travel in the cool of the night. 

Candidus immediately ſaddled the three horſes. Cu- 
negonda, the old woman, and he, travelled thirty 
miles on a ſtretch. While they were making the beſt 
of their way, the holy Hermandad came to the houſe; 


they buried my Lord in a magnificent church, and 
threw Iffachar upon a lay ſtall. 


Candidus, Cunegonda, and the old woman, had now 
arrived at the ſmall town of Avacena, in the middle of 


the mountains of Sierra Morena; and thus ſpoke in 
an ian, 


24 CANDIDUS; or, Chap. 9. 
in aſſiſtance, he will infallibly have me burnt ; he may 
treat Cunegonda in the fame manner; he has caufed 


ſurprize, he run him through the body, and laid him 


Maw 4 tinned ——_— —_— - LM 


9 vw 0 0 WW” WW 


Chap. 10, ALL FOR THE B28 1. 25 


CS WIR HS Ce 


CHAP. X. 


In what 47e Candidus, Cunegonda, and the old wo - 
man arrived at cada, and of their imba lation. 


64 could have robbed me of my piſtoles and 

my jewels?” ſaid Cunegonda, with tcars in 
her eyes: « what ſhall we ſubſiſt on? what ſhall we do? 
where ſhall I find inquititors and Jews to give me 
more?” Alas, ſaid the old woman, I ſtrongly 


ſuſpect a Rev. Father Cordelier, who lay yeſterday 


with us in the ſame inn at Badajos. God preſerve me 
from judging raſhly, but he came twicc'iato our cham- 
ber, and went away a long time before us.“ Ah!” 
ſaid Candidus, ** the good Pangloſs has often demon- 
ſtrated to me, that the goods of the earth are com- 
mon to all men, and that every oue has an equalright 
to them, According to theſe principles, the Corde- 
lier ought to have left us enough to carry us to our 


_ journey's end. Have you nothing at all left you then, 


my pretty Cunegonda? Not a farthing,“ ſaid ſhe. 
© What courſe ſha;l we take? faid Candidus. Let 
us ſell one of the horſes,” ſaid the old woman; I will 
mount behind Miſs, though I can hold myſelf only on 
one buttock, and we ſhall reach Cadiz,” 
in the ſame inn was a Benedictine prior, who 
bought the horſe very cheap. Candidus, Cunegonda, 
and the old woman, pafſ.d through Lncena, Chillas, 
and Lebriza, and arrived at length at Cadiz. They 
were fitting out a fleet, and aſſembling tro ps, for 
bringing to reaſon the Rev. fathers the Jeſuirs of Pa- 
raguay, who were accuſed of having excited one of 
their hordes, near the city of St. Sacrament, to revolt 
from their allegiance to the Kings of Spain and Por- 
tugal, Cancious having ferved .mong the Buigart- 
| | B 


26 CANDIDUS; or, 


commander of this little army, with ſo much grace, 
celerity, addreſs, dexterity, and agility, that he gave 
him the command of a company of infantry, Being 
now made a captain, he embarked with Miſs Cune- 
gonda, the old woman, two valets, and the two An- 
daluſian horſes, which had belonged to bis Lordſhip 
the grand inquiſitor of Portugal. 

During the whole voyage, they argued a great deal 
en the philoſophy of poor Pangloſs. We are going 
to another world,” faid Candidus ; it is there with- 
cut doubt that every thing is beſt, For it mult be 
confeſſed, that one has reaſon to be a little uneaſy at 
u hat paſfeth in our world, with reſpect both to phy- 
ficks and ethics.“ I love you with all my heart,” 
laid Cunegonda; but my mind is ſtill terrified at 
what I have feen and experienced,” All will be 
well,“ replied Candidus; the fea of the new world 


is already preferable to thoſe of our Europe; it is 


more calm, and the winds more conſtant. Certainly 
the new world is the beſt of all poſſible worlds.“ 
God grant it,” ſaid Cunzgonda; “ but I have been 
ſo terribly unfortunate in mine, that my heart is al- 
moſt ſhut againſt hope.” * You complain indeed,” 
ſaid the old woman to them; alas! you have not 
met with ſuch misfortunes as I have.“ 

Cunegonda was almoſt ready to fall a- laughing, and 
thought the eld woman very comical, for pretending 
to be more untortunate than herſelf, *©* Alas ! my 
004 dame,” faid Cunegonda, „ unleſs you had been 
raviſhed by two Bulgerians, had received two cuts 
with a hanger in your belly, had had two caſtles de 
moliſhed, had had two fathers and two mothers mur- 
dered, and had te:n two lovers whipped at an auto- 
da-fe, I cannot fre how you could have the advantage 

of me. Add to this, that I was born a barone ſs with 
ſeventy two artucrial quarterings, and that have been 
a ccok-maid,” © My Lady,” replied the old Wo 


Chap. 10, ; 
ans, performed the exerciſe ef that nation before the 


* x LS * * OO 


Chap. 11. ALL Fort THE BEST. 27 
man, you know nothing of my extraction; and were 


1 to ſhew you my backſide, you wovld not talk as you 
do, but would ſuſpend your judgment.“ T his diſcourſe 


having raiſed an inſatiable curiofity in the minds of 


Cunegonda and Candidus, the old woman related her 
ſtory as follows. 


* * e 0 N e dee 


CHAP. ML 


Te hiftory ef the ald aueman. 


r Had not always eyes bleared, and bordered with 
red; my noſe has not always touched my chin; 


nor have I been always a ſervant. I am the daughter 


of Pope Urban X. and of the Princeſs of Paleſtrina, I 
was brought up till I was fourteen, in a palace, to 
which all the caſtles of your German barons would 
not have ſerved for ſtables; and one of my robes colt 
mere than all the magnificence in Weſtphalia, I in- 
creaſed in beauty, in charms, and in fine accompliſh» 


ments, in the very centre of pleaſures, of homages, 


and of high expectations. I now began to captivate 
every heart. My neck was fo formed, and what a 
neck! white, firm, and ſhaped like that of the Venus 
of Medicis. And what eyes! what eyelids! what fine 
black eyebrows! what flames ſpirkled from wy eye- 


balls, and, as the poets of our country told me, eclipf- 


ed the twinkling of the ſtars! The maids who drejſed 
and undreſſed me, fell into an ecſtaſy when they visw- 


ed me before and behind, and all the men would i have 


been glad to have been in their pl ces. 
I was betrothed to a prinze, the ſovereign of Maſſi 


_ Carara, What a prince ! 2s handſome as myſelf, 


made up of ſweetneſs and charms, of a witty mind, 
and burning with love, I loved him, as one uſes to 


do lor the firſt time, with idolatry, with APE, 


"i B 2 


2? CANDIDUS; or, Chap. 11. 
Preparations were made for our nuptials. 'The pomp 
and magnificence were inconceivable ; nothing but 


continual feaſts, carouſals, and operas; and all Italy 


made ſonnets upon me, of which there was ſcarce one 
tolerable. I was juſt on the point of reaching the ſum · 


mit of happineſs, when an old marchioneſs, who had 


been miſtreſs to my prince, invited him to drink cho- 


colate at her houſe, He died there in leis than two 


hours time in terrible convulſions. But this is only a 
mere trifle. My mother in deſpair, and yet leſs af- 


flicted than me, reſolved to retreat for ſome time from 


fo mournful a place. She had a very fine ſeat near 


Gaietta. We embarked on board a galley of the coun- 


try, gilt like the altar of St Peter's at Rome, . We 


were ſcarce out at ſea, when a corſair of Sallee fell 


vpon us, and boarded us. Our ſoldiers defended 
themſelves like thoſe of the Pope; they all fell down 
upon their knees, aſter throwing away their arms, and 
aſked abſolution ir articuls moriis of the corſair. 


hey inſtantly ripped us as naked as monkeys; my | 
mother, our maids of honour, and myſelf too, meet · 
ing with no better uſage. It is a very ſurpriſing thing 


with what expedition theſe gentry undrefs people, But 


what ſurpriſed me molt was, that they ſhould put their 


fingers into a place, into which we women ſeldom ſuf- 
fer any thing to enter but pipes. This ceremony ap- 
. peared very ſtrange to me; but fo we judge of every 
thing that is not produced in our own country, [ 
toon learned, however, that it was to fearch whether 
we had not concealed fore of our jewels there, It is 
a cuſlom eitabliſhed time cut of mind among civilized 


rations that ſcour the fea. I koow that the gentle - 


wen the religions knights of Malta never omit to 
practiſe it, when they take Turks of either ſex. It is 


one of the laws of nations, from which they never de - 


vinte. 
I need not tell you how great a hardſhip i it is ſor a 


jcung princels any her u. other to be carried ſlaves to 


.cer re erer e e 


® 2 - A ee. 


$ 0g = nm» 


7" 0 @ FT wu 7 OP TWP YT 


© G. 2 «- 


.to 


F . 8 F K. A HEY PEER TW 


Chap. tt. ALL For THE BR r. 2) 


" Morocco, You may eaſily form a notion of all that 


we muſt ſuffer on board the veſſel of the corſair. My 
mother was ſtill very handſome our maids of honour, 
nay our plata chambermaids, had more charms than 
are to be found throughout all Africa. As for my- 
ſelf, I was all attraction, I was all beauty, and a! 

charms, nay more, I was a virgin, However, I was 


not one long: this flower, which had been reſerved 


for the accompliſhed Prince of Maſſa Carara, was ta- 
ken from me by the captain of the corſair, He was 
an ugly negro, but ſancied he did me a great deal of 
konour. Iadeed, her niglhlnels the Princefs of P. leſtei- 
na and myſelf mu't have been very ſtrong to refiit all 
the violence we met with till our arrival at Moroccc; 
But let me paſs over that: theſe are ſuch common 


_ things, that they are ſcarce worth the mentioning, 


Morocco was ov:rflowed with blood when we ar 
rived there. Fifty ſons of the Emperor Muley Iſmael 
had each their adherents : this produced in effect fifty 
civil wars, of blacks againſt blacks, of blacks againlt 
tawnies, of tawnics againſt tawnics, and of mulattoes 
againſt mulattoes. In a word there was one contiuu - 
ed carnage all over the empire. 

No ſooner were we landed, than the blacks of a par » 
ty adverſaries to that of my cortair made an attempt 
to rob him ot his booty. Next to the jewels and the 
gold, we were the moſt valuable things he had, I 
was here witneſs to ſuch a battle as you never ſaw in 
your European climates. The people of the north 
have not ſo much fire in their blood; nor have they 
that raging paſſion for women that is ſo common in 
Africa. Ore would think that you Europeans had 
nothing but milk in your veins; but it is vitriol and 
fire that runs in thoſe cf the inhabitants of Mount At- 
las, and the neighbouring countries. They feught 
with the fury of lions, tygers, and ſerpents of the 
country, to know who ſhould have us. A moor ſeiz- 
ed my mother by the right arm, while my captain's 

| | B 3 


39 CANDIDUS; or, Chap. 11. 
lieutenant held her by the left; a moorith ſoldier then 
took bold of her by one leg, and our pirates held her 
by the other. All our women found themſelves al- 
moſt in a moment ſeized thus by four ſoldiers. My 
captain kept me concealed at his back. He had a ſci- 
mitar in his hand, and killed every one that oppoſed 
his fury, In ſhort, I ſaw all our Italian women, and 
my mother, torn in pieces, hacked, and mangled by 
the brutes that ſought for them. My fellow priſon · 
ers, thoſe who had taken them, ſoldiers, ſailors, blacks, 
_ whites, mulattoes, and laſtly my captain himſelf, were 
all killed; aud I remained expiring among a heap of 
dead bodies, Theſe bartarous ſcenes extended, as e- 
very one knows, over more than three hundred leagues, 
without ever omitting the five prayers a day ordained 
by Mahomet. 

I diſengaged myſelf with great difficulty from the 
weight of ſo many bloody carcaſes heaped upon me, 
and made a ſhift to crawl to a large orange tree on 
the bank of a neighbouring rivulet; where I fell down 
cppreſſed with fear, fatigue, der, deſpair, and hun · 
ger. Soon after, my ſenſes being overpowered, were 
locked up in a ſleep, which reſembled a fit rather than 
| fleep, I was in this tate of weakneſs and infenſibili- 
ty, between death and life, when I felt myſelf preſſed 
by ſomething that moved upon my body. I opened 
my eyes, and ſaw a white man, of a very good aſpect, 
who ſighed, and muttered theſe words between hi; 
teeth, O che ſciagura dVefſere ſenza coglioni! i. e. © 
this misfortune of being deprived of teſlicles 


RB... „„ . „% 


K % 2 & © 


Chap. 12. 


ALL FOR THE BrgT, 31 


c WE EE 


The ſequel :f the old woman's adventures, 


Stonithed and tranſported to hear my own coun- 

try language, and not lefs ſurpriſed at the words 
uttered by the man, I made anſwer, that there might 
be far greater misfortun-s than thoſe he complained 
of, I then gave him a ſhort hint of the horrid ſcenes 
J had undergone, and relapſed again into a ſwoon, 
He carried me to a neigh:ouring houſe, cauſed me be 
put to bed, and gave me ſomething to eat, waited up- 
on me, comforted and flattered me, and ſaid, that he 
had never ſeen any one fo handſome as me, and that 
he had never regreted fo much the loſs of what no 
one could reſtore to him. was born at Naples.” 
ſaid he, where they caſtrate two or three thouſand 
children every year; ſome die of the operation, othe: 5 


acquire a finer voice than that of any woman, and a- 


thers become ſovereigns of ſtates. This operation was 
periormed on me with great ſucceſs, and I became 2 
linger in the chapel of her Highneſs the Princeſs of 
Paleftrina.” * Of my mother! cried I. Of your 
mother !'* cried he again, ſhedding tears. What! 
are you that young princeſs, whom I had the care of 
bringing up till ſhe was ſix years old, and who pro- 
miſed even then to be as handſome as you are now?“ 
* It is I myſelf : my mother hes about four hundred 
paces from hence, cut into four quarters, under a heap 
of dead bodies.” 

I related to him all that had beſallen me: he like- 
wiſe told me his adventures; and informed me, that 


be was ſent to the King of Morocco, by a Chriſtian 
power, to conclude a treaty with that monarch, by 


which he was to furniſh kim with ammunition, at- 


. 4 


32 CANDIDUS; or, Chap. 12. 
_ tillery, and ſhips, to enable him entirely to deſtroy 
the commerce of other Chriſtians. ©* My commiſſion 
is fulfiiled,” ſaid the honeſt eunuch to me; l am go- 
ing to imbark at Ceuta, and will carry you to Italy. 
But O my misfortune in wanting teſticles !” 


I thanked him with the tears of gratitude; but in- 


ſtead of conducting me to Italy, he carried me to Al- 
giers, and fold me to the Dey of that province. Scarce 
was 1 ſold, when the plague, which had made the 
tour of Africa, Aſia, and Europe, broke out at Algiers 
with great fury. You have ſeen earthquakes ; but 
pray, Miſs, have you ever had the plague ? © Never,” 
replied the Baroneſs, 

If you had had it, replied the old woman, you would 
confeſs that it is far more terrible than an earthquake, 


It is very common in Africa ; I was ſeized with it. Fr 


gure to yourſelf the ſituation of a Pope's daughter, a. 
bout fifteen years of age, who, in the ſpace of three 
months, had undergone poverty and flavery, had 
been raviſhed almoſt every day, had ſeen her mother 
and war, and was dying of the plague at Algiers, I 
cid not die for all that. But my eunuch, and the 
Dey, and almoſt all the ſeraglio at Algiers periſhed. 

When the firſt ravages of this dreadful peſtilence 
were over, they ſold the flaves belonging to the Dey. 
A merchant purchaſed me, and carried me to Tunis. 
There he fold me to another merchant, who fold me 
again at Tripoli; from Tripoli I was fold again at 
Alexandria; from Alexandria I was fold again at 
Smyrna; and from Smyrna at Conſtantinople At laſt 
I became the property of an aga of the Jamtaries ; who 
Was ſoon after ordered to go to the defence of Aſoph, 
then beſieged by the Ruſſians. 


The aga, who was a man of gallantry, took all his 


ſeraglio along with him, and lodges us in a ſmall fort 
on the Palus Mæ tis, under the guard of two black 
eunuchs and twenty ſoldiers, We killed a great num- 


22 GEE. Oe 


Chap. 12+ ALL FOR THE BEST, 33 
ber of the Ruſſians no returned the compliment witn 
intercit. Aſoph was put to fire and ſword, and no 
regard was paid to age or ſex. There remained on · 
ly our little fort; which the enemy reſolved to re- 
duce by famine. The twenty Janiſaries had ſworn, 
that they wonld never ſurrender, The extremities 
of ſamine to which they were reduced, obliged them 
to eat our two eunuchs, for tear of violating their oath ; 
anda few days after they reſolved to devour the women. 

We had an Iman, a very religious and humane man. 
He preached an excellent fermon to them, in which 
he diſſuaded them from killing us all at once. Crx 
off only one of the buttocks of theſe ladies,” ſaid be, 
* and you will fare extremely well: if you muſt come 
to it again, you will have the ſame entertainment a 
few days hence: Heaven will bleſs you for fo chari- 
table an action, and you will find relief.“ 

As he had an eloquent tongue, he eaſily — 
them. This horrible operation was performed up - 
on us; and the Iman applied the ſame balſam to us 
that is applied to children after they are circumciſed. 
We were all ready to die. 

The Janiſaries had ſcarce finiſhed the repait witk 
which we had ſupplied them, when the Ruſſians came 
in flat bottomed boats, and not a ſingle Janiſary e- 
ſcaped. The Ruſſians ſhewed no concern about the 
condition we were in, As there are French ſurgeons 
in every country, one of them who was a perſon of 
very great ſkill, took us under his care, and cured us; 
and I will remember it all my life, that when my 
wounds were pretty well healed, he made me amo- 
rous propoſals, To be ſhort, he bid us all comfort 
ourſelves; and aſſured us, that the like misfortune 
had happened in ſeveral lieges, and that it was the 
law of war, 

As ſoon as my companions were able to walk, they 
were obliged to go to Moſcow, I fell to the lot of a 
| Boyard, who made me his gardener, and gave me 

B 5 ä 


34 CANDIDUS; or, Chap. 12. 
twenty laſhes with his whip every day. But my Lord 
having been broke on the wheel, within two years af. 
ter, along with thirty more Boyards, on account of 
ſome buſtle at court, 1 availed myſelf of this event, 
and made my eſcape. After traverſing all Ruſſia, 1 
was a long time ſervant to an innkeeper at Riga, after- 
terwards at Roſtock, Wiſmar, Leiptic, Caſle!, Utrecht, 
Leyden, the Hague, and Rotterdam. I grew old in 
miſery and diſgrace, having only one half of my poſ- 
teriors, but ſtill remembring that I was a Pope's daugh - 
ter. A hundred times have I had thoughts of killing 
myſelf; but till I was fond of life. This ridiculous | 
| weakneſs is perhaps one of our moſt melancholy foi- 
| bles. Fur can any thing be more ſtupid, than to be 
deſirous of continually carrying a burden, which one 
has a mind to throw down on the ground ? to dread 
exiſten ce, and yet preſerve it? in a word, to careſs the 
ſerpent that devours us, till he has gnawed our very 
| heart? 

In the coun'ries through which it has been my fate 
to travel, and in the inns where I have been a ſer- 
vant, I have ſeen a prodigious number of people who 
looked upon their own exiſtence as a curſe; but I never 
knew of more than eight who voluntarily put an end 
to their miſery, viz, three negroes, four Engliſhmen, 
and a German profeſſor, named Robeck. My laſt ſer- 
vice was with Don liſachar the Jew, who placed me 
near your perſon, my fair Lady, I am reſolved to 
ſthare your fate; and 1 have been more affected with 
your misfertunes than my own. I ſhould never have 
ipoke of my fulterinys, it you had not vexed me a lit- 
tle, and if it had not been cuſtomary oa board a ſhip 
to tell ſtories, by way of amuſement. In ſhort, Miſs, 
I have a god deal of experience, and I have known 
the world, Divert yourſelf, and prevail upon each 
patſenger to tell you his ery; and if there is one 

tyuad who hes not frequemly curſed his life, and has 
not as clin fail te himtelf, that ke was the moſt un 


Chap. 13. ALL ror Tae Bas r. 23 
— 3 bes you tens — 
to the fea, with my head foremoſt, 


XX LE Role LE ale a * 


C HAP. XIII. 


How Candidut was obliged to part from the ſair Cu- 
HE charming Cunegonda baving heard the 


negonda and the ald woman, 
I old woman's ſtory, paid her all the civilities that 


were due to a perſon of her rank and merit. She ap- 
proved of her propoſal ; and engaged all the paſſen gers. 
alternately to relate their adventures: and then both 
Candidus and ſhe confeſſed, that the old woman 
was in the right. © It is a great pity,” ſaid Candi 
dus, that the ſage Pangloſs was hanged, contrary 
tocultorn, at the auto · da- ſe; for he would tell us moſt 
ſurprifing things concerning the phyſical and moral 
evil which cover both land and fea; and I ſhould be 
bold enough, with due reſpeQ, to prop ſe ſome objec 
tions. 

While each paſſenger was relating his flory, the 
ibip advanced in her voyage. They landed at Bue- 
nos-Ayres, Cunegonda, Capt. Cancidus, and the old 
woman wait:d on the governor, Don Fernandes d'I- 
baraa, y Figueora, y Maſcarenes, y Lampourdos, y 
Souza, This nobleman was poſſeſſed of pride ſuitable . 
to a perſon dignified with ſo many titles, He ſpoke 
to other people with ſo noble a diſdain, carried his 
noſe ſo high, raiſed his voice ſo intolerably, aſſume d 
ſo imperious an air, and affected fo lofty a gait, tha: 
all thoſe who ſy.uted him were tempted to beat him. 
He was an exc: ſhive lover of the fair ſex. Cunegonda 
appeared to h m the prettieſt woman he had ever ſeen. 
The firſt thing he did, was to aſk whether ſhe was not 
the Captain's wife? The manner in which he pro. 
poled the queſtion alarmed Candidus, He durſt ne: 

. B 6 


34 CANDIDUS; or, Chap. 12. 
twenty laſhes with his whip every day. But my Lord 
having been broke on the wheel, within two years af. 
ter, along with thirty more Boyards, on account of 
ſome buſtle at court, I availed myſelf of this event, 
and made my eſcape. After traverſing all Ruſſia, l 
was a long time ſervant to an innkeeper at Riga, after- 
terwards at Roſtock, Wiſmar, Leiptic, Caſſel, Utrecht, 
Leyden, the Hague, and Rotterdam. I grewoldin 
miſery and diſgrace, having only one half of my pot- 
teriors, but (till remembring that I was a Pope's daugh · 
ter. A hundred times have I had thoughts of killing 
myſelf; but (till I was fond of life. This ridiculous 
weakneſs is perhaps one of our moſt melancholy foĩ- 
bles. Fer can any thing be more ſtupid, than to be 
defirous of continually carrying a burden, which one 
has a mind to throw down on the ground ? to dread 
exiſten ce, and yet preſerve it? ina word, to careſs the 
ſerpent that devours us, till he has gnawed our very 

In the coun'ries through which it has been my fate 
to travel, and in the inns where I have been a ſer- 
vant, I have ſeen a prodigious number of people who 
looked upon their own exiſtence as a curſe; but I never 
knew of more than eight who voluntarily put an end 
to their miſery, vg. three negroes, four Engliſhmen, 
and a German profeſſor, named Robeck. My laſt ſer- 
vice was with Don Iilachar the Jew, who placed me 
near your perſon, my fair Lady, I am reſolved to 
mare your fate; and 1 have been more affected with 
your misfertunes than my own. TI ſhould never have 
ipoke of my ſuſterings, it you had not vexed me a lit- 
tle, and if it had not been cuſtomary oa board a ſhip 
to tell Rories, by way of amuſement. In ſhort, Miſs, 
I have a good deal of experience, and I have known 
the world, Divert yourſelf, and prevail upon each 
paffenger to tell you his ſtory; and if there is one 
_ toauad who hes not frequemly curſed his life, and has 

not as elun fai te higalelf, that ke was the moſt un 


Chap, 13. ALL For THE Bur. - 
happy of mortals, I will give yon leave to caſt me in- 
to the fea, with my head foremolt. 


TER PEPEIELLEEENEES 


CHAP. XIII. 


How Candidus was obliged to part from the fair Cu- 
| negonda and the ali woman, 


HE charming Cunegonda having hear the 
old woman's ſtory, paid her ail the civilit ies that 
were due to a perſon of her rank and merit, She ap- 
proved of her propoſal ; and engaged all the paſſen gers. 
alternately to relate their adventures : and then both 
Candidus and ſhe confeſſed, that the old woman 
was in the right. * It is a great pity,” ſaid Candi 
dus, that the ſage Pangloſs was hanged, contrary 
to euſtom, at the auto · da· fe ; for he would tell us moſt 
ſurpriſing things concerning the phyſical and moral 
evil which cover both land and ſea; and I ſhould be 
bold enough, with due reſped, to propaſe ſome objec- 


'- hans.* 


While each paſſenger was + at his flory, the 
ſhip advanced in her voyage. They landed at Bue- 
nos-Ayres, Canegonda, Capt. Candidus, and the old 
woman waited on the governor, Don Fernandes d'I- 
baraa, y Figueora, y Maſcarenes, y Lampourdos, y 
Souza. This nobleman was poſſeſſed of pride ſuitable 
to a perſon ignited with ſo many titles, He ſpoke 
to other people with ſo noble a diſdain, carried his 
noſe ſo high, raiſed his voice fo intolerably, aſſume d 
ſo imperious an air, and affected fo lofty a gait, tha: 
all thoſe who ſi.uted him were tempted to beat him. 
He was an exc: ſive lover of the fair ſex. Cunegonda 
appeared to h m the prettieſt woman he had ever feen, 
The firſt thing he did, was to aſk whether ſhe was not 
the Captain's wife? The manner in which he pro 
poled the queſtion alarmed Candidus, He durſt ne: 

. B 6 


36 C ANDID US; or, Ghap. 15. 
not; he urſt not tell him that ſhe was his ſiſter, be · 
cauſe ſhe was not that neither: and though this offi · 
cious lie might have been of ſervice to him, yet his 
ſoul was too refined to betray the truth. * Miſs Cu- 
negonda,” faid he, © inteniſs me the honour of mar- 
rying me, and we beſeech your excellency to grace 
our nuptials with your preſence.” 

Don Fernandes d' Ibaraa, y Figneora, y Maſcare- 
nes, y Lampourdos, y Souza, turning up his muſta- 
ches, forced 2 grim ſmile, and ordered Capt. Candi- 
dus to go and review his company. Candidus obey- 
ed, and the governor remained alone with Miſs Cu- 

He declared hic paſſion, proteſted that he 


would marry her the next day in the face of the church, 


or otherwiſe, as it ſhouid be agreeable to a perſon of 
Her charms. Cunegonda deſired a quarter of an hour 


to conſider of the propoſal, to conſult with the old 


woman. and to take her reſolution, 


Says the old woman to Cunegonda: ** Miſs, you can 


reckon up ſeventy-two deſcents in your family, and 
not one farthing in your pocket, It is now in your 


power to be wife to the greateſt lord in South Ame- 


rica, who has very pretty whiſkers; and what occa- 
fion have you to pique yourſelf upon inviolable fide- 
lity ? You have been raviſhed by the Bulgarians; a 
Jew and an inquiſitor have been in your good graces, 
Misfortunes have no law on their fide. I confeſs, 
were I in your place, I ſhould have no ſeruple to marry 
the governcr, and to make my Lord Capt. Candidus's 
fortune. 
While the old woman was thus ſpeaking, with all 
the prudence which age and experience dictated, they 
deſecried a ſmall veſſel entering the port, which had on 
board an aicaid and alguazils. The occaſion of their 
voyage was this, 
1 he old woman had ſhrewdly gueſſed, that it was 
a cord lier with a great ſleeve that ſtole the money 


Chap. 14. ALL FOR THE Bur. 37 
and je wels from . Cunegonda in the city of Badajor, 
when the and Candidus were making their eſcape. 
The friar having offered to ſell ſome of the diamonds 
to a jeweller, he knew them to be the inquiſitor's. 
The cordelier, before he was hanged, confeſſed he 
had ſtole them. He Geferibed the perſons he had ſtole 
them from, and told the route they had taken. The 
flight of Cunegoada and Candidus being by this means 
diicovered, they were traced to Cadiz; where a veſ- 
ſe] was immediately ſent in purſuit of them; and now 
the veſſel was in the port of Buenos Ayres. A report 
was ſpread, that an alcaid was going to land, and 
that he was in purſuit of the murderers of my Lord 
the grand inquiſitor. The old woman ſaw in a mo- 
ment what was to be done. You cannot run a- 
way, ſaid ſhe to Cunegonda, and you have no- 
thing to fear; it was not you that killed my Lord; 
and beſides, the governor, who is in love with you, 
will not allow you to be uſed ill: therefore tay 
here. She then ran to Candidus: Fly,” ſaid ſhe, 
© or in an hour you will be burnt alive.” He had 
no time to loſe : but how could he part from Cune- 
„KK 


Oe tn ame.” 
an 


How Candidus and Cacambo were received by the Je- 
ſuits of Paraguay. 


\Andidus had brought ſuch a valet with him from 
Cadiz, as one frequently meets with in great num · 

bers on the coaſts of Spain, and in the colonies, He 
was à fourth part a Spaniard, born of a mongrel in 
Te-uman ; and had been a ſinging boy, a ſexton, a ſai- 
lor, a monk, a factor, a ſoldier, and a footman. His 
uaue was Cacambo, and he had an entire regard to 


. 


33 CANDIDUS; or, Chap. 14. 
bis maſter, who was a very good fort of man. 
ſaddled the two Andalufian horſes with all expediti- 


on: Let us go, Maſter, let us follow the old wo. 


man's advice, let us ſet off, and run without looking 


behind us. Candi dus dropped ſome tears: O my 
dear Cunegonda“ fays he, muſt I leave you juſt 
at a time when the governor is going to ſee us mar- 
ried ! Cunegonda, when you are brought fo far, what 
will become of you?” *© She will do as well as ſhe 


can,” faid Cacambo; women are never at a loſs; 


God will provide for her; let us run,” *© Whither 
art thou carrying me? * ſaid Candidus: where are 
we going? what ſhall we do without Cunegonda?“ 
«+ By St. James of Compoſtella, faid Cacambo, 


„% you was going to fight againſt the Jeſuits; now 


let us go and fight for them. I know the road per- 
fectiy well; 1 will conduct you to their kingdom; 
they will be charmed to have a captain that knows 
the Bulgarian exercife; you will make a prodigious 
fortune; though one cannot find his acconnt in one 
world, he may in another, It is a great pleaſure to 
ſee variety of objects, and to perform new exploits.” 
« Have you then been at Paraguay?“ faid Candi- 
dus. *© Yes, in truth, I have,” faid Cacambo: I 
was uſher to the college of aſſumption, and am ac- 
quainted with the government of the good fathers, 
as well as I am with the ſtreets of Cadiz, Itis an ad- 
mirable ſort of government. The kingdom is up- 
wards of three hundred — in diameter, and di- 
vided into thirty provinces. The fathers there are 
maſters of every thing, and the people have nothing. 
It is the maſterpiece of reaſon and juſtice. For my 
part, I ſee nothing fo divine as the good fathers, who 
wage war here againſt the Kings of Spain and Portu- 
gal, and in Europe are their confeſſors; who in this 
country kill Spaniards, and at Madrid ſend them to 
heaven. This tranſports me: let us therefore puſh 
forward; you are going to be the happieſt of morr.ls, 


| 
. 


Chap. 14- AT L ror THE 5 . 29 
What pleaſure will it be to thoſe fathers, when they 
know that a captain who underſtands the Bulgariau 
exerciſe, comes to offer them his ſervice !” 

As ſoon as they reached the firlt pals, Cacambo told 
the advanced guard, that a captain deſired to ipeak 
with my Lord the commaudant. They went to in- 


ſorm the main guard of it. A Paraguayan officer ran 


on foot to the commandant to impart the news to 
him. Candidus and Cacambo were at firit diſarm. 
ed, and their two Andaluſi in horſes feized, The two 
ſtrangers were introduced between two files of mutke- 
reers : the commandant was at the further end, with 
a three cornered cap on his head, his gown tucked 
up, a ſword by his fide, and a ſpontoon in his hand, 
He made a ſignal, and ſtraightway four and twenty 
ſoldiers ſurrounded the new comers. A ſerjeant told 
them they mutt wait; that the commandant could not 
ſpeak to them; that the Rev. Father Provincial does 
not permit any Spaniard to open his mouth but in 
his preſence, or to ſtay above three hours in the pro- 
vince, ** And where is the Rev. Father Provincial ?” 
faid Cacambo, ** He is upon the parade, aiter ſay- 
ing mals,” anſwered the ſerjeant; and you cannot 
kiſs his ſpurs in leſs than three hours. But,” faid 
Cacambo, my maſter, the Captain, who is ready 
to die for hunger as well as myſelf, is not a Spaniard, 
dut a German: cannot we have ſomething for break- 
faſt, while we wait for his Reverence ?” 
The lerjeant went that inſtant, to give an account 
of this diſcourſe to the commandant, ** God be praiſ · 
ed,” ſaid the Rev, Commandant; ** fince he is a Ger- 
man, I may ſpeak with him; bring him into my ar- 
bour,” Candidus was immediately conducted into a 
green pavilion, decorated with a very handſome bal. 
luſtrade of green and gold marble, with intertextures 
ol vines, containing parrots, humming birds, fly birds, 
Guiney-hens, and all other forts of rare birds. An 
excellent breakfaſt was provided in veſſels of gold; and 


40 CANDIDUS; or, Chap. 14. 
_ while the Paraguayans were eating Indian corn out of 
wooden diſhes, in the open fields expoled to the ſul- 
try heat of the ſun, the Rev. Father Commandant re- 
tired to his ar bour. 

He was a very handſome young man, with a full 
face, tolerably fair, freſh coloured, his eye · brows were 
arched, his eye full of fire, his ear red, his lips like 
vermilion; his air was ſomewhat fierce, hut of a fierce- 
neſs which differed both from that of a Spaniard and 
a Jeſuit, They now returned Candidus and Cacam» 
bo their arms, which had been taken from them, to- 
gether with the two Andaluſian horſes ; which Ca - 
cambo took the liberty to feed near the arbour, keep- 
ing his eye upon them, for fear of a ſurpriſe. 

Candidus immediately kiſſed the hem of the con- 
mandant's garment ; after which they both, by his 
order, fat down to table. Youare a German then?“ 
faid the Jeſuit to him, in that language. ** Yes, m7 
Reverend Father,” faid Candidus. In pronouncing 
theſe words, they looked on each other with an ex- 
treme ſurpriſe, which they were not able to account 
for. ** And what part of Germany do you belong to? 
ſaid the Jeſuit. ** To the lower part of Weſtphalia,” 
faid Candidus: I was born in the caſtle of Thunder. 
ten-tronckh.“ Heavens ! is it poſſible!ꝰ cried the 

commandant. *©* What a miracle is this! cried Can- 
didus, Is it you?“ ſaid the commandant. ** ”Tis 
impoſſible ! faid Candidus, On this they both fell 
backwards; but getting up again, embraced each o- 
ther, and ſhed tears. What! is it you, my Reverend 
Father! you! the brother of the fair Eunegonda! you, 
that was flain by the Bulgarians ! you, the Baron's 
fon! are you a Jeſuit at Paraguay ! I muſt confeſs, 
chat this is a ſtrange world indeed! Ah Pangloſs 
Pangloſs! how glad would you have been, if you bad 


not been hanged !” 
The commandant ordered the negro llaves, and 


| the Paraguayans, that poured out their liquor in cu2s 


Chap. 1. ALL ror THE Besr, 4 
of rock cryſtal, to retire. He thanked God, and St. 
us, a thouſand times; folded Candidus in his 
arms; their faces being all the while bathed in tears. 
* You will be more aſtoniſhed, more affected, more 
out of your wits,” ſaid Candidus, when I tell you 
that Miſs Cunegonda, your filter, who you thought 
was ripped up, is as well as I am.“ Where!” In 
your neighbourhood, at the houſe of the governor of 
Buenos Ayres ; and I was coming to fight againſt you.” 
Every word they ſpoke iu this long converſation, heap» 
ed ſurpriſe upon ſurpriſe, Their ſouls dwelt upon 
their tongues, liſtened in their ears, and ſparkled in 
their eyes. As they were Germans, they made a long 
meal, (according to cuſtom), waiting for the Reve- 


rend Father the Provincial; when the commandant 
thus deſpoke his Candidus, 


CHAP. xv. 


How Candidus killed the brother of his dear Cane 
gonda. 


Shall ever have preſent tomy memory that dread- 

ful. day wherein I faw my father and mother kil- 
led, and my ſiſter raviſhed. When the Bulgarians 
were gone, my dear filter could be found no where ; 
and I, together with my father and mother, twa 
maids, and three littie lads that were murdered, were 
| Hung into a cart, in order to be buried in a chapel, 
which belonged to the Jeſuits, about two leagues diſ- 
tant from our family-caſtle, A Jeſuit ſprinkled us 
with holy water, which being very ſalt, and ſome drops 
falling iato my eyes, the Father could perceive my 
eyeballs move; on which he put his hand upon my 
fide, and felt my heart beat: 1 was taken care of; 
and in about three weeks time, no one would have 


* 


42 CANDIDUS; or, Chap. ug, 
thought that any thing had ailed me. You know 
very well, my dear Candidus, I was very handſome, 
but I grew more ſo: on which account the Reverend 
Father Didrius, ſuperior of the houſe, conceived a ve- 
ry great affection for me; gave me the habit of a no- 

vice; and ſome time after, ſent me to Rome. The 
ſuperior was then looking out for a recruit of young 
Jeſuits from Germany. For the rulers of Paraguay 
take as few Spaniſh Jeſuits as they can; but chooſe 
foreigners, becauſe they think they can tyrannize o- 
ver them as they pleaſe. I was therefare made choice 
of by the Revered Father General, as a proper perſon 
to go to work in this vineyard. I fet ſail in compa- 
ny with a Polander, and a Tirolefian, On my arri- 
val I was honoured with a ſub-deaconry and a lieu- 
tenancy. At preſent I am a colonel and a prieſt, We 
ſhall give the King of Spain's army a warm reception; 
1 can aſſure you that they will be excommunicated, 
and beaten. Providence has ſent yeu hither to aſ- 
ſilt us. But is it true, that my dear filter Cunegon- 
da is in our neighbourhood, at the governor of Buenos. 
Ayres's honſe? Candidus fwore that it was as true 
as the goſpel, On this their tears guſhed out a- 
freſh | 


The Baron could not refrain embracing Candi- 
dus, whom he called his brother and his protector. 
© Ah, perhaps,” faid he, we two may enter the ci- 
ty in triumph, and recover my ſiſter Cunegonda.” 


There is nothing I could with for more,” faid Can- 


didus; for TexpeRted to be married to her before to- 
morrow, and I have ſome hopes I ſhall yet.” © The 
inſolence of the fellow!“ replied the Baron; would 
you have the impudence to marry my ſiſter, who can 
ſhew ſeventy- two quarterings in her coat of arms? 
Candidus being quite thunderſtruck at this, made him 
the following reply : ** My Reverend Father, all the 
. quarterings in the world do not fignify a farthing. | 
have delivered your ſiſter from the hands of a Jew, 


Chap. 15. ALL ror THE 3581. 43 
and an inquiſitor; ſhe lies under a great many obliga- 
tions to me; and is willing to marry me. Maſter Pan- 
gloſs always told me that all men are equal. I am 
fare 1 thall have her.” ** We will ſee whether you 
ſhall or no, you villain!” ſaid the Jeſuit Baron of 
Thunder-ten-tronckh ; and at the ſame time gave him 
a blow on the face with the flat part of his ſword, Can- 
didus drew his immediately, and plunged it up to the 
hilt in the Baron's body ; but drawing it out again, 
and looking upon it as it reeked, he cried out, © 
God! I have killed my old maſter, my friend, my 
brother in-law. I am one of the beſt natured men in 
the world, yet I have killed three men, and of the 
three, there were two of them prieſts,” 
Cacambo, who ſtood ſentry at the door of the ar- 

bour, and who heard the noiſe, ran in, ** We have 
nothing now to do but to fell our lives as dear as we 
can,” ſaid his maſter to him; ** and if they ſhould 
force their way i into the arbour, let us at leaſt die with 
our arms in our hands.” 

Cacambo, who had been Oy WEN ROE S fimi- 
lar nature, did not ſtand to rack his brains for an ex- 
pedient ; but took the Jeſuit's dreſs, which the Baron 
wore, put it upon Candidus, gave him the dead man's 
cap, aud made him get upon his horſe, All this was done 
in the glance of an eye. Let us gallop away, 
Maſter,” fays he; every one will take you for ſome 
]:ſuit that is going expreſs, and we hall get to-the 
frontiers before they can overtake us.“ 

He fled like lightning, before theſe words were 
quite out of his mouth, exclaiming in Spaniſh Make 
. make way for the Reverend Father, the Colo- 
wel.” 


CANDIDUS; or, Chap. 16. 


CHAP. 


| What paſſed between our two travellers, and two 
girls, two monkeys, and the ſavages called Oreil- 


XVI. 


ANDIDUS and his man had got beyond the 

paſs, before any body in the camp knew any 
thing of the death of the German Jeſuit, Theprovident 
Cacambo had taken care to fill his wallet with bread, 
chocolate, hams, and ſome bottles of wine. They 
puſhed with their Andaluſian horſes into a ſtrange 
country, where they could not difcover any path or 
road. At laſt they perceived a pleaſant meadow, 
which was divided by a river. Our two travel- 
lers turned their horſes a grazing. And Cacam- 
bo made a to his maſter to eat a bit, and at 
. the ſame time ſet him the example, ** Do you think,” 
faid Candidus, ** that I can feaſt upon ham, when I 
have killed the Baron's fon, and find myſelf under a 


: neceſſity never to ſee Cunegonda again, as long as I 


live? What fignifies it to prolong my days in miſe- 
ry, fince I muſt drag them far from her, a prey to re- 
morſe and deſpair? and what will the Journal of 
'Trevoux ſay of me? 

Having thus ſpoke, he refuſed to eat a morſe]. The 
fun was now fet ; when our two wanderers, to their 
very great ſurpriſe, heard a faint cry, which ſeemed to 
come from ſome women. It was not eaſy to determine 
whether it was occaſioned by diſtreſs.or mirth ; they 
roſe immediately with all the anxiety and apprehenſi 

on to which people are ſubject in a ſtrange place. The 
noiſe was made by two girls that ran ſtark naked on 
the banks of the meadow, purſued by two large mon» 
keys that. bit their backſides, Candidus was moved 


Chap. 16. ALL ror Tus Besr, 45 
with pity; and as he had learned to ſhoot among the 
Bulgarians, and was ſo good a markſman, that he 
would hit a nut in a buſh without touching the leaves, 
he took up his Spaniſh fuzee, which was double charg- 
ed, and killed the two mcnkeys. ** God be praiſed, 
my dear Cacambo,” ſaid he, I have delivered the 
two poor girls from this great danger; however, if I 
have been guilty of a ſin in killing the inquiſitor, 1 
have now made ample amends for it, by ſaving the 
lives of the two girls. They may chance to prove 
a couple of ladies of rank; and who knows but 
this adventure may do us ſome ſer vice in this coun- 
wy?” 

He was going on at this rate, thinking that he had 
done a great feat; but how great was his ſurpriſe, 
when, inſtead of rejoicing, he ſaw the two girls em- 
bracing the monkeys with all the marks of the moſt 
tender affection! they bathed their bodies with tears, 
and filled the air with ſhrieks that teſtified the deep- 
et diſtreſs, *I could never have expected to have 
ſeen ſo much as this,” ſaid he to Cacambo ; who re- 
plied, ** You have done a fine piece of werk indeed, 
Sir, you have killed the ladies two ſweethearts. 
„Their ſweethearts! is it poſſible! you are in jeſt 
ſure, Cacambo: who the duce could believe you to 
be in earneſt?” My dear Sir,“ replied Cacambo, 
you are always for making mountains of molchills ; 
why ſhould you think it incredible, that there are fome 
countries where monkeys enjoy the tavours of the la- 
dies? why, they are got by human creatures, I the 
ſame manner as I was got by a Spaniard,” WAy,” 
replied Candidus, now 1 recollet, Mr Pangloſs has 
told me, that there may be many an inſtance of this 
kind, and that theſe mixtures gave birth to the Egi- 
pans, Fauns, and Satyrs; that a great many of the 
ancieuts had ſeen them with their own eyes: but I 
always looked upon it as a mere romance.” © You 
ought, at preſent, to ſee your miſtake,” ſaid Cacam- 


46 CANDIDUS; or, Chap.16. 
bo, * and own that the doctor was in the right. And 
you may fee what influence the prejudice of edu- 
cation has upon the underſtanding. All I am afraid 
of is, that theſe ladies will play us ſome unlucky 


trick.“ 
Theſe wiſe reflexions induced Candidus to quit the 


meadow, and take to a wood; where he and Cacambo 
ſapped together: and, after heartily curſing the Por- 
tugueſe inquiſitor, the governor of Buenos Ayres, and 
the Baron, they fell aſleep. 
On their awaking, they found that they could not 
ſtir: for the Oreillons, the inhabitants of the country, 
whom the two laſſes had informed of their adventure, 
had bound them in the night time, with cords made 
af the bark of a tree. They were ſurrounded by a bo- 
dy of fifty Oreillons, ſtark naked, armed wich arrows, 
clubs, and hatchets made of flint: ſome of them were 
making a great cauldron boil, others preparing ſpits ; 
and all of them crying out, He's a j-tuit, he's a je- 
faitz we will make him pay fauce for it, we will 
pick his bones for him; let us eat the Jeſuit, let us eat 
the Jeſuit.” 

Nou may remember I told yon, my dear Matter,” 
_ cried Cacamboin a lamentable tone, that thoſe two 
laſſes would play us ſome ugly trick.“ 
Candidus perceiving the cauldron and the ſpits, 


cried out, **O Lord! we are certainly going to be 


roaſted or boiled. Ah! would Mr Pangloſs now ſay, 
on ſeeing nature without diſguiſe, that whatever is, 
is right? It may be fo: but I muſt confeſs it is a ſad 
thing to have loſt Mils — and to be ſpitted 
by the Oreillons. 


Cacambo, who was never at a loſs for an invention: 


Never deſpair,” ſaid he to the diſconſolate Candi - 


dus. **I underſtand the jargon of theſe people a lit 
Lle, and am going to ſpeak to them.” Don't fail,” 
faid Candidus, to repreſent to them the inhumani- 


Chap. 16. ALL For Thi Beer. 47 
ty of dreſſing men for meat, and ſet forth what an un · 
chriſfian pe actice it is. 

1230 ſays Cacambo, ** you fancy that you 
ſhall feaſt on a Jeſuit to-day ; a very good diſh, I make 
no doubt, nor is there any thing more juſt than to 
ſerve one's enemies ſo. In effect, the law of nature 
teaches us to kill our neighbour, and it is a 

which is put in practice all over the globe. If we do 
not make uſe of the right of eating him, it is becauſe 
we have plenty of victuals without it; but as you 
have not that advantage, it muſt certainly be better 
for you to eat your enemies, than fling away the fruit 
of your victories as a fealt to crows and ravens. But, 
Gentlemen, I ſuppoſe you would not be for | 
your friends, You fancy you are going to ſpit a Je- 
ſuit ; but, believe me, I aſſure you it is your defender, 
it is the enemy of your enemies that you are going to 
| roaſt, As for my part, | was born among you. The 
gentleman you fee here, is my maſter, and fo far from 
being a Jeſuit, he has juſt now killed a Jeſuit, and he 
is only dreſſed in his ſpoils ; which is the cauſe of your 
miſtake. In order to confirm my aſſer tion, let one of 
you take his gown off, carry it to the firſt paſs of the 
government of the fathers, and inform himſelf whe- 
ther my maſter has not killed a Jeſuit officer, Itis an 
affair that won't take up much time; and you may 
always have it in your power to eat us, if you catch 
me in a lie, But if I have told you the truth, and no- 
thing but the truth, you are too well acquainted with 
the principles of natural right, morality, and law, not 
to ſhew us ſome favour.” 

The Oreillons were fo fully convinced of the reaſon- 
ableneſs of his propoſal, that they deputed two of their 
chiefs to go and inform themſelves of the truth of 
what he had told them. The two deputies acquitted 
themſelves of their charge like men of ſenſe, and re- 
turaed ſoon with a favourable account. The Oreillons 
then vnbound their priſoners ſhewed them a thouſand 


CANDIDUS; or, Chap. yy, | 


civilities, alfred them women, gave them ſomething's 
refreſh them, and conducted them back again to the con- 
ines of their ſtate, crying all the while, like madmen, 
« He is no Jeſuit, ke is no Jeſuit.” 


deliverance. ** What a people!” faid he; what 


tune to whip Miis Cunegonda's brother through the 


lungs, I ſhould incvitably have been eaten up. But, 


after all, the dictates of pure nature are always beſt, 
fince this people, inſtead of eating me, ſhewed me a 
thouſand civilities as foon as they were informed that 
I was not a Jeſuit,” 


Candidus and his man arrived at the country of Eldo- 


rado, and what they ſaw there, 


HEN they had reached the frontiers of the O. 


to Candidus, that this part of the world is no bet- 
ter than the other. Take a fool's advice for once, 
and let us return to Europe, as faſt as ever we can.” 

How is that poſſible : % ſaid Candidus: And pray 
what part of it would you have us go to? ſhall [ 
go into my own country? the Bulgarians and Abari- 


ans kill all they meet with there; if I return to Por- 


tugal, I am ſure 1 ſhall be burnt alive; it we remain 
in this country, we run the hazard of being roaſted 
every moment And again, how can I think of 
leav.ng that part of the globe where Miſs Cunegonda 
lives? 

„Why then, let vs take our courſe towards Cay- 
enne, laid Ciczmbo; ue ſhall meet with ſome 
Frenchmen there, for you know they are to be met 


Candidus could not help admiring the ſubject of his 


men what manners! If bad not had the good for- 


(OPRIP(SFUVIRAS ASS) | 


reillons, You obſerve now,“ ſaid Cacambo 


et 


Ckap. 17. ALL For THE BS u. | n 
with all over the globe; perhaps they will give us ſome 
relief, and God may have pity upon us.“ 

Itwas no eaſy matter for them to go e 
they did no know whereabouts it lay; beſi des, moun- 
tains, rivers, precipices, banditti, and favages, were 
difficulties they were ſure to encounter with in their 
journey. Their horſes died with fatigns, and their 
proviſions were ſoon conſumed. After having lived 
a whole month on the wild fruits, they tound them- 
ſelves on the banks of a ſmall river, which was bor - 
dzred by cocao trees, which at once preſerved their 
lives, and kept up their hopes» 

Cacarabo, who was on allo:cilions as geod a conn- 
ſellor as the old wo nan, nid to Candidus, We can 
hold out no longer; we have walked enough alrea - 
dy, and here's an empty canoe upon the thore, let's 
fill it with cocao, then get on board, and let it drive 
with the ſtream: a river always carries one to fome 
inhabited place. If we don't mect with what we 
like, we are fure to meet with ſomething new.“ Why, 
what you ſay is very right, een let us go,“ ſaid Can- 
didus, ** and recommened ourſelves to the care of 
Providence,” 

They rowed ſome leagues between the two banks, 
which were enamelled with flowers in ſome places, in 
others barren, in ſome parts level, and in others very 
ſteep. The river grew broader as they proceeded, 
and, at laſt, loſt itſelf in a ſpacious horizon, that was 
bounded by ſome frighttul rocks, which reached as 
high as the clouds. Our two travellers had the cou 
rage to truſt themſelves to the ſtream. The river be- 
ing very narrow in this place, drove them along with 
ſuch a rapidity and noile as flled them with the uc- 
moſt horror, Ia abcut four and twenty hours they 


: got fight of day light again, but their canoe was daſh- 


ed in pieces againſt the breakers, They were oblig- 

ed to crawl from one rock to another for a whole 

league; after which they got Fght of a ſpacious plain, 
4 


30 CANDIDUS; or, Chap. ny, | 


bounded with inacceſſible mountains. The country 
was cultivated both for pleaſure and profit ; which 
latter was always mixed with the agreeable. The 
roads were covere J, or, more properly ſpeaking, were 


adorned with carriages, whoſe figure and materials 


were very brilliant; they were full of men and women, 
of an extraordinary beauty, and drawn with great 
ſwiftneſs, by large red ſheep, which for fleetneſs fur- 
paſſed the finelt horſes of Andaluſia, Tetuan, or Me. 
duinez. 

«© This certainly,“ ſaid Candidus, is a bs 
countrythan Weſtphalia,” He and Cacambo got en 
{hore near the belt village they came to. The very 
children of the village were dreſſed in gold brocades, 
a'l tattered, playing at quoits at the entrance of the 
town. Our two travellers from the other world a- 
muſed themſelves wita looking at them. The quoits 
were made of large round pieces, yellow, red, and 
green, and caſt a ſurprifing light. Our travellers hands 
itched prodigiouſly to be fingering ſome of them: for 
they were almolt certain, that they were either gold, 
emeralds, or rubies, the lealt of which would have 
been no {mall ornament to the throne of the Great 
Mogul. To be ſure,” ſail Cacambo, © theſe muſt 
he the children of the king of the country, diverting 
themſelves at quoits.” The maſter of the village 

coming at that ieſtant to call them to ſchooi: 
„That's the prec:ptor to the royal family,” cried 
Candidus, 

The little brats rad quitted their play, 
leuving their queitz and other playthings behind 
them, Candid us pick-4 them up, run to the ſchool- 
maſter, and prejeated them to him with a great deal 
of humilicy, acquaiating hic, by ſigns, that their Royal 
Highneiſes had forgot their gold and jewels, The 
maſter of the village ſmile}, and flung them upon 
the ground; and having ſtared at Candidus with 
ſome degree of ſurpriſe, waited off, 


81 


„ 


MF - 


Chap. 19. ALL ror rut Bur, 51 
Our travellers did not fail immediately to pick up 


the gold, rubies, and emeralds. ** Where are we 


got to now 2” cried Candidus. The princes of the 
blood mult certainly be well educated here, ſince they 
are taught to make fo light of gold and jewels.” Ca 
cambo was as much furpriſed as Candidus, At 
length they drew near to the firſt houſe in the village, 
which was built like one of our European palaces. 
There was a vaſt croud of people at the door, and ſtill 


a greater within, They heard very good muſic, and 


their noſtrils were ſaluted by a moit re;reſhing ſmell 
from the kitchen. | 

Cacambo went up to the door, and heard they 
were ſpeaking the Peruvian language, which was his 
mother tongue; for every one knows that Cacambo 
was born at Tucuman, in a village where they make 
aſe of no other language, **I'll be your interpre- 
ter, maſter, maſter,” cries Cacamba, in the great- 


elt raptures, this is au inn; in with you, in with 


Jou,“ 
Immediately two waiters and two maids that be- 
longed to the houſe, dreſſed in cloaths of gold tiſſue, 
and having their hair tied back with ribands, invited 


them to fit down to table with the landlord, They 


ſerved up four ſoups, each garniſhed with two parro- 


| quets, a large diſh of bouille, that weighed about two 


hundred weight ; two apes roaſted, of an excellent 
taſte, three hundred hamminp birds in one plate, and 
ſix hundred fly birds in another; together with ex- 
quiſite ragouts, and the molt delicious tarts, all upon 


plates of a ſpecies of rock cryſtal. After which the 
lads and maids ſerved them with a great variety of 


liquors made from the ſugar cxne3, 

The gueſts were moſtly tradetiven and carriers, al! 
extremely polite ; who aſked ſome queitions of Cacam - 
bo with the greateſt diſcretion and cireumſpection, 


and received as fatisfatory anſwers. 


When the repaſt was ended, Cacambo thought, x: 
a. 


— 


52 C AN DIDU S; or, Chap, pp, 


well as Candidus, to diſcharge their reckoning, by 


patting down two of the large pieces of gold which 
they bad picked up. But the landlord and landlady 
burſt out into a prodigious fit of laughing, and could 
net reſtrain it for ſome time. Recovering themſelves 
at laſt: „Gentlemen, ſays the landlord, we can 
ſee pretty well that you are (trangers; we are not 


much uſed ro ſuch gueſts here. Pardon us, if we fell 


a laughing, when ycu offered us the (tones of our 
highways in diſcharge of your reckoning. It is plain 


you have got none of the money of this kingdom; but 


there is no occaſion for it. in order to dine here, 
All the invs, which are eſtabliſned for the conve- 
niency of trade, are maintained by the government, 
You have had but forry entertainment here, becauſe 


this is but a poor village; but any where elſe you 
will be ſure to be received in a manner ſuitable to 


your merit,” | 

Cacambo explained che hoſt's ſpeech to Cardidus, 
who heard it with as much aſtoniſhment and wonder 
as his friend Cacambo interpreted it. What coun- 
try can this be,” ſaid they to each other, which is 
vaknown to the ref of the univerſe, and of fo diffe- 
rent 2 nature from ours? It is probably that coun- 
try where every thing is right; for it is neceſſary that 
there ſhould be one of that kind. And tor all Doctor 
Pangloſs has faid, I could not help noticing ma- 
ry a time that things were extremely bad in Weſt⸗ 
phalia.“ Sy 


bed 
* 


* K 8 - mw & & © kw ay 


Chap. 18. ALL FOR THE BESsr. 53 


A MN. 


C H P XVIII. 


What they [ax in the country of EIAorado. 


Acambo could not hide his curioſity from his 
lanclord. © For my part,” faid the landlord to 
hi n, I am very Naa but not the worſe on that 
account: but «2: have an eld man here, who has re 


tired from court, and is counted both the wiſet and 
the molt communicative perion- in the kingdom.” 


And ſaying this, without any more ado, he conduQed 
Cacambo to the old man's houſe. Candidus acted 
now only a {ccond character in the play, and follow- 
ed his rv unt. They entered into a very plain houſe; 


for the door was nothing but ſi ver, and the ceilings 


nothing but gold, but finiſhed with ſo much taſte, 
tuat the richell ceilings of Europe could not ſurpats 
them, The ancichamber wes indeed only covered 


with rubies and emeralds, but the order in which e- 


very thing was arranged, made amends for this great 
ſimplicity. 

The old gentleman received the two ſtrangers ca 
2 ſopha {fd with the teathers of humming birds, 
and ordered them to be ferved with liquors in vetſ-!s 
of diamond; after which he tavsr. ed their curiolity 
in the follo: ing Manner. 

„am now in my nhundredth and feventy-fecond 
year; and I have heard my decealcd father, who was 
groom to his mMjety, menioa the ſurpriſing revoliy- 
tions of Peru, of which he was an cye-witnels, The 
kingdom we are in at prefent, is the ancient ccuntry 
of the Incas, who left it very indiſcreetly in order 
to conquer one part of the world; inſtead of which, 
— themf:!ves were all deſtrored by the Spar! 


G3 


54 CANDIDUS; or, Chap, 18. 

The princes of their family who remained in their 
native country, were more wiſe; they made a law, 
by the unanimous conſent of the whole nation, that 
none of our inhabitants ſhould ever go out of our lit. 
tle kingdom; and it is owing to this, that we have 
preferved both our innocence and our happineſs, The 
Spaniards have had ſome confuſed idea of this coun- 
try, and have called it E Dorado; and an Engliſh- 
man, named Sir Valter Raleigh, has likewiſe been 
en our coaſts above a hundred years ago: but as we 
zre ſurrounded by inacceſſible rocks and precipices, 
we have always been hitherto ſheltered from the ra 
acity of the Europtan nations, who are inſpired with 
an iaconceivable rage for the ſtones and dirt of our 
land, and who, to poſſeſs themſelves of them, would 
murder us all, to the very laſt man. 

Their conference was pretty long, and turned up- 
on the form of their go-yernment, their manners, their 
Komen, their public ſhews, and their arts. Art laſt 
Candidus, who had always a taſte for metaphyſics, 
tid Cacambo alk, if there was any religion in that 
country ? 

The old gentleman BE A" a little,“ How is it 
polſible,” ſaid he, that you ſhould queſtion it? Do 
you take us for ungrateful wretches?“ Cacambo 
then humbly aſked him, what the religion of Eldora- 


do was? This made the old gentleman reddea again. 
Can there be more religions than one:?“ ſaid he: 


We profeſs, I believe, the religion of the whole 
world; we worſhip the Deity from evening to morn- 
ing.“ Do you wortlip but one GO?“ ſaid Cacam- 
bo,” who ſtill acted as interpreter in repreſenting 


Candidus's doubts. * You may be ſure we do,” faid 


the old man; © fince it is evident there can be neither 
two, nor three, nor four. I muſt confels, that the 
people of your world propoſe very odd queſtions.” 
Cindidus was not yet wearied in interrogating the 
good old man: he wanted to know how they prayed 


Chap. 18. ALL ror THE BEST, 55 


to God in Eldorado. We never pray at all,” ſaid 


the _ reſpect able ſage; „We have nothing to atk 
of him; he has given us alt we need, aud we incel- 
fantly return him thanks,” 

Candidus had a curiofity to fee their prieſts, and 
bid Cacambo ik, wicre they were. I tis made the 
old gentleman finile. * My triengs,” ſaid he, © we 
are all of us prieſts; the King, and the heads of eve- 
ry family, fing their telemn longs of thanklgiving, 
every morning, accompanied by five or ſix thoufand 
muſicians.” ** Walt fad Cacambo, hae you 
no monks to preach, to diſpute, to tyrannize, to fe* 
people together by the ears, ani get thote burn 
ul o are uot of the fame ſentiments 45 themſelves ! ? 
© We mult be very great fools inveed if we had, fail 
the old gentleman ; e are all of us of the fame 
opinion here, and we don't underſtand what you mean 


by your monks. ? 


Cardidus was in an ec aly during a!! this diſcourſ®, 
and faid to himſelf, ** This place is vaſtly different 
from Weſtphalia, and my Lord the Baron's caltlo, 
If our friend Panglois had icen Eldorado, he wou!.! 
never have maintained, that nothing upon earth could 


lurpaſs the cailtle of I hnnder-ten-troackh, It is plain 


every body ſhould travel.“ 

Aiter this long converſation was finiſhed, the good 
old man ordered a coach and fix ſheep to be got ready, 
and twelve of his Comeitics to conduct the traveller. 
to the court. Excuſe me,” ſays he to them, it 
my age deprives me of the honour of attending yen. 
The King will receive you in a manner that you will 


not be diipizaied with; and you will, I doubt nor, 


make allowance ſor the cuſtoms of the country, f 
you ſhould | meet with any thing that you m—__—— 
of.“ 

Candidus and Cacambo got into the coach; the fin 
ſheep flew, and la les thin four heurs they de 
the King's palace, which was ſituat. g at one end of the 

C 4 


56 CANDIDUS; or, Chap. 18. 
metropolis, The gate was two hundred and twenty 
feet high, and one hundred broad: it is impoſſible to 
deſcribe the materials it was compoſed of. But one 
may eaſily gueſs, that it muſt have prodigiouſly ſur. 
paſſed thoſe ſtones and the ſand which we call gold 
and jewels, 


Candidus and Cacambo, on their alighting from tlie 


coach, were received by twenty maids of honour, of 


an exquiſite beauty, who conducted them to the baths, 
and preſ nted them with robes made of the down of 
humming - birds; after which the great officers and 
their ladies introduced them into bis Majeſty's apart- 
ment, between two rows of muſicians, conſiſting of a 
thouſand in each, according to the cuſtom of the 
country. 


When they — the foot of the throne, Ca- 


:-ambo aſked one of the great officers, in what man 
ner they were to behave when they went to pay their 
reſpects to his Majelty, whether they were to fall down 
on their knees or their bellies; whether they were to 
put their hands upon their heads or upon their back- 
ſides; whether they were to lick up the duſt of the 
room; and, in a word, what the ceremony was! 
+ The cuſtom is,” ſaid the great officer, © to embrac: 
the King, and kiſs him on both fides,” Candidus 


and Cacambo accordingly claſped his Majeſty round 


the neck, who received them in the moſt polite man- 
ner imaginable, and very genteelly invited them to 
ſup with him. 

In the interim, they ſhewed them the city, the pub - 


lic edifices, that reach almoſt as high as the clouds, 


the market places embelliſhed with a thouſand co- 
lumns; fountains of pure water, beſides others of 
roſe· water, and the liquors that are extracted from the 
ſugar-canes, which played inceſſantly in the ſquares, 


which were paved with a kind of precious ſtones, that 


diffuſed a fragrance like that of cloves or cinnamon. 
Candidus aſked them to ſnew them one of their courts 


Chap. 13. ALL FoR THE BEST, 57 
of juſtice, and their parlament houſe; they told him 
they had none, and that they were itrangers to law- 
faits, He then enquired il they had any priſons, an d 
was told they had not WV hat ſurpriſed him mot, 
and gave him the greateſt pleature, was the palace 06 
ſciences, in which he ſaw a gallery of two thonſan ? 
paces, full of inſtruments for making experiments 11 
philoſophy. | 

After having gone over abot a thouſandth part of 
the city in the afternoon, they were reconduded to 
the palace. Candidus ſeated himtclt at table with | i; 
Majelty, his valet Cacambo, and a great wany ladies, 
Never was chere a better entert iument ſeen; and ne- 
ver was more wit ſhewn at a table, than what his Ma- 
jeſty diſylayed. - Cacambo interpreted the King's re. 
partees to Candidus; and though they were trani}ats 
ed, they appeared repartees Kill: A thing which furs 
priſed Candidus more than any thing elie, 

They ſpent 2 whole month in this hotpitable man- 
ner. Candidus was continually faying to Cicambo, 
© | mult ſay it again and again, my friend, that the 
zaltle where I was born was nothing in compariſon or 
this country Where we are now; but yet Ms Cune- 
gonda is not here; and, without doubt, you have left 
2 ſweetheart behind you in Europe, If we ſtay where 
we are, we {hall be looked upon only like other folks; 
whereas if we return to our own world only with 
twelve [heep loaded with the peubles of Eldorado, we 
hall be richer than all the kings put together; we 
ſhall have no need to be afraid of the inquiſitors; any 
we may eaſily recover Miſs Cunegonda,” 

This propoſal was extremely agreeable to Cacam! 6; 
ſo fond are we af running about, of making a figure 
among our country en, and of making orations on 
#hat we have {zen in our travels, that theſe two hap. 
py men reſolved to be no longer fo, and accordingly 
alked his Majeſty's leave to depart, 

Los are guilty of a very great weakneſs,” fai. 

C5 


68 CAN DID US; or, Chap. 18. 
his Majeſty to them: I am not ignorant that my 
country is a trifling place; but providing it be but 
paſſable, you had better ſtay in it. I muſt indeed con- 
feſs, that I have no right to detain people of another 
nation; it is a degree of tyranny inconſiſtent with our 
cuſtoms and laws; all men are free: you may go 
when you plcaſe ; but you ought firſt to be informed, 
that you cannot leave us without ſome diih:ulty, It 
is impoſſible to go agaialt the curtent up the rapid 
river which runs under the rocks; your pailage hi- 
ther was a kind of miracle. "The mountains which 
ſurround my kingdom are a thouſand feet high, and 
as ſteep as a wall; they are at leaſt ten leagues over, 
and their deſcent is nothing but precipices, However, 
fince you ſeem determined to leave us, I will give or- 


ders immediately to the conſtructors of my machines, 


to contrive one to tranſport you with the greatelt eaſe, 
When they have conveyed you to the other {ide of the 
mountains, no one mult attend you; becauſe my ſub- 
jects ha e made a vow never to paſs beyond them, and 


are too wiſe to break it. 1 here is nothing elſe you 


can aſk of me, which ſhall not be granted.“ We 
aſk your Majeily,“ faid Cacambo, very eagerly, on- 
ly a few ſheep loaded with proviſions, together with 
ſome of the common ones and dirt of your coun» 


””F 


The King ſmiled heartily: I cannot,” faid he, 


© conceive what pleaſure yu Europeans find in our 


yellow clay; but you are welcome to take as much of 
it as you pleaſe, and much good may it do you.” 

He gave immediate orders to his engineers to con- 
ſtruct a machine to hoiſt up and tranſport theſe two 
extraordinary perſons cut of his kingdom. Three 
thouſand able mechanics ſt to work; and in à fort 
night's time the machine was compleated, which coſt 
no more than twenty millions Sterling of their cur- 
rency. 

Candidus and Cacambo were both placed in the ma- 


Chap. 19, ALL For The Brown, 59 
chine, together with two large red ſheep bridlel and 
ſaddled for them to ride on, when they were got clear 
of the mountains: twenty ſheep of burden loaded with 
proviſions ; thirty with the greateſt curioſities of th 
country, by way of preſent; and fifty with gold, pre- 
cious ſtones, and diamonds, Ihe King took his leave 
of our two vagabonds, with the greateſt marks of at 
fection. 

It was 2 very fine appearance to ſee them depurt, 
and the ingenious manner in which they and the the 
were {lang over the mountains, The philuiop' 
took their leave of them, after having got tiem ae 
over; and now Candidus had no other delire, no 0- 
ther aim, than to go to preſent his ſheep to M Cu: 
negonda. We have now got enough,“ fei be, 
« to pay for the ranſom of Miis Cunegonda, it the 
governor of Buznos-Ayres will but part witch her Let 
us march towards Cayenne, there take ſhipping, aud 
then we will lock out for {ome !nng kingdom that we 
can purchale.” 


e er 


Nei ger es” 
CH AF. TIS; 


tat befel ther at Surinam, and bow Candidus becans 
acquainted With Martin, 


T HE firft day's journey of our two ien was 
very pleafant, being clated with the idea of find - 
ing themſelves maſters of more rich-s than Afia, Eu- 
rope, or Africa could tcrape together. Candidus was 
ſo delighted, that he cut out the name of Cunegond. 
upon almoſt every tree that he came to. The ſecond 
day two of their ſheep ſank in a moraſs, and were loſt 
with all they carried: two others died of fatigne à 
few days after, ſeven or eight died at once for want in 
a deſart; and a few deys after others ſell Con a pre. 
: C 6 4 


— 


60 CAN DID US; or, Chap. 19. 
cipice. To be ſhort, after a march of one hundred days, 
their whole ſtock amouated to no more than two ſheep, 

Says Can idus, then, to Cacambo, “ My friend, you 
ſee how perithable the riches of this world are; there 
is nothing durable, nothing to be depended on but 
virtue, aud the happinels of once more ſeeing Miſs 
Canegonda.” I grant it,“ ſaid Cacambo; but we 
have (till two ſheep left, Leſides more treaſure than e- 
ver the King of Spain was maſter of; and ee a town 
2 good way off that ! take to be Surinam, belonging 
to the Dutch. We are at the end of our troubles, and 
at the beginning of our happineſs,” 


As they drew nigh to the city, they ſaw a negro 


ſtretched on the ground, with only cre half of his 
habit, that is to ſay, having only a pair of drawers 
of blue cloth; the poor fellow had loſt his left leg and 
his right hand. Good God !” ſaid Candidus to him 


in Dutch, friend, what do you do here, in this ter» 


rible condition ?” I am waiting for my maſter Myn- 


heer Vander.icudur, the great merchant,” replied the 


negro. And was it Mynheer Vanderdendur that 
uſed you in this manner?” ſaid Candidus. Yes, 
Sir,” ſaid the negro, “ it is the cuſtom of this coun- 
try. They give us a pair of linen drawers for our 
whole cloathing twice a year, If we ſhould chance 
to have one of our fingers caught in the mill, as we 
are working in the ſugar houſes, they cut off our 
hand; if we offer to ran away, they cut off one of 
our legs; and I have had the misfortune to be tound 
guilty of both theſe charges, Such are the conditi- 
ons on which zou eat ſugar ia Europe! Yet, when 


my mother ſold me for ten crowns of Patagon on the 


coalt of Guinea, ſhe faid to me, My dear boy, bleſs 
our bentfadtors, be always very dutiful to them, they 
wiil make you live happily : you have the honour to 
be a flare to our lords the whites, and will by that 
means be in a way of making the fortunes both of 
jour father ud wether, Alas! Ido not know whe 


— —— —e— 


— — 


— 


Chap, 19. ALL For THE BEST, Gt 
ther | have made their tortunes, but I am ſure they, 
have not make mine. The dogs, monkeys, and par» 
rots, are a thouſand times leſs wretched than we. 
The Dutch miſſionaries who converted me, told me e- 
very Sunday, that we are all ſons of Adam, both biacks 


and whites, 1 am not a gene2logilt myfeltz but if 


theſe preachers (peak the truth, we are all couſin ger 
mans; and tien you muſt own, that it is a ſhocking 
thing for them to ule their relations in this —— 
manner. 

„% Ah! Panglofs,” cried Candidus, ** you never 
dreamed of ſuch an abominable piece of villany! there 
is an end of the matter; I fee I mult at laſt renounc2 
your optimiſm. What do you mean by optimiſm ?”? 
ſaid Cacambo. Why,” faid Candidus, ** it is the 
folly of maintaining that every thing is right, when 
it is wrong,” He then looked upon the negro with 
tears in his eyes, and in that condition entered into 
Surinam. | 

The firſt thing they did here was, to inquire whe- 
ther there was any veſſel in the harbour that mighs 
be hired for Buznos-Ayres. The perſon they applied 
themſelves to was no other than a Spaniſh comman- 
der, who offered to make an honourable bargain with 
them, He appointed to meet them at an inn, whi- 
ther Candidus and the faithful Cacarabo went to wait 
for him with their two theep. 

Candidus, who had his mind in his tongne, told the 
Spaniard all his adventures, and conſeſſed to him that 
he was determined to run away with Mi's Cunegonda. 
„ thall take care how I carry you to Buenos Ayres, 
if that is the caſe,” {aid the captain;” for I would be 


| hanged, and ſo would you. The fair Cunegonda is 


my Lord's favourite miltreis,” 

This was a thunder clap to Candidus; he wept a 
long time; but at lait, drawing Cacambo aſide, * I 
will tell you, my dear friend, tays he, what 1 
would have you do, We have cach of us about five 


62 CAN DID U ZS; or, Chap. 19. 


or ſix millions of diamonds in our nd + and as yon 
are a much cleverer fellow than I am, I world have 
you go and fetch Miſs Cune gonda from Buenos Ayres, 
If the Governor ſhould make «ny difficulties, give him 
a million of them; if that do not ſucceed, give him 
two. As you did not murder the inquiticor, they will 
have no ſuſpicion of you: in the mean time I will fir 


out another veſſel, and 80 and wait for you at Venice; 


that is a ſafe place, and Ines not be atraid there of 
Bulgarians, Abares, Jews, or inquifuors,” Cacambo 
cried up the wiſdom of this propoſal. He was indeed 
under great concern to le we ſo good a matter, who 
uled him like a familiar friend; but the pleaſure of 
being ſerviceable to him ſoon got the better of the 
forrow he felt in parting with him. 

They took leave of each other with tears; C:ndivus 
recommending to him at the ſame time not to forget 


their good old woman, The fame day Cacambo let 


Jail, This Cacambo was a very honeſt fellow. 
Candidus Raid ſome days at Surinam, waiting {or 
another veſſel to carry him and the two ſheep which 
remained to Italy. He hired ſervants, and purcha!- 
ed every thing neceſſary for a long voyage; at lait, 
Mynheer Vanderdendur, the malter of a large veſſ-/, 
came and offered his ſervice, * What will you have,” 
zaid he to our Dutchman, ** for carrying me, my f4- 
mily, goods, and theſe two lheep you fee here, direct- 
ly to Venice? The maſter of the veſſel aſkcd ten thou. 
ſand piaſtres, Candidus made no words. 
Oh, oh,” ſaid the crafty Vanderdendur to himſoli, 
after having left him, if this ſtranger can give tn 
thouſand piaſtres, without making any words, he mult 
be immenſely rich.“ Returning a few minutes after, 
he let him know, that he could not go for Jefs than 


twenty thouſand, © Well, you ſhall have them then,” 


faid Candidus.“ 
« Odſo!“ ſaid the captain with a low voice, „this 


man makes no more of twenty thouſand piaitres thay 


4 God a. eos - 


Chap. 19, Abs FOR THE BEST. 63 


be did of ten!“ He then returucd 4 fecond time, and 


ſaid that he could not carry him to Vemice tor lels chin 
thirty thouſand pialires, en tall have thirty. 
thouſand then,” replied Candidds. 

„ Oh, oh,” faid the Dutch trader ag in to himſelf, 
« this man makes nothin; GT thirty thoutaud P Aunses, 
no doubt but the two facep are loaucd with immente 
treaſures; lat us [tins cut no longer; let us however 
finger the thirty thouland piatitres prit, and then we 
ſhall ſez. | 

Candidus fold two ſmall diamonds, the lead of 
which was worth more than what the captain had 
aſked. He advanced him the money. [he two theep 
were put on board the veſſel. Caudid us foilowed in 
a ſmall wherry, intending to join the veſſel in the 
road. But the captain catched his opportunity, un- 
furied his fails, unmoored, and met with a tivuurable 
gale, Candidus, diltratted and out of his wits, foon 
lit fight of him. Ah!” cried he, this is a trick 
worthy of the old world,” He returned on ſhore o- 
verwhelmed with forrow; for he had certainly loſt 
more than would fet up a ſcore of kings. 

He ran immediately to the Dutch judge; and as he 


vas not quite maſter of himſelf, knocked very loud 


at the door; he went in, told his caſe, and raiſed his 
voice a little louder than became him, The judge 


began with making him pay ten thouſand piaſtres 


for the noite he had made. After which he heard him 
very patiently, and promiſed to examine into the af+ 
fair as foon as ever the trader ſhauld return, at the 
fame time makiag him pay ten thouſand piaſtres as 
the expence of the hearing. 

This proceeding made Candidus ſtark mad, Hz 
had indeed experienced misfortunes a thouſand times 
more affecting; but the coolneſs of the judge, and 
the knaviſh trick of the maſter of the veil: who had 
robbed him, fired his ſpirits, and plunged bim into a 
profound melancholy. The villany of mankind pre · 
lented ĩtſelf to his mind in all its detormity, and he 


64 CANDIDUS:; or, Chap, 19. 
dwelt upon nothing but the moſt diſmal ideas. At 
laſt, a French veſf] being ready to fail for Bourdeaux, 
as he had no ſheep loaded with diamonds to carry with 
him, he paid the common price as a cabin paſſenger, 
and ordered the crier to give notice all over the city, 
that he would pay for the paſſige and diet of any ho- 
neſt man that would go the voyage with him, and he 
would give him two thouſand piiſtres beſides; on 
condition that he would make it appear that he was 
the moſt diſſatisfied with his circumſtances, and the 
moſt unfortunate perſon in that province, 

A vaſt multitude of candidates preſented themſelves, 
enough to have manned a fleet, Candidus, deſirous 
to pick from among the belt, marked out twenty, who 
ſeemed to him to have the beit pretenſions, and to be 
the molt ſociable. But as every one of them thought 
the preference due to himfeli, he invited them all to 
his inn, and gave them a ſupper, on condition that 
each of them thould take an oath, that he would re- 
late his adventures faithfully, promiſing to chuſe tha: 

who ſeemed to be the greateſt object of pity, 
and had the greateſt reaſon to be diſfatisfied with hi; 
lot, and to give a ſmall preſent to the wy as a grati 
cation for their trouble, 

The aſſembly continued till four the next morning. 
As Candidus was employed in hearing their adven- 
tures, he could not help recollecting what the old wo 
man had told him in their voyage towards Buenos- 
Ayres, and the bargain ſhe had made in caſe he met 
with a ſingle perſon in the ſhip, that did not eſteem 
himſelf moſt miſerable. He thought upon Pang loſs 

at every incident that was rzlated. That Pang lots,“ 
ſaid he, would be hard put to it to defend this ſy- 
ſtem. I with he was but here. Indeed, if every thing 
is ordered for the belt, it muſt be at Eldorado, but 
no where elſe on earth,” At laſt, he determined in 
favour of. a poor ſcholar, who had wrote ten years for 
the bookſellers at Amſterdam. Por he thought there, 


7 Ts * cr — l W * 


| ſon, abandoned by his daughter, who got a Portugueſe 


Chap. 20. ALL FOR THE BES x. | 63 
could not be a more diſagreeable employment on the 
face of the earth. 

This ſcholar, though in other reſpects a good fort 
of a man, had been robbed by his wife, beat by his 


to run away with her; had been ſtripped of a ſmall 
employment, which was all he had to ſubſiſt on; and 
was perſecuted by the prieſts at Surinam, becaule they 
took him for a Socinian, 

It muſt indeed be confeſſed, that ſome of the other 
candidates were at lealt as unhappy as he; but he got 
the preference, becauſe Candidus thought that a ſcho- 
lar would be the fitteit perion to divert him during 
the voyage. All his competitors thought that Can- 
didus did them a great piece of injuſtice; but he ſoon 


convinced them to the contrary, by OSS upon 


them a hundred piaſtres apiece. 


eee, 


C HAP. XX. 
What befel ts Candidus and Martin at ſea. 


HE ſcholar, whoſ: name was Martin, imbarked 

tor Bourdeaux along with Candidus, i bey 
had both of them ſeen and ſuffered a great deal; and 
it the vefiel had been to fail from Surinam to Japan, 
by the way of the Cape of Good Hope, they would 
have found enough to have entertained them on the 
lutj-& ot phyfical and moral evil during the whole 
voyage. 

Cancidvs had ons great advantage, however, over 
Marun, which was, that he (till hoped to fee Miſs Cu- 
negonda again; but as for Martin, he had nothing 
to hope for: to which we may add, that Candidus 
had both gold and diamonds: and though he had 
loſt a hundred large red ſheep loaded with the greats 


3 —— 1 ** — ns 


66 CANDIDUS; or, Chap. 20. 
eſt treaſure that the earth could produce, though the 
Enavery of the Dutch captain was always uppermoſt 
in his thoughts; yet when he reflected upon what he 
had left in his pockets, and when he talked of Cune- 
gonda, eſpecially towards the latter end of a hearty 


meal, he inclined to Pangloſs's hypotheſis. 


« But you, Mr, Martin,” ſaid he to the ſcholar, 
* what is your opinion? what is your notion of mo- 
ral and phyſical evil?“ * Sir, replied Martin, the 
prieſts have accuſed me of being a Socinian ; but the 
truth is, I am a Manichean.” * You are in jel 
fure,” faid Candidus ; there is not one Manichean in 


the world!” * 1 am one thoogh,” faid Martin; 1 
cannot well account for it, but yet l am not able to 


think otherwiſe.” The devil muſt be in you then,” 
faid Candidus. He concerns himſelt ſo much in the 
affairs of this world,“ ſaid Martin, „that he may 
poſſibly be in me, as well as any where elle; but I 


mult profeſs, that when l ca{t my eyes upon this globe, 


or rather upon this globule, I cannot help thinking, 
that the Deity has abandoned it to fome malignant 
being: I always except Eldorado. I never met with 


a city that did not with the deſtruction of its neigh» 


bour-city, nor one family that did not deſire to ex- 
terminate another family, All over the world the 
poor curſe the rich, to whom they are obliged to 
cringe; and the rich treat them like ſo many ſheep, 
whoſe wool and fleſh is old to the belt bidder. A 
thouſand aſſaſſins formed into regiments, running a- 
bout from one extremity of Europe to another, prac- 
tiſe murder and rapine according to diſcipline for their 


bread, becauſe it is the moſt honourable profeſſion in 
the world; and in thoſe cities which ſeem to enjoy 


the ſweets of peace, and where the arts are cultivat- 
ed, mankind are devoured with greater envy, cares, 
and diſquietudes, than a city meets with troubles 
when it is beſieged. Private torments are ſtil] more 
inſupportable than public calamities. In a word, 1 


Chap. 20. ALL For Tu BIS r. 67 


have ſeen and experienced ſo much, that I am become 
a Manichean.” | 

© There's ſome good for all that,” replied Candi- 
dus. That may be,” ſaid Martin, but I do not 


know where to find it.” 


In the middle of this diſpute, they heard the report 
of cannon, The noiſe increaſing every moment, each 
perſon took out his glaſs. By this means they eſpied 
two veſſels engaging each other, about three miles di- 
tant. The wind brought the combatants fo near 
the French veſſel, that they had the plcaſure of ſeeing 


the fight very eaſily, At length, one of the veſſels 


gave the other a broadſide between wind and water, 


which ſunk it to the bottom. Candidus and Martin 


plainly perceived about a hundred men upon the deck 
of the ſhip that was ſinking, litting up their hands to- 
wards heaven, and making the molt diſmal lamenta- 
tors; and in an inſtant they were are all ſwallowed 


up by the ſea. 


„ Well,” ſaid Martin, “ fee how mankind treat one 
another, It is true,” ſaid Candidus, ** there's ſome» 
thing diabolical in it.” As he was ſaying fo, he per - 
ceived fomething red and glittering {ſwimming near 
his (hip, They immediately ſeat out the longboat to 
ſee what it could be; when it proved to be one of 
his ſheep. Candidus felt more joy at the recovery of 
this theep than he had trouble at the loſs of a hundred 
loaded with the largeſt diamonds of Eldorado. 

The French captain foon found, that the captain 
of the conquering veſſel was a Spaniard, and that the 
commander cf the veſſel which was funk was a Dutch 
pirate, and the very ſame who had robbed Candidus. 
The immenſe rich's which the villaia had amaſſed, 
were buried in the fea along wich him, and chere was 
only a fingle ſheep ſaved. 

* You lee,” ſaid Candidus to Martin,“ that 8 


cedneis ſometimes meets with condign puniſhment: that 


caſcal the Dutch commander, has met with the fate 


68  _CANDIDUS; or, Chap. 27. 
hemerited.” ** Yes,” faid Martin: but why ſhould 
the paſſengers on board his ſhip alſo periſh together 
with him? God indeed has puniſhed the villain, but 
the devil has drowned the reſt.” 

In the mean time, the Frenchman and the Spani- · 
ard continued their courſe, and Candidus his debates 
with Martin, They diſputed fifteen days without 
intermiſſion ; and, at the end of the fifteen days, they 
were no farther advanced than when they began, But 


they chatted, they communicated their ideas to each 
other, and comforted each other reciprocally. Can- 


didus careſſing his ſheep, ſaid, Since I have found 
you, I have ſome hopes of _— —— 


3X XS ee 4504S 
CHAP. XXL. 


— and Martin afprcach the ccaft of France, 
and — 


3 at length d-ſcried the coaſt of France. 
| Have you ever been in France, Mr Martin?“ 
ſaid Candidus. Les, repiied Martin, I have 
run over ſeveral of its provinces, In fume, one half 
of the inhabitants are mere idicts; in ethers. they ace 
too cunning ; in others either very goud natured or 
very brutiſh; in others they afſet to be wits; and 
in all of them, their ruling paſſion is love, the next 
lying, and the third to talk nonfenſe,” * But, Mr 
Martin, have you ever been at Paris?“ „ Yes, | have 


been at Paris: there are all theie forts there; ic is a 


mere chaos; a croud in which every one is in fearch 
after pleaſure, but no one finds it, as far I have been 
able to diſcover, I ſpent a few Jays there; and, at my 
arrival, was robbed ot all I had by ſome {harpers, at 
the fair of S: Germain, Nay, I myſcit was aken vp 


| tor a robber, and was eight days in priton; after 


i. OE. i, Ca et a 


Chap. 21. A1 ror The Beer. 69 


which 1 turned corrector of the preſs, to get a ſmall 


matter to carry me on foot to Holland. I know the 
whole tribe of ſcribblers, with malecontents, and fa- 
natics, They ſay the people are very polite i in that 
city; I wiſh I could believe them.” | 

« For my part, I have no curioſity to fee France, 
ſaid Cand:dus; © you may eaſily fancy, that when a 
perſon has once ſpent a month at Eldorado, he is very 
indifferent whether he ſees any thing elſe upon earth, 
except Miſs Cunegonda. I am going to wait for her 
at Venice; we will go through France in our way to- 
wards Italy. Won't you bear me company ?” With 
all my heart,” ſaid Martin: they ſay that Venice is 
not fit for any but the Noble Ven<tians; but, for all 
that, they receive ſtrangers very well, provided they 
have a good deal of money. I have none; you have; 
therefore 1] follow you all the world over. Now 
{ think of it,” faid Candidus, do you imagine that 
the earth was originally nothing but water, as is aſ- 
ſerted in the great book belonging to the Captain?“ 
« I don't believe a word of it,” ſaid Martin, no more 
than I do of all the reveries that have been publiſhed 
for ſome time.” * But for what end was the world 
created then ?” ſaid Candidus. To make one mad,” 
replied Martin. Was not you vaſtly ſurpriſed,” 


continued Candidus, at the paſhon which the two 


girls in the country of the Oreillons had for thoſe two 
apes, whole ſtory I related to you?” Not at all,” 
ſaid Martin; I fee nothing ſtrange in that paſſion ; 


for I have ſcen ſo many ſtrange things already, that 1 


can look upon nothing as extraordinary. Do you 


believe,” ſgid Candidus, that mankind always cut 


one another's throats ; that they were always liars, 
knaves, treacherous, aud ungratetul ; always thieves, 


ſharpers, bighwavinen, lazy, envious, and gluttous; 


always drunkards, miſers, ambitious, and blood- 
thirky , always b:ickbiters, debauchees, fanatics, hy- 


pocrites, and tools? Do you not believe,“ ſaid 


= — = "= - 5 _— 

— — in, — — 
—— ** — — 2222 — 
— * : * * 7” r 


10 CANDIDUS; or, Chap. 22. 
Martin, that hawks have always preyed upon pi- 
when they could light upon them ?” Certain · 
ly,” replied Candidus, ** Well then,” faid Martin, 
« if the hawks have always had the ſame nature, 
what reaſon can you give why mankind ſhould have 
changed theirs?” © Aye,” ſaid Candidus, it is 
very different, becauſe free will * # #####+++* 

In the mid ſt * this diſpute, Gop arrived at Bour- 
deaux. 


Ede, th cee Hue, e 


CHAP. XxXE. 
What befe! Candidus and Martin in France. 


NAndidus remained no longer at Bourdeaux than 
till he could diſpoſe of ſome of the pebiles of 
Eldorado, and ſur niſh hiuſelt with a polt chaiſe large 
enough to hold two perſons; lor he could not parc 
with his philoſopher Martin. He was indeed very 


_ Corry to part with his ſheep, which he left at the aca- 
dem of ſciences at Bourdeanx ; who pr Hafen for the 


ſubje& of this year's prize, the rexon „ tins (heep's 


| wool was red; and the prize was adjudged to a learn. 


ed man in the North, who demoatirated by A plus 
B minus C divided by Z, that the — muſt be red, 
and die of the rot. 

In the mean time, all the travellers whom candi. 
dus met in the inns on the road, telling him they were 
going to Paris, this general eagerneſs to ſee the ca- 
pital, inſpired him at length with the ſame deſire, as 
it was not much cut of the way in his journey towards 
Venice. 

He entered Paris by the ſuburb of St Marceau, and 
fancied him ſelf to be in the dirtieſt village in Welt: 
r 


Condidus was ſcarce got to Ris inn, when he was 


mw — tt 5 -o ro > „„ = +», ww, eee© 


Et TW F" oe,” w- ˙· ⁴ TE oe "Toe 


_ 


oe a > x & 


ho — my At 


SO. a 


Chap. 22. ALL For THE BE r. 71 
ſeized by a ſlight indiſpoſition, cauſed by his fatigues. 
As he had a very large diamond on his finger, and 
the people had taken notice of a pretty heavy box a- 
mong his baggage, in a moment”s time he had no lefs 
than two phy ficians to attend him, who did not ſtay 
to be ſent for; a few intimate triends, that never leit 
him, ſat up with him, together with a couple of fe- 
male friends that took care to have his broths warm- 
ed, Said Martin, ** I remember that when 1 was fick 
at Paris, in my firſt journey, I was very low in poc- 
| ket, and could meet neither with friends, nurſes, nor 
phyſicians ; but [ recovered.” 

In the mean while, what by mediciges and bleed- 
ings, Candidus's diſorder beginning to grow a ſerious 
affair, the clerk of the pariſh came, with great mo- 
deity, to aſk a bill for the other world, payable to the 
bearer, Candidus refuſing to accept it, the nurſes 
aſſured him that it was a new filhion, Candidus re - 
plied, that he was retolved not to follow the faſhion, 
Martin was going to throw the prieſt out of the win · 
dow, The clerk ſwore that Candidus ſhould not be 
buried, Martin ſwore that he would bury the clerk, 
if he continued to be troubleſome, The quarrel grew 
high, and Martin took the prieſt by the ſhouiders, and 
pulhed him out of doors, This occaſioning a great 
deal of ſcandal, an action was commenced againſt him, 

Candidus recovered; and all the while he was up- 
on the mending hand, had the belt of company to ſup 
with him. Taey gamed high; and Candidus was 
very much ſurp1if:d that he never could throw an ny 
vut Martin was not ſurpriſed at all, 

Among thote who did him the honours of the town, 
was x little ab5e of Perigord, one of thoſe people that 
are always Luſy, always alert, always ready to do one 
ervice, forward, fawning, and accommodating them- 
ſelves to every one's humour; who watch for trang- 
ers on their journey, tell them the ſcandalous hiſtory 
ol the town, and offer them pleaſures at all prices. 


72 CANDID US; or, Chap, 22. 
This man carried Candidus and Martin to the play- 
houſe, where a new tragedy was to be acted. Can- 
didus found himtelt ſeated near ſome critics; but this 
did not keep him from crying at ſome ſcenes that were 
well ated One of theſe critics, who ſtood at his el. 
bow, faid to him, between one of the acts, „ You 


was in the wrong to ſhed tears; that's a ſhocking ae- 


treſs, the actor who plays with her is worſe than ſhe, 
and the piece is {till worſe than the actors. The au- 
thor does not underitand a fingle word of Arabic, and 
yet the ſcene lies in Arabia: but befiles, he is a man 
who does not believe that our ideas are innate ; Pl 
bring you twenty pamphlets againſt him by to- 2 
row morning Sir, id the abbe of Perigord, 
« did you take notice of that young man with the 
lively countenance and fine ſhape? he will not coſt 
you more than ten thouſan francs per month, and 
fifty thouſand crowns in diamonds,” I have not 
above a day or two to ſpare,” replied Candidus, 
ce 9 I have one to meet at Venice, which hur- 
ries me. 

In the evening, after ſupper was over, the inſinu- 
ating Perigourdin redoubled his compliments of ſer- 
vice, and his officiouſneſs. You are then, Sir,” ſaid 
he, © under an engagement to go to Venice?“ © Yes, 
Mr Abbe,” faid Candidus, I am under a neceſſity 

to go to meet Miſs Cunegonda Being then invited 
with the pleaſure of ſpeaking about the object he lov- 


ed, he related, according to cuſtom, a part of his ad- 


ventures with that illuſtrious Weitphalian. 

I fancy,” ſaid the Abbe, that Mils Cunegonda 
is a lady ot very great parts, and that ſhe writes charm- 
ing letters? © I never received auy from her,“ ſaid 
Candidus: for figure to yourſelf, that being driven 
out of the caſtle on account of my paſſion for her, 1 
could not write to her; that ſoon after I heard lhe 
was dead; that ad Il found her, and loſt her; 
and that J have now feat an expreſs to her about two 


gold upon the eaſy chair. 


Chap. 22. ALL For THE BEST, 73 
thouſand five hundred leagues from hence, and wait 
for an anſwer. ” 

The Abbe heard him with great attention, and ap- 
peared to be a little thoughtful. He foon took leave 
of the two ſtrangers, after a moſt affectionate embrace. 
The next day, as foon as Candidus awake, he re- 
ceived a letter, couched in the following terns, 

«Sir, my deareſt love, I have been ill thetic eight 
days in this town, and have learned that you ate 
here, I would fly to your arms, it I were ab'e to ſtir. 
1 knew of your paſſige to Bourdeaux, where I have 
left the faithful Cacambo and the old woman, who 
are to follow me very ſoon. The TOVerncrT At buc- 
nos-Ayres has taken all from me, but your heart is 
ſtill left me. Come and ſee me; for your preſence 
will either reſtore me to life, or kill me with piza- 
lure,” 
This charming, this unexpeded latter, tranported 
Candidus with an inexpreſible joy ; and the indiſpo- 
ſtion of his dear Cunegonda overwhelmed bim with 
ſorrow, Diſtracted between theſe two paſſions, he 
took his gold and diamonds, and got fomebody to 
conduct him and Martin to the hou'e where Mits Cu- 
negonda was lodged. 

On his entrance he trembled in every limb, his 
heart beat quick, and his voice was choked up with 
highs; he was going to open the curtains o: the bed, 
and bid them bring him a light, © Take care, Sir,” | 
ſad the nurſe, ſhe can't bear light for the world, it 
would overpower her;“ and immediately the drew 
the curtains cloſe again, ** My dear Cuneponda,” 
ſaid Candidus, d fiolved in tears, how do you find 


Jourſelf? though you can't ſee me, you may ſpeak to 


me at leaſt. ** She: can't ſpeak,” ſaid the maid. The 
lady then put a plump hand ont of the bed, which 
Cand idus for ſome time bathed with his tears, and at- 
terwards filled with diamonds, leaving a bag full cf 


74 CANDIDUS; or, Chap, 22. 

In the middle of his tranſports, came ia a lifeguard 
man, followed by the Abbe Perigourdin and a file of 
toldiers. There,“ faid he, © are the two ſuſpected 
toreipners.” Ile cauſed them to be immediately ſeized, 
end ordered his men to dtag them to priſon. It is 
not thus they treat travellers at Eldorado,” ſaid Can. 
Gidus, Im more a Manichean than ever,” ſaid 
Martin, © But, pray, Sir, where are you going to 
carry vs? {aid Candidus. © Toa hole in the dun- 
geon, ſaid the i:fecrardman, 

Martin now finding his blood grow tomewhat cool, 
fancied that the laſs who pretended to be Cunegon- 
da, was a ch-at; that the Abbe Perigourdin was 2 
ſharper, who had taken advantage of Candidus's fim. 
pFcity; and that the liſeguardman was ancther ſhar. 
per, whom they might eafily get clear of. 

Rather than expoſe himſelf b-tore a court of juſtice, 
Candidus, ſwayed by his advice, and beſides very im- 
patient to ſee the real Cunegonda, offered the life. 
guardman three ſmall diamonds worth about zoco 
piſtoles each. ah, Sir,“ ſaid the man with the i- 
cry baten, „though you had committed all the 
crimes that can be imagined, this would make me 
think you are the honeſtelt gentleman in the world ! 
Three diamonds ! worth 3cco piltoles apiece! Sir, 
inſtead of putting you in a dungeon, I would loſe my 
lite for you: li ſtrangers are arreſted here, but let me 
lone for that; I have a brother at Dieppe in Nor- 
andy; 1':} conduct you thither; and it ycu have 


«ny diamond to give him, he wil take as much care 


ot yon, as I myſelf.” 

And why do they put all ſtrangers under ar- 
reli!” faid Candidus. The Abbe Perigourdin then 
put in his word: * Becauſe,” ſaid he, * a beggar oi 
 trebatia liſtened to ſome fooliſh ſtories, which made 
him guiity ef a parricide, not like that in May 1610, 
but like that in Dec2mber 1594; and juſt like thoſe that a 


Gerne WW 


g. 3 8 o 


8 8 2: 


Chap. 22. ALL For THm Bear. 75 
great many other beggars have been guilty of, in o 
ther months and other years, after liſtening to fooliſh 
ſtories.” : | 

The lifeguardman then gave him a more particular 
account of their crimes. **Oh the monſters!” cried 
Candidus; are there then ſuch terrible crimes among 
people that can dance and fing? Can I not immedi. 
ately get out of this country, where monkeys provoke 


tygers? 1 have ſeen bears in my own country, but 


[ never met with men except at Eldorado. In the 
name of God, Mr Officer, conduct me to Venice, 
where I am to wait for Miſs Cunegonda,” I can 
conduct you no where except to Lower Normandy,” 
ſaid our mock officer. Immediately he ordered his 
irons to be ſtrack off, ſaid he was under a miltake, 


diſcharged his men, conducted Candidus and Martin 
to Dieppe, and left them in the hands of his bro- 


ther. 
There was then a ſmall Holland trader in the har - 
bour, The Norman, by means of three more dia- 


monds, become the moſt ferviceable man in the uni- 


verſe, put Candidus and his attendants ſafe on board 
the veſſel, which was ready to fail for Portſmouth in 
England. | | 

This was not indeed the way to Venice; but Can- 
didus thought he had eſcaped from he l, and reſolved 
to reſume his voyage towards Venice the firſt oppor- 
tunity that offered. 1 85 


i) 2 


»6 CANDIDUS; er, Chap, 23. 


CH A P, XXIII. 


Candidus ard Martin go to the Enzlif coaft, and 
| «what they ſaw there, 


* H! Pingloſs! Pangloſs! ah! Martin! Mar- 

tin! ah! my dear Cunegonda! what a world 
is this!“ ſaid Candidus on board the Dutch ſhip, 
„A very fool [kh and abominable one indeed,” replied 
Martin. Yon are acquainted with England,” ſaid 
Candidus to him; “are they as great fools as the 
French?“ They have a different kind of folly,” 
ſaid Martin; „you know, that theſe two nations are 
at war about a few acres of ſnow towards Canada, 
and that they have ſpent a great deal more upon this 
fine war, than all Canada is worth. To tell you with 
preciſion whether there are more people fit to ſend to 
a madhouſe in one country than in the other, is more 
than my weak capacity is able to perform. I only 
know in general, that the people we are going to ſee 
are very melancholic.” 

As they were talking in this manner, they arrived 
at Portſmout';, The (hore was covered with a mul- 
titude of people, who were looking very attentively 
at a pretty Inity man who was kneeling, with ſome: 
thin» tied befor? his eyes, on the deck of one of the 
men of war; fcur ſoldiers, that were place4 oppolite 
to him, lodged three balls apizce in his head. with the 
greateſt covineſs imaginable, and the whole aſſem- 
bly went away very well ſatisfied. What is the 
meaning of this?” ſaid Candidus; and what 


| 


demon is it that exerciſes his dominion all ayer the 


globe 446 | 
He inquired who the luſty gentleman was that was 


1 ww a 


oe = -w-a -©z_ © vo 


e 


CY — W 


1 


£@#E*@ _ cw een 


Chap. 23. Att rom THE Brsr. 77 
killed with ſo much ceremony, lle is an a2dmi- 
ral ®,” replied ſome of them. And why was this 
admiral killed? * Becaute,” ſaid they, “he did not 
kill men enough himielf. He engaged the French 
admiral, and was ionnd guilty of not being near e- 
nough to him, but then, faid Candidus, ** was 
not the French admiral as far off from the Englith ad- 
miral, as he was trom him? That is what cannct 
be doubted,” replied they, But in this country 
it is of very gr2:t ſervice do execute an adauir+t 
now and then, in der to make the reit fight the bet · 
ter. | 

Candidus was ſo aſtoniſhed and thocked at what he 
had icen and heard, that he would not ſet toot on 


ſhore, but agrecd with the maiter of the Dutch veſſel 


(though he was ſure to be robbed by him, as well as by 


his countryman at Surinam) to carry him directly to 


Venice, N 
The maſter was ready in two days. They coiſted 


it all along France. Pafting withia fight of Liſbon, 


Candidus gave a very deep groan, They pati:d the 
Streights, made the Mediterranean, and at lalt arrived 
at Venice, 

* The Lord be praiſed,” ſaid Candidus, embracicg 
Martin, it is here that I ſhall ſee the fair Cune- 
gonda again! I have as good an opinion of Cacam - 
bo, as of myleif, Every thing is right, every thing 
goes well; every thing is the beſt in the world.” 


The author alludes to the caſe of Adm. Byng, who was fot cn 
boerd the Monarque man of war at Fertſmouth, March 14. 1557, 


78 CANDID US; or, Chap. 24. 


RNA 
CHAP, XXIV. 
| Concerning Paguetta, and Father G irsfllee, 

| O ſooner were they arrived at Venice, the he 


cauſed Cicambo to be ſearched for in all the 
inns, in all the coffcehouſes, and among all the ladies 


of pleaſure, but could not find him. He ſent daily to 


all the ſhips and barques that arrived; but no news of 
Cacambo. ** Well!“ ſaid he to Martin, ** I have had 


time enough to go from Surinam to Bourdeaux, from 


Zourdeaux to Paris, {rom Paris to Dieppe, from Dieppe 
to Portimon:h: after that 1 have coaſted along 
Portugal and Spatn, and traverſed the Mediterranean, 
and have no been ſome months at Venice, and yet, 
for all that, the lovely Cunegonda is not come. In · 
ſtead of ker, I have only met with a bite, and an ab · 
be of Perigord, Cunegonda is certainly dead; and [ 
have no more to do but to die too, Ah! it would 
Have been far better lor me to have ſtaid in that para- 
Liſe, Dorado, than to have returned again to thiscur- 
ſed Europe. You are certaialy right, my dear Mar. 
tia; all is illufion and miſery here.“ 

He fell into a deep melancholy; and never frequented 
the opera, or the other diver ions of the carnival; 
nay he was proof agaialt all the charms of the fair 


ſex. Martin ſaid to him, Ycu are very fimple in- 


| deed, to fancy that a mongrel valet, with five or fix 
millions in his pocket, would go to the end of the 
world in queſt of your miſtreſs, and bring her to Ve: 
nice, If he meets with her, he'll keep her for him- 
ſelf ; if he cannot find her, he'll get ſomebody elle. 
Let me adviſe you to forget both your valet Cacambo, 
and your miſtreſs Cunegonda. Martin was a molt 
| wretched comfortzr, The melancholy cf Candidus 


— — — — 


3 * — —— — -. n 


ow tO os Re © 6 AA © 


— — —— — 


80. 


piach, 


miſtaken or not. 


to Candidus's roo nm, when the ſaid to him, What! 


again?“ At theſe words, Candidus, who had net 


Chap 24. ALL ror THE BEST, 79 
increaſed ; and Martin never ceaſed preach'ng that 
there was but very lit: le virtue and as little happiness 
to be found 01 earth, excepting, perhaps, at Eldo- 
rado, where it was almoſt impoſſible tor apy one to 


As they were diſpoting on this important ſabje®, 
and waiting for Cinegonca, Caididus Perce.ved a 
young Theatia “ in the place + of St. Mark, holding 
a girl under his arm. The Theatin friar looked freſn, 
plump, and full ot vigour; his eyes were ſparkling, 
bis air bold, his mien lofty, and his gait firm. I. i, 
girl was tolerab'y handſome, and was finging 4 wag 
the ogled ber T5-atin friar with a great deal of pas- 
fion, and 10% en then woud give us fat cheeks « 


© At leaſt you will grant me,” ſaid Candidus to 
Martin, ** that tile folks are happy. I have never 
fcund any but unhappy wretches til now all over this 
habitable globe, excepting at Eldorado, but as for the 
girl aud the Theatin, I will lay any wager that they 
are as happy as happy can be.” Iwill lay they arc 
not,” ſaid Martin. Only let us invite them to din. 
pong ſaid Candidus, “ and then you {hall fee it I am 


He immediately accoſted them, made them a TAR 
and inv.ted them to his inn to eat macaroni, par - 
tridges of Lombardy, and caviare, and to drink mon- 
tepuictano, lachryma Chriſti, Cyprus, and Samos 
wine, The girl bluſhed; the Theatin accepted of the 
invitation, and the girl followed him, locking at 
Candidus with eyes of ſurpriſe and confuſion, trom 
which the tears trickled. Scarce was ſhe entered in 


does not Mr Candidus know his old friend Paquetta 


An order of religious. 
+ The is the fame as our ſqui res. 


D 4 


* 4 
* 
10 

* 

* 

7 
o 

K 


ny bo 


—_— 


Ap: 2% E 
; — — * 
—— a * * 


i M. wy A 1 


— on 0" 
=. > 2 — — 
9 


— 


— ab _ 
pes oth. — 
* — * 
28 n ' 
2 


V — * - = 2 


r — 


ä 
5 — PE 
. . 


— — 8 — n 
; — 


. ere CE 


2 , 
_ __ —— 
* - 


— xz” — — 


3 A. 
— — 


r 


— . = 
pA RET gd 
= ES” — * 


. 


. 


3 
—_— I 


* — 2 — 
.Bltstĩ e ⁶d): ; een ee 


; 1 . A 8 ; 
r A 7˙ Ü⁰ ot a ety, Oo ee b 


married to a decor. 


80 CANDIDUS; or, Chap, | 


yet looked at her with any degree of attention, becauſe 
Cunegonda ingroſſed all his thoughts, ſaid to her, 
«Ah! my poor girl, is it you who reduced Dr Pan- 
gloſs to the fine plight in which I ſaw him?” 

« Ah, Sir ! *tis I myſelf,” faid Paquetta; I find 
you know the whole ſtory ; and I have been informed 
of all the terrible diſaſters which have happened to 
the family of my Lady the Baroneſs, and the fair Cu · 


negenda. My fate, I afſure you, has not been leſs 
melancholy, 1 was very innocent when you knew 


me. A cordclier, who was my confe{for, eaſily ſedu- | 
ced me. 


The effects of it were terrible: I was o- 
bliged to leave the caſtle ſome time after the Baron 
kicked your backſide out of the door. If a celebrated 
quack had not taken pity on me, I ſhould have pe- 
riſked, I was the quack's miltreſs for ſome time, by 
way of recompence. His wife, who was as jealous as 


the devil, beat me every day molt unmerciſully; ſhe 


was a very fiend of hell. The doctor was one of the 
uglieſt fellows I ever ſaw in my life, and I one of the 
moſt wretched creatures that ever exilted, to be beat 
every day for the ſake of a man whom I hated, You 
know how dangerous it is for a ſcolding woman to be 
Being quite exaſperated with 
his wife's behaviour, he gave her one day ſo efficaci- 


ous a remedy to cure her of a ſlight cold the had, that 


ihe died two hours after in the moſt bort id convulſi- 
ons. My miſtrefs's relations entered a criminal action 
againſt my maiter; he took to his heels, and 1 was 
carried to jail, 
me, if I had not been pretty handſome. Ihe judga 
acquitted me, on condition of his ſucceeding the doRor, 
I was ſoon afterwards ſupplanted by a rival, drivea 


cut of doors without any recompence, and obliged to 


continue this abominable occupation, which appears 


10 pleaſant to you men, while it is to us women the 


very abyſs of mi ſery. I am come to practiſe my pro- 


feſſion at Venice. Ah, Sir, if you could imagine what 


My innocence would never have ved 


CER EP go EE ® oo 


9 


8 i 4 - 


Chap 24 Att For THE Ber, dt 
it is to be Obi να,c;o careſs indifferently an old mer- 
chant, 4 couut-llor, a monk, a gondotier, or an abbez 
to be expoled to 41; forts of intults and outrages; to 
be often reduc. d to orroò a petticoat, to have it lit. 
ed up vy 4 Uiiagre-abl. raſcal, to be robbed by one 
gallant of wiv. one has got by another; to be ran- 
ſomed by the peace officer, and to have nothing cle 
in proſpect bu. a trighttul old age, an hotpital, or x 
dunghiil; you would confels that 1 am one of the mc! 
unlortunate creatures ia the world,” 

Paquetta opened her mind in this manner to tho 
good Candidus, in his cloſet, in the preſence oi Mar- 
tin; who ſaid t Candidus. *© Lou ſee I have uon 
one halt of the wager already.“ 

Brother GiroiN:e waited in the dining room, and 
drank a glaſs or two while he was waiting for din+ 
ner. But,” ſaid Candidus to Paquetta, yon had 
an air ſo gay, fo content, when I firit met you, you 
ſung, and careſled the Theatin, with to much warrath, 
that you ſeemed to me as happy then as you pretend 
to be miſerable now”, „Ah, vir,” replied Paquetra, 
this is one of the miſeries of the trade, Leſterday 
[ was robbed and beaten by an officer, and to day ! 


am obliged to appear in good humour to pleafe a 


monk.” Candidus wanted no more, to be fatisfied, 
and owned that Martin was in the right. They fat 


| down to table with Paquetta and the Ihaatin; the 


repalt was very entertaining, and, towards the end, 
they began to ſpeak to each other with ſome degree - 
of confidence. My father,” faid Candidus to the 
monk, you ſeem to enjoy a ſtate that all the word 
might look on with envy, The flower of health 

bloſſoms on vour countenance, and your paytiogno:y, 
ipeaks nothing but happineſs; you have a very pret- 
ty girl to divert you, and you ſeem to be well tatig! 


with your ſtation as a Theatin monk.“ 


Faith, Sir,” ſaid Prother Grioſſſee, { wiih tha? 
3ll the Theatins were at the bottom of the fea, I bay: 
D 5 


IF. 


— ———— __—_ — — 


= — — 
— — 2 + 
* - — 22. 
— — — 
=> 5 ES” 


—— — — — 


— 
— = 


n 


- * — r It I — — — 7 


2 


ä — — — — 
— . 
A .. FEED Eng we; 2 
- SF _. r 


— —é 


— 


— 2 SD 


< — TE 
- 282 
* 1 * _— 


* — 
7 "a — — 
e * 3 — 
2 — = Jo — oo: 


o 8 


> - + 
4 cc 4AOLICSSES 


RE ES ͤ cc 


r 
* 3 
—— 


ther Girofflee. 
will make then happy.” I don't believe a word of it,” 


was,” ſaid Martin. 


82 CANDIDUS; er, Chap, 24. 
been tempted an hundred times to ſet fire to the con- 
vent, and to go and turn Turk. My parents forced 
me, at the age of fifteen, to put on this curſed habit, 
to increaſe the fortune of an elder brother of mine, 
whom God confound, Jealouſy, diſcord, and fury, 
reſide in the convent. It is true indeed, I have preach. 
ed a few paltry ſermons, which brought me in a lit- 
tle money; one part of which the prior robs me of, 
the remaincer ſerves me to ſpend upon the ladies; 
but every evening, when I ent:r the monattery, Iam 


ready to daſh out my brains againſt the wall of the 


dormitory; and all the brotherhood are in the ſame 


_ caſe.” 


Martin turning towards Candidus, with bis uſual 
coolneſs, ** Well,“ faid he to hin, have not I wan 
the whole wager now? Cindidus gave two thous 
ſand piaſſres to Paquetta, and one thouſand to Bro- 
« Pit anſwer for it,” ſaid he, * this 


ſaid Martin; you may perhaps make them a great 
deal more miſeratle by your piaſtres.“ © Be that as 
it may,” ſaid Candidus: but one thing comforts me, 
I ſee that one often finds thoſe perſons whom one ne- 
ver expected to find any more; and as I have found 
my red ſheep and Paquetta again, it may be I may 
find Cunegonda again too.“ I with,” ſaid Martin, 
* that ſhe may one day make you happy; but it is 
what I very much queſtion,” * You are very incre. 
dulous, faid Candidus. That is what I always 


« But only lock on thoſe gondoliers, ſaid Candi- 
dus; are they not perpetnally ſinging ?” * You 
don't ſee them at hume, with their wives, and their 
monkeys of children,“ ſaid Martin. The Doge has 
bis inquietudes, and the gondoliers have theirs. Indeed, 
generally ſpeaking, the condition of a gondolier is 
preferable to that of a doge; but I believe that the 


. 


Chap. 25. ALL FoR Tat BE 81. 8; 
differ Ace is ſo ſnall, that it is not worth the trouble 
of examining iuto.“ 

« People talk,” ſaid Candidus, of Seignior poco 
curante, who lives in that fine palace upon the Bren- 
ta; and who entertaias (trangers in the moſt polite 
manner. They pretend that this man never felt a 
ny uneaſineſs. 1 ſhould be glad to fee fo ex r! 
ordinary a phzaomenon,” ſaid Martin, On wich 
Candidus immediately ſent to Seignior Pococuraute, 
to get permiikon to viſit him the day following. 


COOL OOO IST 


CHAP. XXV. 


The vijit to Seigniaor Pococurante, the Mule Ve- 
netian, 


Andidus and Martin went in a gondola on the 
Brenta, and arrived at the palace of the Noble 
pococurante. His gardens were very ſpacious and or. 
namented with fine ſtatues ot marble, and the palace 
itſelf was a piece of excelent architecture. The maſ- 
ter of the houte, a very wealthy man, about three - 
ſcore, received our two inquiſitives very genteelly, but 
with very little heartineſs; which, though it confuſ- 
ed Candidus, did not in the leaſt make Martin unca- 


Two young girls, handiome, and very neatly dref. 


ſed, ſerved them at firſt with chocolate, which was 


frothed extremely well, Candidus could not help 


dropping therm a compliment on their beauty, their 


politenels, and their addreſs, © The creatures are 
well enough,” ſaid the ſenator Pococurante; 1 


ſometimes make them lie in my bed, for I am quite 
tired of the girls of the town, of their coquetry, & their 


Fazoukes, qr:rr.!s, humours, monkey trichs, Pride, 
D 6 


— 


2 r r 2 2 2 e — — 
5 : - " 5 
„„ . — — 8 — 5 4 — 


3 


” 3 
* 
2 
1 
by - 
* * 
*. 
7 
9 
* 
ND 
f 
* 
= 
4 
vo 
4 
* 
+ 
8 
"i 
1 
N 
Ly 
4 
1 
1 
48 
Us q 
* © 
my 
4 
© A 
, 
Q 
* 
- 
: * 
" * 
* 
4 7 
1 
72 
5 
* 
} 
D 
bs 
* 
4 
iy 
" 
| 
- 
N 
x 
: 
8] 
4 
n 
' 
ud 
7 
i. 
* , 
0 — 
ry 
. oY 
ö * . 
[4 - 
. 
* 
A 
ov Aa 
4 4 
too N. 
mu s 
1 
> 
me 
'14 : 
. 1 
3 
1 „ 
0 
= 
3 7 
3 
1 
15 
22 
7 
we 
: 
I 
8 
1 
- 
1 
_ 
0 
Ib ' 
- 
* 
ay 
bo. 
: 
S 
4 
* 
1 
0 
4 
* 
4 
* 
1 
j * 
, F 
| * 
1 
4 
. 
7% 
= V 
il 
" if 
4 4 
1 
5 
wa 


34 | CANDIDUS; or, Chap. 25. 
follies, and the ſonnets one is obliged to make, or hire 
others to make for them; bot, x a_ all, theſe two girls 
begin to grow tireſome to me. 
Alter breakfaſt, Candidvs raking a walk in his long 
gallery, was charmed with the beauty of the pictures. 
He aſked by what miſter were the two firſt. hey 
are by Raphael,“ ſaid the Senator; I bought them 
at a very high price, merely out of vanity, ſome years 
ago. They are ſaid to be the finelt paintings in Ita- 
ly : but they do not pleaſe meat all; the colours are 
dead, the figures nut finiſhed, and do not appear with 
relief enough; the drapery is very bad. in ſhort, let 
people ſay what they will, I do not find there a true 
imitation of nature. I do not like a piece unleſs 
it makes me think IT fee nature itſelf; but there 
are no ſuch pieces to be met with, I have, indeed, 
a great many pictures, but I do not value them at 
a”. 

While they were waiting for dinner, Pococurante 
entertained them with a concert; Candidus was quite 
charmed with the muſic. * This noiſe,” ſaid Poco» 
curante, ** might divert one for half an hour, or fo; 
but if it were to 1:{t any longer, it would grow tire- 
ſore to every body, though no ſoul durſt own it, 
Muſic is, now a days, nothing elſe but the art of 
_ executing difficulties; and what has nothing but 
difficulty to recommend it, docs not pleaſe at the long- 
run. 

I migkt perhaps take more pleaſure in the opera, 
if they Pad not found out the fecret to make ſuch a 
monſter of it as ſhocks me. Let thoſe go that will to 
ſee wretched tragedies fet to muſic, where the ſcenes 
are compoled for no other end than to Jug in by the 
head and cars two cr three ridiculous ſongs, in order 
to ſet off tie pipe of an adreſs. Let who will, or who 
can, dic away with pleaſure, at hearing a uch tril- 
ling ent the part of Cer and Cato, nd ſtrutting up- 
ou the ſtave with a ridiculcus 2nd if. Red air, For 


— — —— Woo — wi 


Chap. 25- ALL FOR THE Besr. 83 
my part, I have long ago bid adieu to thoſe paltry en- 
tertainments, which conſtitutes the glory of Italy, and 
are purchaſed by crowned heads fo extravagantly 
dear.“ Candidus diſputed the point a little, but with 
great diieretion. Martin was entirely ct the fame 
ſentiments with the Senator. They fat down to table, 
and, after an excellent dinner, went into the library. 
Candidus calling his eyes upen a Homer very hand- 
ſomely bound, praiſed his High Mightineſs for the 
goodnels of his talte. ** There,” ſaid he is a book 
that was the favourite of the great Pangloſa, the beſt 
philoſopher in Germany.“ It is none of mine,” 
ſaid Pococurante, with great indifference; * I was made 
to believe formerly that I took a pleafure in reading 
him. But that continued repetition of battles that re. 
ſemble each other; his gods, who are always very buſy 
without bringing any thing to a deciſion; his Helen, 
who is the tubje&t of the war, and has ſcarce any 
thing to do in the whole piece; that Troy, which is 
belieged, but never taken; | ſay, all theſe defects give 
me the greateſt diſguit. I haveatked ſome learned men, 
if they peruſed him with as little pleaſure as I did? 
Thoſe who were ingenious profeſſed to me, that they 
could not keep the book in their hands; but that they 
were obliged to give it a place in their libraries, as a 

monument of antiquity, and as they do old ruſty me- 
dals, which are of no uſe in commerce.“ 
our Excellence does not entertain the ſame o- 
pinion of Virgil?“ ſaid Candidus. Ih confeſs,” re. 
plied Pococurante, “that the ſecond, the fourth, and 
the fixth books of his Aneid are excellent; but as for 
his pious Aneas, his brave Cloanthus, his friend A- 
chates, the little Aſcamus, the infirm King Latinus, 
the burgeſs Amata, and the infipid Lavinia, I do not 
think any thing can be more frigid, or more diſa - 
greeable, I prefer Taflo and Ar oſto's ſoporiferous tales 
far before him.? = „ 

* Shall I preſume to aſk you, Sir,” faid Candidus, 


86 CANDIDUS; or, Chap. 2. 
„ whether you do not enjoy a great deal of pleaſure in 


peruſing Horace? There are ſome maxims, ſaid 
Pococurante, which may be of ſome ſervice to a man 


who knows the world, and being delivered in expreſſive 
numbers are imprinted more eaſily on the memory, 
But I have little value for his voyage to Brunduſium, 
his deſcription of his bad dinner, and the Billingſgate 
ſquabble between one Pupillus, whoſe ſpeech he ſaid 
was full of filthy ſtuff, and another whoſe words were 
as ſharp as vinegar. I never could read without great 
dilguſt his indelicate lines againſt the old woman and 
witches; and I cannot ſee any merit in his telling his 
triend Mzcenas, that if he ſhould be ranked by him 
amongſt the lyric poets, he ſhould knock the ſtars 
with his lofty brow. Some f. ols admire every thing 
in an author of reputation; for my part, I read only 
ſor myſelf; 1 approve nothing but what ſuits my own 
tate,” Candidus, having been taught to judge of 
nothing for himſelf, was very much ſurpriſed at what 
he heard; but Martin looked upon the ſentiment of 


Pococurante as very rational. 


% Oh, here's a Cicero,” ſaid Candidus, here is the 
great man whom I fancy you are never tired of read- 
ing,” I never read him at all,” replied the Veneti- 
an. What is it to me, whether he pleads for Rabicius 
or Cluentius ? I have trials enow of my own. I might 
indeed have been a greater friend to his philoſophical 
works, but when I found he doubted of every thing, 
1 concluded 1 knew as much as he, and that I had 
no need of a tutor to learn ignorance. 
„Well! here are four and twenty volumes of the 
academy of ſciences,” cried Martin; * it is poſſible 


there may be ſomething valuable in them.” There 


might,” ſaid Pococurante, ** if but one of the authors 


of this hodge podge had been only the inventor of the 


art of making pins; but there is nothing in all thoſe 
volumes but chimerical ſyſtems, and ſcarce a fingle ar- 
ticle of real uſe,” 5 


Chap. 23. Av For THE BEST. - 

W hat a prodigious number of theatrical pieces you 
have got here,” ſaid Candidus, ** in Italian, Spaailh, 
and French!“ * Yes,” ſaid the Senator, ** there are 
about three thouſand, and not three dozen good ones 
among them ail. As tor that colleMon ot ſermons, 
which all togecher are not worth one page of Seneca, 
and all thoſe huge volumes of divinity, you muit thigk 
that they are never opened either by me or any body 
elle.“ | 

Martin perceiving ſome of the thelves fil ed with 
Engliſh books; I fancy,” ſaid he, * a repuolican, 
as you are, muſt generally be pleaſed with compoſi- 
tions that are writ with ſo great a degree of freedom. 
« Yes” faid Pococurante, ** it is commendadle to write 
what one thinks; it is the privilege of man. But all 
over our Italy they write nothing but what they don't 
think, Thoſe waonow inhabit the country of the Cz- 
ſars and Antonines, dare not have a ſingle idea, with- 
out taking out a licence from a Jacobin, I ſhould 
be very well ſatisfied with the freedom that breathes 
in the Engliſh writers, if paſhou and the ſpirit of par- 
ty did not corrupt all that was valuable in it.“ 

Candidus diſcovering a Milton, alked him, if he 
cid not look upon that author as a great genius ? 
* What!” ſaid Pococurante, ** that blockhead, that 
has made a long commentary in ten books, of rough 
verſe, on the firſt chapter of Geneſis; that groſs imi 
tator of the Greeks, who has disfigured the creation, 
and who, when Moſes has repreſented the Eternal 
producing the world by a word, makes the Meſſiah 
take a large pair of compaſſes from the armory of God, 
to mark out his work. How can I have any eſteem 
for one who has ſpoiled the hell and devils of Taſſo; 
who turns Lucifer ſometimes into a toad, and ſome - 
times into a pigmy; makes him deliver the fame 
ſpeech a hundred times over; repreſents him diſput · 
ing in divinity; and who, by a ſerious imitatioa of 
Ariolto's comic invention of fire arms, repreſents the 


8 CANDIDUS: co, Chap. 25. 
devils letting off their cannon in heaven? Neither I, 
nor any one elle in Italy, has it in his power to be 
pleaſed at theſe outrages againſt common icr fe : but 
the marriage of Sin and Death, and the ſnakes that 
proceed from her womb, are enough to make every 
perſon of the leaſt delicacy of taſte vomic. I his ob- 


| Ceure, fantaſtical, and diſguſting poem was deſpiſed at 


its firſt publication: and I only treat the author now 
in the fame manner as he was treated ia his own coun- 


try by his cotemporaries. By the bye, I ſneak what 1 


think; and I give myſelf no uneaſineſs, whether or 
not other people think as I do.“ 

Candidus was vexed at this diſcourſe ; for he re- 
ſpeed Homer, and was fond of Milton. Ah!“ 
ſaid he, whiſpering to Martin, I am very much afraid, 
that this man here has a ſovereign contempt for our 

German poets,” * There would be no great harm in 
that, „ ſaid Martin, Oh what an extraordinary man!” 
ſaid Candidus, muttering to himſelf: „what a 
great genius is this Pococurante ! can pleaſ: 


him. 


After having thus taken a view of all the books, 
they went down into the garden. Candidus expati · 
ated upon all its beauties. I never knew any thing 
laid out in 1o bad a taſte,” faid the maſter; © we 
have nothing but trifles here: but a day or two 
hence, I ſhall have one laid out upon a more noble 
plan.” 

When our two inquiſitives had taken their leave of 
his Excellency, ** Now, fure,” faid Candidus to Mar- 


tin, you wiel confeſs that he is one of the happieſt 


men upon earth, for he is above every thing that he 


has. Do not you ſee,” ſaid Martin, that he is 


diſguſted with every thing that he has? Plato has {aid 
a long time ago, that the beſt ſtomachs are not thoſe 
which caſt up all forts of viduals,” But,“ ſaid 
Candidus, is nct there a pleaſure in criticiſing upon 
every thing? in perceiving defects where other people 


Chap. 26. ALL For THE Brgmt, 99 
fancy they ſee beautiess That is as much as to 
ſay,” replied Martin, © there is a great pleaſure in 
having no pleaſure,” * It that is the caſe,” reſumed 
candidus, no perſon will be ſo happy as myſelf, 
when I ſee Miſs Cunegonda again.“ We thould 
always hope for the beſt,” ſaid Martin. 

Ia the mean time days and weeks paſſed away; but 
no Cacambo was to be found. And Candidus was fo 
overwhelmed with grief, that he did not recollect, that 

paquetta and brother Giroffize never ſo much as once 
came to thank him. 


7E 
CHAP. XXVI. 


Of Candidus and Martin's ſupping with fix ſtrangers, 
and who they were, 


s Candidus, followed by Martin, was going one 
night to ſeat himſelf at the table with ſome 
rangers who lodged in the ſame inn, a man of a com» 
plexion as black as ſoot, came behind him, and taking 
him by tee arm, ſays to him, Get yourſelt ready to 


Zo along with us; don't faii:” He turned his head, 


and ſaw Cacainbo, Nothing but the fight of Cune- 
gonda could have ſurprit:d or picaſed him more. He 
was juſt ready to run nid for joy, Embracing his 
dear triend, ** Cunegonda is here,“ ſaid he, without 


| doubt; where is ſhe? Carry me to her, that I may 


die with joy in her company!“ *© Cunegonda is not 
here,” taid Cacambo, ** the is at Conſtantinople.” 0 
heavens! at Conſantinopl-? But, if the was at 
China, I would fly thither ; let us be gone.” © We 
will go after ſupper,” replied Cac mb; I can tell you 
no more; I am a flave; my maſter expects me, and L 
mult go and wait at table; ſay not a word; go to 
ſupper, and hold yourſelf in readineſs. ? 


90 CANDIDUS; or, Chap. 26. 

Candidus, diſtracted between joy and grief, charm- 
ed at having ſeen his truſty agent, aſtoniſhed at be. 
holding him a fave, full of the idea of finding his miſ- 
rreſs again, his heart palpitating, and his underſtand- 
ing confuſed, ſet himſelf dowa at the table with Mar- 
tin, who ſaw all theſe ſcenes without the leaſt emoti- 


on, together with ſix ſtrangers that were come to ſpend 
the carnival at Venice, 


Cacambo, who foured out wine for one of the fix 
ſtrangers, drew near to his maſter, towards the end 


of the repaſt, and whiſpered him in the ear, ** Sire, 


your Majeſty may ſet out when you think proper, the 
ſhip is ready.“ On ſaying theſe words, he went out. 
The gueſts ſurpriſed, looked at cach other, without 


| ſpeaking a word; when another ſervant approaching a 
his maſter, ſaid to him, Sire, your Majelly s chaiſe is 


at Padua, and the yacht is ready.” The maſter gave 
a nod, and the domeſtic retired. All the gueſts ſtar. 
ed at one another again, and their common ſurpriſe 
was increaſed. A third ſervant approaching likewiſe 
the third ſtranger, ſaid to hm, Sire, believe me, your 
— muſt not ſtay here any longer; I am going 

to get every thing ready; and immediately he dil - 
appeared. 

Candidus and Martin began by this time to make 
no doubt but that this was a maſquerade of the car- 


nival. A fourth domeſtic ſaid to the ſourth maiter, 


« Your Majeſty may depart whenever you plcaſe;” 


| and went out as the others had done, The fitth ſer - 


vault expreſſed hintelf in terms to the ſame effect as the 
fourth: but the ſixth ſervant ſpoke in a diff-rent man- 
ner to the ſixth ſtranger, who ſat near Candidus: 
„Faith, Sir,” ſaid he, no one will truſt your Ma- 
jeſty any longer, nor myſelf neither; and we may 
both be ſent to j1il this very night; I ſhall however 
take care of myſelf, Adieu.“ 


All the domeſtics having diſappeared, the fix ſlran- 


gers, with Candidus and Martin, remained in a pf. 


Chap. 26. ALL ror Tar Besr, 91 
found filence. At laſt Candidus broke it: ** Gentle- 
men, ſaid he, this is ſomething very droll; but 

why ſhould you be all of you Kings? For my part, L 
own to you, that neither I nor Martin are.” 

Cacambo's maſter then anſwered very gravely in I- 
talian, ſaying, ** I aſſure you I am not in jeſt; lam 
Achmet III. I was Grand Sultan for ſeveral years; 
I dethroned my brother; my nephew dethroned me; 
my viſirs were beheaded : I finith my days in the old 
ſeraglio. My nephew, the Grand Sultan Mahmoud, 
permits me to take a voyage ſometimes for the ſake 
of my health, and I am come to paſs the carnival at 
Venice. | | 
A young man, who ſat near Achmet, ſpoke next, 
and ſaid, ** My name is Ivan; 1 was Emperor of all 
the Ruſſias, I was dethroned in my cradle, my father 
and mother was confined; I was brought up in pri- 
ſon, I have ſometimes the permiſſion to travel, ac- 
companied with two perſons as guards; I am alſo come 
to paſs the carnival at Venice,” 

The third ſaid, ** I am Charles Edward, King of 
England: my father has ceded his rights to the throne 
to me. I have fought to ſupport them; eight hun- 
dred of my adherents have had their hearts taken out 
alive, and their heads ſtruck off, I myt(:If have been 
in priſon : I am going to Rome, to pay a viſit to my 
father, who has been dethroned as well as myſelf and 
my grandfather; and am come to Venice to celebrate 
the carvival,” 

The fourth then ſaid, ** 1 am King of Poland; the 
fortune of war has deprived me of my hereditary do- 
minions; my father experienced the ſame reverſe; L 
refiza myſelf to providence, like the ſultan Acnmet, 
the Emperor Ivan, and Charles Edward, whom God 
long preſerve; and I am come to paſs the carnival at 
Venice,” 

The fifth ſ1id, © I am likewiſe the King of Poland; 
L lok my kingdom twice; but Providence has given 


92 c AN DID USVs; or, Chap. 26. 
me another government, in which I have done more 
good, than all the kings of the Sarmatians, put toge- 
ther, have been able ro do on the banks of the viſtu- 
la. I refign myſelf likewiſe to providence, aud am 
come to paſs the carnival at Venice.” 

It now was the fixth monarch's turn to ſpeak, 
Gentlemen, ſaid he, I am not ſo great a prince 
as any of you: but for all that I have been a King as 
well as the beſt of you. lam Theodore; I was ele&- 
ed King of Corſica; I was called Your May eſiy, but at 
preſent am ſcarce allowed the title of Si. I have 
cauſed money to be coined, but am not maſter at pre- 
ſent of a farthing. I have had two lecretaries of 
ſtate, but now have ſcarce a ſingle ſervant. I have 
feen myſelf on a throne, and have for ſome time lain 
upon ſtraw in a common jail in London, I have been 


vaſtly afraid of meeting with the ſame treatment here, 


though I am come, like your Majeſtics, to ſpend the 
carnival at Venice” 
The five other kings heard this ſpeech with a noble 
compaſſion. Each of then gave king Theodore twen- 
ty ſequins to buy him forme cloaths and ſhirts, and 
Candidus made him a preſent of a diamond worth 
two thouſaud ſequins more. Who,” ſaid the five 
lings. can this private perion be, who is both able 


to give, and really has given an hundred times as 


much as either of us?” 

At the very inſtant the) roſ: from table, four Se- 
rene Highneſſes, who had lik wiſe loſt their dominions 
by the fortune of war, and were come to paſs the car- 
nival at Venice, came into the room: but Candidus 
took no notice of thoſe new-comers, his thoughts be. 
ing taken up with nothing but going in ſearch of his 
dear Cunegonda at Conſtantinople, 


Chap. 27. ALL ror THE BEST. 9% 


e b eee ee 
| EUVAay. 2 Rn. 


The voyage of Candidus to Conſtantinople, 


NY Acambo had already prevailed on the Turkiſh 

captain, who was going to carry Sultan Achmet 
back again to Conſtantinople, to receive Candidus and 
Martin on board. They both of them imbarked, af- 
ter they had proftrated themſelves before his miſera- 
ble Highneſs. As Candidus was on his way, he faid 
to Martin, There were fix dethroned kings that we 
ſupped with; and what is (till more, among theſe fix 
kings there was one that I gave alms to. Perhaps 
there may be a great many other princes more unfor- 
tunate ſtill. For my part, I have ſoſt only one hun- 
dred ſheep, and am going to fly into the arms of Cu- 
negonda, My dear Martin, I mult yet fay, Pangloſs 
was in the right; all things are for the beſt,” «]- 
with they were,” faid Martin.“ But,” ſaid Candi- 
dus, the adventure we met with at Venice is ſome- 
what romantic. Such a thing was never heard of, 
that fix dethroned kings theuld ſup together at a com- 
mon inn.“ This is not more extraordinary,” repli- 
ed Martin, “than the molt of the things that have 
happened to us. It is a common thing for kings to be 
dethroned; and with reſpect to the honour that we 
had of ſupping with them, it is a mere trifle that does 
not merit our attention.“ . | | 

Scarce had Candidus got on board, when he leap» 
ed on the neck of his old ſervant and friend Cacambo. 
„Well,“ faid he, what news of Cunegonda ? is ſhe 
ſtill a miracle of beauty? docs the love me (till ? how 
does ſhe do? No doubt but you have bought a palace 

tor her at Conſtantinople? 
My dear malter, rcp'ied Caca abo, Cunegq 


9 CANDIDUS; or, Chap. 25. 
da waſhes diſhes on the banks of the Propontis, in the 


ſla ve in the houſe of an ancient ſovereign, named Ra- 
gotſky, to whom the Grand Turk allows three crowns 
a-day to ſupport him in his aſylum ; but what is worſe 
than all, ſhe has loſt her beauty, and is become ſhock- 
ingly ugly.” Well,“ handſome or ugly,“ replied 
Candidus, I am a man of honour, and it is my duty 
to love her ſtill. But how came ſhe to be reduced to 
fo abject a condition, with the five or ſix millions that 
you carried her? And well, faid Cacambo, ** was 


not I to give two millions to Signior Don Fernandes d' 


Ibaraa, y Figueoro, y Maſcarenes, y Lampourdos, y 
Souza, the governor of Buenos Ares, for the permiſ- 
fion of taking Miſs Cunegonda back again? and did 
not a pirate bravely rob us of all the reſt ? Did not 
this pirate carry us to Cape Matapan, to Milo, to Ni- 


caria, to Samos, to Dardanelles, to Marmora, to Scu- 


tari? Cunegonda and the old woman are ſervants to 
the prince I told you of, and I am a flave to the de- 
throned Sultan. What a chain of ſhocking cala- 
mities !”” ſaid Candidus. But, after all, I have ſome 


diamonds, I thall eafily purchaſe Cunegonda's liberty, 


It is pity that ſhe is grown ſo ugly.“ 
Then turning himſelf to Martin, &© Who do you 


think,“ ſays he, is moſt to be pitied, the Sultan Ach- 


met, the Emperor Ivan, King Charles Edward, or 
myſelf ? © I cannot tell,” faid Martin, I muſt ſee 
into your hearts to be able to tell.“ Ah!“ ſaid 
Candidus, ** if Pangloſs were here, he would know 
and tell us.“ 1 know not, replied Martin, © in 
what ſort of ſcales your Pangloſs would weigh the 
misfortunes of mankind, and appraiſe their ſorrows. 
All that I can venture to fay is, that there are millions 
of men upon earth a hundred times more to be pitied 
than King Charles Edward, the Emperor Ivan, or 
Sultan Achmet.“ That is very poſſible,” ſaid Can - 


houſe of a prince who has very few to waſh : ſhe is a 


-2-E EE EE. 


e 


Chap. 27+ Art ror THE Bas r. 95 
In a few days they reached the Black fea. Candi- 
dus began with ranſoming Cacambo at an extravagant 
price; and, without loſs of time, he got into a galley 
with his companions, to go to the banks of the Pro- 
pontis, in ſearch of Cunegonda, notwithſtanding her 
loſs of beauty. 
Among the crew there were two flaves that rowed 


very ill, to whoſe ».re ſhoulders the Levaat trader 


would now and then apply a few ſtrokes with a bull”s 
pizale, Candidus, by a natural ſympathy, looked at 
them more attentively than at the reſt of the galley+ 
llaves, and went up to them with an heart full of pi- 
ty. Some features of their faces, though very much 
disfigured, ſeemed to bear ſome reſemblance to thoſe 
of Pangloſs, and the unfortunate Jeſuit the Baron, 


the brother of Miſs Cunegonda. This fancy affected 


him, and made him very dull. He looked at them a- 


gain more attentively. Really,” faid he to Cacambo, 


« if I had not ſeen Mr Pangloſs hanged, and had not 
had the misfortune to kill the Baron myſelf, I ſhould 
think it was they that are rowing in this galley,” 

At the names of the Baron and Pangloſs, the two 
galley-ſlaves gave a loud ſhriek, held faſt by the ſear, 


and let their oars drop, The maſter of the Levanter 


ran up to them, and redoubled the laſhes of the bull's 
pizzle upon them. Hold! hold! Signior,”” cried 
Candidus, I will give you what money ycu pleaſe.” 
„Lord! it is Candidus'” faid one of the galley- 
flaves; Oh! it is Candidus !” ſaid the other. Do 
dream?“ ſaid Candidus; am I awake? am I in 
this galley? is that Maſter Baron whom I killed? is 
that Maſter Pangloſs whom I ſaw hanged ?” 

« Yes, it is we! it is we!” replied they. What! 
is that the great philoſopher ?” ſaid Martin. Harkee, 
Maſter Levant Captain,” faid Candidus, what will 
you have for the ranſom of Maſter Thunder-ten- 
tecnekh, one of the lick B.rons of the empire, toge- 


ther with Malter Pangloſs, the moſt profound Meta. 


the Levant captain, *©* ſince theſe two dogs of Chriſti- 
an ſlaves are barons and metaphyſicians, which, with- 
out doubt, is a great degr-e of dignity in their own 


country, you ſhall give me fifty thouſand ſequins,” 


% You (hall have them, Sir; carry me back again like 
lightning, to Conſtantinople, andyou ſhall be paid di- 
realy, But Rop, carry me to Miſs Cunegonda firſt,” 
The Levant captain, on the firſt offer of Candidus, had 
turned the head of the veſſel towards the city, and 
made the ſlaves row faſter than a bird cuts the air. 
Candidus embraced the Baron and Pangloſs a hun- 
dred times How happened it, that I did not kill 
you, my dear Baron? and my dear Pangloſs, how 
came you to life again, after being hanged ? and how 
came you, both of you, to be galley- ſlaves in Turky ?” 
« Is it true that my dear fiſter is in this country,” ſad 
the Baron. Yes,” replied Cacambo. ** Then l ſee 
my dear Candidus once more,” ſaid Pangloſs. 
Candidus preſented Martin and Cacambo to them; 
they embraced each other, and fpoke all at the ſame 
time. The galley fiew like lightning, and they were 
already in the port. A Jew was fent for, to whom 
Candidus fold a diamond for fifty thouſand ſequins, 


which was worth a hundred thouſand ; who notwith- 


ſtanding, {wore by Ab ham, that he could not give 
any more, He immediately paid the ranſom of the 
Baron and Pangloſs. The latter threw himſelf at 


the feet of his deliverer, and bathed them with his 


tears; as for the other, he thanked him with a nod, 
and promiſed to repay him the money the firſt opper- 
tunity. But is it poſivle that my ſiſter is in Turky ?” 
ſaid he. Nothing is more pofiible,” replied Cacam- 
bo; ©* for ſhe ſcours the diſhes in the houſe of a prince 
of Tranſylvania!” Two more Jews are immediately 
brought, to whom Candidus ſold ſome more diamonds; 


phy ſician of Germany? ** You Chriſtian Dog,” ſaid 


| Chap. 28. ALL For THE BEST, 97 


and they ſet out again all together in another galley, 
in order to deliver Cunegonda. 


erer No EO La 


CHA P. XXVII. 


What 7 Candidus, Cuncganda, Pangloſi, Mar- 


Ii, &e. 


Once more beg pardon,” ful Cainditus to the 

Baron. I beg your pardon, my Rev. Father, 
for having given you a thruſt with a {word through 
the body. Don't let us lay ny mi re about it,“ laid 
the Baron; I was a little too haſty, I miſt confels. 
But fince you defire to know by what fatality I came 
to be a galley flave, I will intorm you. Alter I was 
cured of my wound by a brother, who was apotheca- 
ry to the college, I was attacked and carried olf by a 
party of Spaniards, who contined me in priton at Bu- 


enos Ayres, at the very time my filter was letting out 


from thence. I demanded leave to return to Rcme 
to the Father general. 1 was nominated to go as al- 
moner to Conſtantirople with the French ambaſſador. 
I had not been eight days engaged in this employ - 
ment, when cone evening I met with a ye ung well made 
icoglan, It was then very hot; the young man went 
to bathe himſelf, and I took this opportunity to bathe 
myſelf too. I did not know that it was a capital crime 
for a Chriſtian to be found naked with a young muſ- 
ſulman. A cadi ordered me to receive a hundred 
ſtrokes of the baſtinado on the ſoles of my fret. and 
condemned me to the galleys. I do not think there 
ever was a greater act of injuſtice, But I ſh-uld be 
glai to know, how it comes about, that my filter is 
diſh waſher in the kitchen of a ranſylvan ian prince, 
who is a refugee among the Turks.“ 

** But you, my dear Pangioſs, how came I ever to 

E 


98 CAN DID US; or, Chap, 28, 
ſet eyes on you again?“ * Tt is true indeed,” aid 
Panglofs, ** that you ſaw me hanged; I ought natu- 
rally to have been burnt; but yon may remember, 
that it rained prodigiouſſy when they were to roaft 
me: the ſtorm was ſo violert, that they deſpaired of 
ligleing the fire, I was therefore hanged, becauſe 
they could do no better. A ſurgeon bought my bo. 
dy, carried it home with him, and diſſected me. He 
firſt made a crucial incition on me from the umbilicus 
to the clavicnia, No cne could have been more flo. 
venly hanged than I was, The <cxecutioner of the 
holy inquiſition, who was a ſubdeicon beſides, burnt 
people indeed to a miracle, but was not uſed to hang- 
wg. The cord being wet, did not ſiip properly, and the 
nooſe was badly tied: in thort, I till drew my breath, 
'The crucial inciſion made me give ſuch a dreadful 
ſkriek, that my ſurgeon fell Cown backwards, and 
 iancying be was diſſecting the devil, he run away, ready 
to die with the fright, and fell down a ſecond time on 
the Rair-caſe, as he was making off. His wife run 
but ef an adjacent cloſet, on hearing the noiſe, ſaw 
ae extended on the table with my crucial inciſion, 
and being more frightened than her huſband, fled alſo, 
2nd tumbled over him. When they were come to 
themſelves a little, I heard the ſurgeon's wife ſay to 
Fin: My dear, how come you to be fo weak as to 
venture to d ed an heretic? Don't you know that 
the devil always takes poſſeſſion of the bodies of thoſe 
people? I will go immedciately and fetch a prieſt to 
czorciſe him. I {huddered at this propoſal, and mu- 
ſtered up what little ſtrength J had left to cry out, 
Oh! have pity upon me! At length the Portugueſe 


barber tock courage, ſewed up my ſkin, and his wife 


nurſed me ſo well, that I was upon my feet again in 


about fifteen days, The barber got me a place, to 


be footman to a knight of Malta, who was going to 


Venice; but my maſter not being able to pay me my 


chip. 28. Att For THE BEST. 99 
wages, I engaged in the ſervice of a Venetian merch- 
ant, and went along with him to Conſtantinople.” 
One day the maggot took me to go into a moſque. 
There was no body there but an old iman and a young 
devotee, very handſome, faying her prayers, Her 
breaſt was uncovered ; the had in her boſom a beau- 
tiful noſegay of tulips, roſes, anemonies, ranuaculut - 
es, hyacinths, and auricula's ; ſhe let her noſegay fall; 
| took it up, and preſented it to her with the moit 
profound reverence, However, I was fo long in giv- 


ung it to her again, that the iman fell into a paſhon, 
and ſeeing I was a Chriſtian, called out for help. They 


carried me before the cadi, who ordered me toreceive 


hundred baſtinadoes, aud to be ſent to the galleys. 1 
was chained to the very fame galley and the ſame 


bench with the Baron. There were on board this 
galley four young men from Marte lles, five Neapoli- 
tan prieits, and two monks of Coriu, who told us, that 
the like adventures happened every day, The Baron 
pretended that he had ſuſfered more injuſtice than I; 
and I infilted, that it was far more innocent to put a 
noſegay into a woman's boſom, than to be found ſtark 
naked with an icoglan, We were perpetually diſ- 
puting, and we r_ ceived twenty laſhes every day with 
a buli's pizzle, when the concatenation of events of 
this world brought you to our galley, and you ran- 
lomed us.” 

* Weil, my dear Pangloſs, faid Candidus to him, 
when you was hanged, diſſected, ſeverely beaten, 
and tugging at the oar in the galley, did you always 
think, that things in this word were for the beſt?“ 
am till of my firſt opinion,“ rep!“ Panylots ; 
* for as Tam a philoſopher, it won be inconſiſtent 
vith my character to contradict myſelf; eſpecially as 
Leibnitz could not be in the wrong ; and his pre-e- 
ſtabliſned harmony is certainly the fineſt ſyſtem in the 
world, as well as his plenum and ſubtle matter,” 


E 2 


» 
— - _ —_ a7. - — 
_ —U—k —ñẽ — . — 2 —— 
— * * 
— —.— — — 2 


1co C ANDI DUS; or, Chap. 29. 


"© 


a of 


CHAP MIS 
Mie Candidus f,und Cun:gonda and the old woman 


again. 


Hile Candidus, the Baron, Pangloſs, Martin and 
Caicambo were telling their adventures to each 
other, and diiputing about the contingent and non- 
contingent events of this world, and while they were 
arguing upon effects and cauſes, moral and phy ſical 
evil, on liberty and neceſſity, and the comforts a 
fon may experience in the galleys in Turky, they ar- 
rived on the banks of the Propoatis, at the houſe of 
the prince of Tranſylvania, The firſt objects which 
preſented themſelves were Cunegonda and the old 
woman, hanging out ſome table linen on the lines to 
dry. 

The Baron grew pale at this ſight. Even Candidus, 
the aff. Kionate lover, upon ſeeing his fair Cunegonda 
prodigiouſly tanned, with her eyelids reverſed, her 
neck withered, her cheeks wrinkled, her arms red and 
full of ſcales, ſeized with horror, jumped near three 
yards backwards, but afterwards advanced to her out 
of gnod manners, She embraced Candidus and her 
brother, who, each of them, embraced the old woman, 
and Candidus ranſomed them both. 

There was a little farm in the neighbourhood, 
which the ol: woman adviſed Candidus to hire, till 
they could meet with better accommodations for their 
whole company. As Cunegonda did not know that 
| ſhe was grov vgly, nob-dy having told her of it; 
ſhe put CanJidus m ind of bis promiſe, in ſo peremp- 
tory a manner that the good man durſt not refuſe 


her. He then intimated to the Baron, that he in- 
tended to marry his ſiſter. I will never ſuffer,” 
ſaid the Baron, ** ſuch meanneſs on her ſide, nor ſuch 


LAS * 


Ys oy 


0 
\ \ — f 
. 


”\ 
. 
— 
* 
* 


Ar x 


fools: 
deliv 
ſom 
{cull 


Chap. 30. ALL ror THE BER r. 101 
nſolence on yours. With this infamy I never will 
de reproached. The children of my filter can never 
be inrolled in the chapters of Germany, No; my fi- 
ſter ſhall never marry any but a Baron of the empire.“ 
Curegonda threw herſelf at his feet, and bathed them 
with her tears; but he remained inſenſi le. You 
fooliſh puppy von.“ ſaid Candidus to him. * I have 
delivered you !rom the galleys ; I have paid your ran - 
ſom; I have alto paid that of your filter; the was 4 
cullion here, and 1s very ugly; 1 have the goodnels 
to make her my vie, and you pretend ſtill to pP 
it: I ſhould kill you again, it I ſhould conſult my paſ- 
ſion,” ** You may indeed kill me again,” ſaid the 
Baron; but you thail never marry my ſiſter, while 
[ have breath,” 


Fre e ee . 2 * 2 8 K . * 


Tis cencluji: Bo 


Andidus was not very defirons at the bottom of 
his heart, to marry Cunegonda, But the extreme 
impertinence of the Baron determined him to conclude 
the match, and Cunegonda preſſed it ſo earneſtly, that 
he could not retract. He adviſed with Pangloſs, Mar- 
tin, and the truſty Cacambo. Peng lots drew up an 
excellent memoir, in which he proved, that the Baron 
had no right over his filter, and that the might, ac- 
cording to all the laws of the empire, marry Candi. 
dus with her left hand. Martin was for throwing 
the Baron into the ſea: Cacambo was of opinion, chat 
it would be beſt to ſend him back again to the Levant 
captain, and make him work at the galleys; aſter \ Wi 
which they might ſend him to Rome to the Father- vi 
general, by the firſt ſhip, This advice was thought Fil 
good ; the old woman approved it 3 and nothing Was . } | 

bs .- 


102 CANDIDUS; or, Chap. 30. 
fail to his (iter about it. The ſcheme was put in exe- 
cution for a little money; and fo they had the plea- 
ſure of outwitting a I ſuit, and puniſhing the pride of 
a German Baron. | | 

It is natural to imagine, that, after ſo many diſaſ- 
ters, Candidus married to his ſweetheart, and living 
with the philoſopher Pangloſs, the philoſopher Mar- 
tin, the diſcreet Cacambo, and the old woman, and 
eſpecially as he had brought ſo many diamonds from 
the country of the ancient Incas, muit live the moſt a- 
greeable life of any man upon earth. But he was dup- 
ed fo often by the Jews, that he had nothing left but 
_ the ſmall farm; and his wife growing ſtill more ug 
ly, turned peeviſh and inſupportable. The old wo- 
man was very infirm, and worſe humoured than Cu- 
negonda herſelf, Cacambo, who workedein the gar - 
den, and weat to Conſtantinople to ſell its productions, 
was worn out with labour, and curſed his fate. Pan- 
gloſs was ready to deſpair, becauſe he did not ſhine at 
the head of ſome univerſity in Germany. As for Mar- 
tin, as he was firmly perſuaded that all was equally 
bad throughout, he therefore bore things with pati- 
ence, Candidus, Martin, and Pang loſs diſputed ſome · 
times about metaphyſics and ethics. They often ſaw 
paſſing under the windows of the farm houſe boats 
tull of effendis, baſhaws, and cadis, who were going 
into baniſhment to Lemnos, M:tylere, and Erzerum. 
They obſerved, that other cadis, other bathaws, and 
other eſfendis, ſucceeded in the poſts of thoſe who were 
exiled, and that they themſelves were baniſhed in their 


tures. They ſaw heads, decently impaled, which were 


to be preſented to the Sublime Porte. "Theſe ſpectacles 
increaſed the number of their diſputations; and when 


they did not diſpute, they were ſo procigioufly unea- 


ſy and unquiet in themſeives, that the old woman took 
the liberty to fay to them, I want to know which 


is the worſt, to be raviſhed an hundred times by ne- 


gro pirates, to have a buttock cut cf, to run the gaunt» 


es 


＋ꝓ — — 


— 


EN Lewes ears ans 


Chap. 30. ALL FOR THE BEST. 103 
let among the Bul-arians, to be whipped and hanged 
at an auto-da-fe, to be diſſected, to row in the galleys; 
in one word, to have ſuffered all the miſeries we have 


| | undergone, or to ſtay here, without doing any thing? 


That is a quettion not eaſy to be determined,” faid 
Candidus. 

This diſcourſe gave riſe to new reflections, and Mar- 
tin concluded, upon the whole, that mankind are born 
to live either in the diſttactians of inquietude, or in the 
lethargy of diſguſt. Candidus did net agree to that 
opiaton, but remained in a ſtate o tufpenſe. Panglols 
confeſſed, that he had undergone terrible trials; but 
having once maintained, that all things went wonder- 


fully well, he (till kept firm to his hypotheſis, though 


quite oppoſite to his real ſentiments, 

What contributed to confirm Martin in his ſhocking 
principles, to make Candidus ſtagger more than ever, 
and to imbarraſs n was, that one day they faw 
Paquetta and Brother Giroſice, who were in the 


greateſt diſtreſs, at their firm. "They ſocn ſqnan- 


dered away their three thouland yialtres, had parted. 


were reconciled, quarrelled again, had been confined 
in priſon, had made their eſcape, and Father Girotllee 
had at length turned Turk. Pagiietta continued her 


trade, wherever {he went, but made nothing by it. 
could eaſily foreſee,” iaid Martin to Candidus, 


«that your prelents would ſoon be hrandered dWay, 


and would render them more miſcrable. You and Ca- 
cambo have twallowed millions of iaſtres, and are 
not a bit happier than Brother Giroſilee and Paqust- 


ta,” „ Ha! ha!” ſaid Pangloſ, to Paquetta, has 


Providence brought you amongſt us again, my poor 

child? Do you know that you hes colt me the tip 

of my noſe, one eye, and one of my ears, as you may 

ſee you have? What a world is this!“ This new ad- 

venture ſet them a · philoſophiſing more than ever. 
There lived in the neighbou hood a very famous 

derviſe, who paſſed for the greateſſ philoſopher i in Tur» 

E 4 


104 CANDIDUS; or, Chap. 30. 
ky. They went to conſult him. Pangloſs was cho- 
ſen ſpeaker, and faid to him, Maſter, we are come 
to deſire you would tell us, why fo ſtrange an animal 
as man was created.“ 
What's that to you?“ ſaid the derviſe; * is it a- 
ny buſineſs of thine? But, my Reverend Father,” 
faid Candidus, there is a ſhocking fight of evil up- 
on earth.. What ſignifies,” ſaid the derviſe, * whe- 
ther there be good or evil? When his ſublime High- 
neſs ſends a veſſel to Egypt, does it trouble him whe- 
ther the mice on board are at their eaſe or not?” 
What would you have one do then?“ faid Pan- 
gloſs. ** Hold your tongue,“ ſaid the derviſe. [ 
promiſed myſelf the pleaſure,” ſaid Pangloſs, of 


reaſoning with you upon effects and cauſes, the beſt 


of poſſible worlds, the origin of evil, the nature of the 
1oul, and the pre- eſtabliſned harmony.” The der- 
viſe, at theſe words, ſhut the door againſt them. 

During this conference, news was brought that two 
vizirs and a mufti were ſtrangled at Conſtantinople, 
and a great many of their friends impaled, This cz- 
taſtrophe made a great noiſe for ſome hours, Pahgloſe, 


Candidus, and Martin, in their return to the little 


farm, met a good looking old man takiag the air, at 
his door, under an arbour of orange trees. Pangloſs, 
who had as much curiofity as philoſophy, aſked him 
the name cf the mufti, who was lately ſtrangled, 1 
know nothing about it,” ſaid the good man; and 
what's more, I never knew the name of a fingle muf · 
ti, or a ſingle vizir, in my life. I am an entire ſtran · 
ger to the ſtory you mention; and preſume, that, ge- 
nerally ſp:aking, they who trouble their heads with 
ſtate affairs, ſometimes die thocking deaths, not with- 
out deſerving it: but I never trouble my head about 
what is doing at Conſtantinople z I content myſelt 
with ſending my fruits thither, the produce of my 
garden, which I cultivate with my own hands = 
Having ſaid theſe words, he introduced the ſtrangers 


44: TEALFREEND 


Ss 3 0 . 


mm w Y 


Chap 30. ALL FOR THE BesT, 10 5. 
:nto his honſe: his two daughters and two ſons ſerv- 
ed them with ſeveral kinds of ſherbet, which they 
made themſel ves, hefides caymac, enriched with the 
peels of candied citrons, oranges, lemons, ananas, pi- 
ſtachio nuts, and Mocuo coffee, unadulterated with the 
bad coffee of Bitaviz and the iſles. After which, tha 
two daughters of this good mulſu;mano perfumed the 
beards of Candidus, Panglofs, and Martin, 

% You muſt certainly,” taid Candidus to the Turk, 
« have a very large and very opulent eltate !” +! 
have only twenty acres, ? ſaid tie Turk; which I, 


' with my children, cultivate. Labour keeps us free 


from * of the greatelt evils, tireſomenels, vice aud 
want,” e 

As Candidus returned towards his farm, he mad > 
deep reflections on the diſcourſe of the Turk. Said 
he to Pangloſs and Martin, The condition of this 
good old man ſeems to be preferable to that of the fic. 
Kings with whom we had the honour to ſup.“ The 
grandeurs of royalty,“ taid Panglols, are very preca 7 
rious, in the opinion of all philoſophers. For, in thort, 
Eglon, King ot the Moabites, was aflulinated by E- 


| hud; Abſalom was hung by the hair of his head, 


and pierced through with three darts; King Nadab, 
the fon of Jeroboamn, was killed by Baalha ; King E- 
lah by Zimri ; Ahaziah by Jehu; Athaliah by jehe - 
iadah ; the Nings Joachim, Jechonias, and Zedekias, 
were carried into captivity, You kaow the fates of 
Creſus, Ailyages, Darius, Dionyſus of Syracule, Pyr- 
hus, Perſeus, Hannibal, Jugurtha, Artoviſtus, Cefir, 
Pompey, Nero, Otho, Vitellius, Domitian, Rici:rd II. 
Edward II. Henry VI. Richard III Mary Sturt, an.! 
Charles I. of England, the three Henrys of France. 

and the Emperor Hency [V You kaow T2 
know very well,“ ſaid Canc:idns, © tat we ought to 
lock after our garden.“ Ton are in the right, 51.1 
Pangloſs: fer when maa was placed m the yo den 
ot Eden, he was placed there, ut aferart tr en“: 


2 


2 3 


106 "CANDIDUS, kc. Chap. 30. 
cultivate it; which proves that mankind are not crea. 
ted to be idle.“ Let us work,” f:id Martin, with- 
out diſputing ; it is the ou way to render life ſup · 
portable. 

All their little ſociety entered into this laudable de- 
ſign, according to their different abilities, Their little 
piece of ground produced a plentiful} crop, Cunegon- 
da indeed was very ugly, but ſhe turned out an exce!- 
lent paſtry cook. Paquetta worked at embroidery, and 
the old woman took care of the linen. There was no 
idle perſon in the company, not excepting even Bro 
ther Girofflee ; he made a very good carpenter, and 
became too a very honeſt man. 

Pangloſs would ſometimes ſay to Candidus: „ A 
events are linked tog ether in this beit of all poſſible 
worlds, For if you had not been driven with great 
blows on the bach ide out of a very fine caſtie, on ac - 
count of your paſſi n for Mrs Cunegouda; if you had 
not been thrown into the im quiſition; if you had not 
rambled through America on foot it you had not gi- 
ven the Baron « hearty blow with your tword; if you 
had not loſt all the ſheep that you brought from that 
good country Eldorado yu would not here have 
eat preſerved citrons and piſtachio nuts,” © That is 
well faid,” replied Cane: cus; * but let us cultivate 
our garden.“ 


Tie End of the FR Parry, 


CAN DIDVS; 
' OR, | 
ALL FOR THE BEST. 


— . 
„ T 


— oÞnediondi edict) ** 


CHAF. L 


How Candidus parted from his company, ard what ar. 
 fulted from it. 


AN ſoon tires of every thing in this liſe; 
riches are a burden to the poileflor ; ambi- 
tion, when fated, leaves regrets ; the ſweets 
of love loſe their pleaſure; and Candidus, 
born to experience all the changes of fortune, was tir- 
ed of cultivating his garden at laſt. Matter Pang!oſfs, 
faid he, if we are in the beſt of e arorlls, youu 
muſt confeſs at leaſt that I do not enjoy a ſuitable pro 
portion of perle happineſs, ſince I hive unknown in a 
ſmall corner ot the Propontis, having no other ſup- 
port than that of my hands, which may ſoon loſe 
their ſtrength ; no other delights than that which ! 
have from Miis Cunegorda, who is very vgly, agd, 


108 CANDIDUS; or, Chap. 1. 
what is worſt of all, ſhe is my wife; no other compa- 
ny than yours, which often tires me : or that of Mar- 
tin, which makes me dull; or that of Girofflee, who 
lately has turned good ; or that of Paquetta, which, 


you know, is very dangerous; or that of the old wo- 


man with one buttock, who tells me a parcel of long 
ſpun ſtories. 
Then Pangloſs replied : Philoſophy tncdes us, that 


the monades, infinitely diviſible, arrange themſelves 


with a wonderful intelligence to form the different. 


bodies that we remark in nature. The heavenly bo. 


dies are what they owght to be; they are placed where 
they ought to be placed; they deſcribe the circles that 
they ought to deſcribe ; man follows the inclination 
that he 0u2/ to follow, he is what he ont to be, he 
does what he owght to do, You are caſt down and 
complain, O Candidus, becauſe the monade of your 
ſoul is weary ; but this wearineſs is a modification of 


the ſoul, and is no argument againſt every thing being 


for the beſt with reſpect to yourſelf and others. When 
ycu ſaw me over run with ulcers, I ſtood firm to my 
opinion : forif Miſs Paquetta had not given me a reliſh 
for the pleaſures of love, and its poiſon, I ſhonld not 
have met with yon in Holland; I ſhould not have given 
an occa ſion to James the Anabaptiit to do a meritorious 
action; I ihouid not have been hanged at Liſbon for 
the edification of our neighbour ; I ſhould not be here 
to comfort you with my advices, to live and die in the 
opinion of Leibnitz. Yes! my dear Candidus, the 
whole is 4 concatenation, every thing is neceflary in 
the beſt of p:fMibl-: worlds. There is an abſolute neceſ- 
fity for the burgeſs of Mentauban to inſtruct kings, 
and the worm of Qaimper- Corentin to criticiſe, critt- 
Ciſe, criticiſe, The impeacher of philolophers is ne- 


ceſſitated to be cruciked in St Denis's ſtreet; and the 


ve neccility obliges the llogging pe dant of the Re- 


2/; and tie archdean. of St Malo to drit.1 gal, aud 


ny from cm Chri/iian Feu nals. F ialu fophy 


aaa («es ou ab * 


Chap. r. ALL For THe Brgr, 203 


ves under the neceſſity to be impeached at the tribu- 
nal of Melpomene. Phiioſophers are obliged to con- 
tinue to enlighten mankind, notwithſtanding the ſnar- 
ling envious brutes that grovel in the mud of litera- 
ture. And were you to be kicked from the fineſt of 
enſtles, and under the nceeſſity of learning again the 
Zulgarian exerciie, run the gauntlet, ſuffer once more 


the effects of a Dutch frow, and be ſent back to Li- 


don to be cruelly ſcourged by order of the holy in 
quiſition, to undergo the ſame dangers among the 


Parkes, the OrEiLLONs, and the FrxexncH; if you 


were, in ſhort, to bear all ile calamities, and though 
you did not underſtand Le:bnitz better than I do my- 
ſelf, you would alwiys maintain that every thing is 


right, and for the be/t ; that the plenum, and the ma- 
teria ſubtilis, the pre eſtabliſhed harmony, and the 
monades, are the prettieſt things in the world; and 


that Leibnitz is a great man, even to thoſe who do 
not under ſtand him. 


To this fine diſcourſe, Candidus, the mildeſt of all 


the beings of nature, though indeed he had killed three 


men, two of whom were prieſts, did not give an an- 


ſwer, but being weary of the Doctor and his compa- 


| a white flick in his hand, not knowing whither he was 
going, in ſearch of a place devoid of wearineſs, and 


try of Eldorado, 

Candidus, leſs unhappy fince he no longer was in 
love with Mi's Cunegonda, got his ſubſiſtence from 
the liberality of different people, who were not Chriſ- 
tans, but were charitable. He arrived, after a very 
tedious and painful march, at Tauris, a city on the 


frontiers of Perſia, famous for the cruelties exerciled | 


there alternately by Turks and Perſians, 

Candidus being quite ſpent with latigne, having 
ſcarcely as many eloarhs as could cover the dill.n- 
guiſhing mark of mas, and what man calls his /hame, 


where men ſhould not be men, as in the good coun- 


110 CANDIDUS; or, Chap. 1. 
was beginning to doubt whether he ſhould believe 
Pangloſs, when a Perſian made up to him in a very 
polite manner, and intreated him to ennoble his houſ: 
by his preſence. You j ke, ſurely, ſaid Candi lus; J 
am a poor devil, who have left a wretched habitati · 


on that I had at the Propontis, becauſe I married Miſs 


Cunegonda, who is become very ugly, and becauſe | 
was weary. I am not indeed fit to eonoble any one's 
houſe, I am not noble myſelf, thanks be to God; if 


I had the honour to be fo, the Honourable Baron of 


Thunder ten-tronckh ſhould have paid very dearly 
for the kicks on the breech he thought proper to give 
me, or I ſhould have died for ſhame, which would have 
been too philoſophical. Beſides, I was ſcourged very 
ignominiouſly by the executioners of the holy inqui- 
ſition, and by two thouſand heroes, whole pay is three 
pence three farthings a day, Give me whatever you 


pleaſe, but do not inſult me in my diſtreſs by banters 


that would depretiate the merit of your favours, My 
Lord, replied the Perſian, you may be a beggar, and 
that is pretty viſible you are ſo ; but my religion 0- 


5 bliges me to be hoſpitable. You are a fellow - creature, 


and in want, therefore the apple of my eye ſhall be 
your path. Deign to ennoble my houſe by your ra- 
diant preſence. I ſhall do as you pleaſe, replied Can- 
didus. Step in, ſaid the Perſian. They walk in; 
and Candidus, full of admiration, was quite aſtoniſh · 
ed at the reſpect that his land lord ſhewed him. The 
| Caves anticipated all his deſires. The whole houſe 
ſeemed intent to procure him full ſatisfaction. Pro- 


vided this continues, ſaid Candidus, matters are not 


ſo bad in this country, Three days had paſſed, and 
the Perſian generoſity ſtil! laſted as uſual. Cancidus 
begins to exclaim, O Maſter Pangloſs, I ſuſpected al- 
ways that you was in the right; for you are a great 
philoſopher ! 


© 
Chap. 2. ALL Fort The Ber, 111 


RU NMUN - TOO: 
CHAP. u. 


What befel Candidus in this houſe, and how he left it. 


NAndidus well fed, well clothed, anden high ſpi- 
( rits, quickly became again as rud.lv, as freth, 
and as pretty, as when he was in We..phaiia, This 
change gave a great deal of plcaſure to Iſhmael Ra- 
hab, his landlord. This man, who was fix feet high, 

| had two finall red {parkling eyes; and his pim- 
pled noſe, of a pretty large ſize, was a {ulli-ient indi- 
cation that he infringed the law ot Mahomet. His 
whiſkers were renowned in the province, and mothers 
were earnelt|!y praying that their ſons might have the 
like muſtaches. Rahib had wives, becauſe he was 
rich; but he was of an opinion that prevails gut too 
commonly in the Eaſt, and in fone colleges of Eu- 
rope. Your excellence is more beaut.tul than the ſtats, 
ſaid the artful Perſian, one day, to our unſu{pefting 
hero, gently ſtroking him under the chin; your charms | 
mult have captivated many hearts; you were born to 
give and to enjoy happineſs. Alas! replied Candi- 


dus, I was but half happy behind the ſcreen, for I was FR 
far from being at my eaſe. Cunegonda was then hand- 23 
lome——Cunegonda, poor innocent! Follow me, ry 
Lord, ſaid the Perſian; and Candidus followed him. HY 
They came to a molt inchanting incloſure at the —1 10 
bottom of a wood, where ſilence and voluptuouinefs . 
ſeemed to reign. There Iſhmael Rahab tenderlj em- 1 
bracing Candidus, in few words declared a paſſios for W 
him, like that which the beautiful Alexis fo {zelingly #4 
deſcribes in the Bucolics of Virgil. Candidus was un- | ; 9 
able to recover from his aſtoniſhment. No, cried he, 1 
[ will never ſubmit to ſuch infamy! What a ſtrange _— 
cauſe, and what a ſhocking effect! I had rather fuf- W. 


* CANDIDUS; or, 
fer death. Thou ſhalt die thea, ſaid the furious Il. 
mae}, How! Chriſtian dog, becauſe I very politely 


2, 


meant to give thee pleaſure ! Reſolve to fatisfy 
me, or to endure the molt cruel death. Candidus 
did not long helitate. The Perſian's powertul argu- 
raents were ſufficient to make him tremble; but he 
feared death like a philoſopher. | 

Cuſtom ſoon reconciles us to any thing. Candidus, 
well fed, well inſtructed, though confined, was not 
abſolutely diſſatisfied with his fituation. Good living, 
and the various entertainments exhibited by the flaves 
of Iſhmael, gave ſome intermiſſion to his grief; he 
was unhappy only when he reflected; and fo are the 
greateſt part of mankind. 

About this time one of the chief ſupports of the 
church militant of Perſia, the moſt learned of all the 


fingers ends, and even the Greek which is at this day 
| ſpoken in the country of Demoſthenes and Sophocles, 


tinople, where he had been diſputing with the Rev. 
Mamoud-Abram, on a very delicate point of doctrine, 
namely, Whether the prophet had plucked the quill 
with which he wrote the Alcoran, out of the wing of 
the angel Gabriel, or whether Gabriel had preſented 
it to him? They had diſputed, Guring three days 
and three nights, with a zeal worthy of the ages moſt 
renowned for controverſy, when the Doctor returned 
perſuaded, like all the diſciples of Ali, that Mahomet 
had placked the quill; and Mamoud Abram remain- 
ed convinced, like the relt of the ſect of Onar, that 
the prophet was incapable of ſuch a piece of rudeneſs, 
and that the angel preſented it to him with the-molt 
becoming grace imaginable, 

It was reported, that there had been, at Conſtan» 


tinople, 2 kind of free thinker, who had infinuated, 


that it was proper to enquire into the truth of the 
Alcoran's having been addually written with a quill 


Mahometan doctors, who underitood Arabic at his 


the Rev. Ed Ivan-Baal-Denk returned from Conſtane 


RRR aur naw HRS 


Chap. 2. ALL FOR THE Br r. 113 
taken from the angel Gabriel; but he was ſton- 


lid arrival made a great noiſe in Tauris; ſe- 
veral perſons who had heard of contingent effects, and 
effects not contingent, began to doubt of his being a 
philoſopher. They mentioned it to the Rev, Ed-[van 
 Baal-Denk ; he was curious to ſee him; and Rahab, 
who could not refuſe a perſon of his conſideration, 
ordered Candidus into his preſence. He ſeemed 
entirely ſatisfied with Candidus's manner of reaſon- 
ing on phyſical and moral evil, on things aQtive and 
piſlive. I underſtand you are a philoſopher, and that 
is ſufficient, ſaid the Venerable Cenobite: it is very 
improper that ſo great a man as you are ſhould be treat · 
ed un worthily, which I am told is the caſe. You are 
a ſtranger, Iſhmael Rahab has no right over you. 1 
will take you to court, where you will meet with a 
favourable reception: the Sophi is fond of the ſcien- 
ces. Ilhmael, deliver this young philoſopher into my 
hands, or you will incur the diſpleaſure of your prince, 
and draw upon you the vengeance of heaven, but 
more elpecially of its miniſters. Theſe laſt words 
terrified the intrepid Perſian; he conſented to every 
thing; and Candidus, bleſſing heaven and the prieſt. 
hood, departed from Tauris that very day with the 
Mahometan doctor. They took the road to Iſpahan, 
where they arrived amidſt the — and acclama- 
tions of the people, 


| GAP 
sf 
wy 


114 CANDIDUS; or, Chap. 3. 
CRICICKICNICKI(MICNICKICK 
CHAP, I. 
Candidus's reception at court, ard what followed, 


HE Rev. Ed Ivan-Baal-D-nk, delayed not to 

preſent Candidus to the King. His Majeſty 
took a particular pleaſure in liſtening to his diſcourſe, 
and placed him among the learned men of his court; 
but theſe learned men treated him as an ignorant fool, 
and an idiot, which very much contributed to per- 
ſuade his Majeſty that he was a great man. Becauſe, 
 faid he to them, you cannot comprehend Candidus's 
arguments, you affront him; but, for my part, tho 
I underſtand them no better than you, I aſſure you 
that he is a great philoſopher ; I ſwear it by my 
whiſkers, Theſe words impoſed ſilence on the learn- 
ed 


Candidus was lodged in the palace, and allowed 
ſlaves for his ſervice; he was cloathed in a magnifi- 
cent ſuit, and the Sophi co.amanded, that, let him 
ſay what he would, no one thould dare to prove him 
in the wrong. His majeity did not ſiop here, The 
venerable prieſt ceaſed not to importune him in favour 
of Candidus; and he reſolved, at lad, to rank him 
with his moſt intimate favourites 

God be praiſed and our holy prophet, ſaid the I- 
man, addreſſing Candidus, I have brought you a molt 
agre eable piece of intelligence. How happy are you, 
my dear Candidus! How will you be envied! You 
_ will ſwim in opulence; you may aſpire to the molt 
illuſtrious employments of the empire, Forget me 
not, however, my dear friend; remember that you 


are obliged to me for the favours with which you will 


ſoon Le honoured, The King will b:itow upon you 


Chap. 3. ALL FOR THE BEST. 115 
a kindneſs which is greatly eſteemed, and you will 
ſhortly exhibit an entertainment which the court has 
not enjoyed this two years And, pray, whatare the 
honours deſigned me by the prince? ſaid Candidus. 
This very day, replied the prieſt, quitedelighted, you 
will receive fitty {trokes upon the ſoles of your feet, 
with a bull's pizzle, in the preſence of his Majelty. 
The eunuchs, who are to perfume you, will be here 
immediately; prepare to ſupport, with becoming re» 
ſolution, this little trial, and make yourtelf worthy of 
the king of kings. Let the kings of kings keep his 
favours, cried Candidus, if, to deſerve them, I muſt 
receive fifty ſirokes with a bull's pizzle. It is his 
cuſtom, replied the doctor coldly, with thoſe on whom 
he would beſtow his tavours, I eſteem you too much 
to report your reluctance, and I will make you happy 
in ſpite of yourſelf. „ 8 
They had ſcarce done ſpeaking when the eunuchs 
entered, preceded by the executor of his Majeſty's mi- 
nute pleatures, who was one of the talle* and mot 
robuſt lors of the court, Candidus would rather have 
been excuſed, but, in ſpite of all he could ſay or do, 
they perfumed his legs and feet according to eu om. 
Four eunuchs conducted him to the place appointed 
tor the ceremony, in the midſt of a double rank of 
ſoldiers, to the lound of muſical inſtruments, cannon, 
andtheringing of bells. The Sophi was already there, 
attended by his principal cflicers, and the moſt intel- 
ligent of his courtiers, Candidus was ſtretched in a 
moment on a pilled bench and the executor of the 
minute pleaſures was preparing to enter upon his of. 

fice, O Pangloſs, Pangloſs, if you were here 
ſaid Candidus, crying and weeping with all his might; 

Which would have been thought very indecent, if the 

prieſt had not aſſerted, that his favourite behaved in 
this manner only to give his Majeſty more entertain - 

ment, Ln truth, this great king lauzhed moſt immo. 
Cerately; he was fo pleaſed with the ſight, that, when 


116 CANDIDUS; er, Chap, 4. 
the fifty ſtrokes were given, he ordered fifty more, 
But his prime minitter having repreſented, with un- 
common boldneſs, that this favour, conferred on a 
ſtranger, might alienate the hearts of his ſutje&s, he 
_ revoked his order, and Candidus was remanded back 
to his apartment. 

They put him to bed, having bathed his feet with 
vinegar, The nobility came, one after another, to 


his prefence; he not only ſuffered him to kifs his 


hand, but gave him a deviliſh knock in the jaws 


with his fit. The politicians cor jectured from this 
that his fortune was made; and, what is more ex- 


traordinary, though politicians, they were not miſ- 


CHAP. iv. 
Candidus receives new favours, His elevation. 


O ſooner was our hero recovered, than he was 

preſented to the King, in order to expreſs his 
gratitude for the favours with which he had been ho- 
noured. The monarch received him graciouſly; 
moreover, he deigned to give him two or three ſlaps 
in the face during the converſation ; and when he took 
dis leave, condeſcended to kick his backſide as he 
went along, even as far as the guardroom: the cour- 
tiers were all ready to die with envy, Since the time 
his Majeſty had firſt begun to bruite his ſpecial ſavou- 
riets, no one had ever had the honour to be fo tho- 
roughly bruiſed as Candidus. 

Three days after this audience, our philoſopher, 
who was ready to go mad at the favours he had re- 
ceived, and began to think that things went very ill, 
was named governor of Chuſiſtan, with deſpotic pow - 


congratulate him; even the Sophi honoured him with 


HTS: 


Chap. 4 ALL ror THE B78 1. 117 
er. He was decorated with a tur cap, which in per- 
fia is a mark of high diſtinction. Having taken leave 
of the Sophi, who honoured him with the repetition 
of ſome favours, he ſet out for Sus, the capital of the 

ince. From the moment Candidus had appear- 
ed at court, the grandees of the empire conſpired his 
deſtruction. The exceſſive favours which the Sophi 
had ſo laviſhly beſtowed on him, ſerved only to in- 
creaſe the ſtorm which was ready to burſt over his 
head. Nevertheleſs, he rejoiced in his good fortune, 
and eſpecially in his remote lituation : his ideas anti- 
cipated the pleaſures of ſupremacy, and he ſaid from 
the bottom of his heart, 


Thrice happy . a0 —__ theie froereign d well 
Far diſtant! 


Scarce had he travelled twenty miles from Iſpahan, 
when, on a ſudden, a body of five hundred cavalry 

faluted him with a furious diſcharge of their carbines, 
Candidus thought at firſt it was intended as a compli- 
ment; but a ball which ſhattered his leg to pieces, 
ſoon convinced him of his miſtake. His people threw 
down their arms, and Candidus, almoſt dead, was 
carried to a deſolate caſtle. His baggage, his camels, 
his flaves, his white eunuchs, his black eunuchs, and 
thirty-ſix wives which the Sophi had given him for his 
own uſe, all became the {ſpoil of the conquerors, 
They cut off the leg of our hero to prevent a morti- 
fication, and endeavoured to preſerve his life to the 
intent that he might ſuffer a more cruel death. 
= Panglofs, Pangiofs ! what would become of your 
optimiſin, if you now beheld me, with only one leg, 
in the hands of my moſt cruel enemies? When I had 
juſt entered the path of felicity; juſt made governor, 
or rather king, of one of the moſt c--nſilerable pro- 
vin ces of the empire of ancient M:dia ; when I became 


poſleſſed of camels, flaves, white evanchs and black 


118 CANDIDUS; or, Chap. 5, 

eunuchs, and thirty fix wives for my owa uſe, and of 

which I had yet made no uite—— Thus Candidus 
ke when he was able to ſpeak. 

But whilſt he thus bewailed his miſery, fortune 
ſtood his friend, The prime miniſter being informed 
_ of the violence which had been committed, had dif- 
patched a fufficient body of veterans in purſuit of the 
rebels; and the prieſt Ed-Ivan-Baal-Denk, had pub- 
liſhed, by means of other prieſts, that Candidus being 
favoured by the prieſts, was conſequently a favourite 
with God. Beſides, thoſe who were acquainted with 
the conſpiracy, were the more impatient to diſcover it, 


fince the miniſters of religion had declared in the 


name of Mahomet, that if any one had eaten ſwine's 
fleth, drank wine, paſſed ſeveral days without bathing, 


or viſited a woman at an improper time, contrary to 


the expreſs commands of the Alcoran, ſhould upon 
_ declaring of what he knew of the conſpiracy, be i/ 
fadto abſolved. Candidus's priion was ſoon diſcover- 
ed; it was inſtantly forced open, and, as religion was 


concerned, the vanquiſhed were, according to rule, 


exterminated. C:ndidus, walking over heaps of dead 

bodies, triumphe< over the greateſt danger he had ever 

yet experienced, and together with his attendants, 
continued his route towards his government, where 

he was received as a peculiar favourite who had been 

honoured with the baſtinado in the preſence of the 
king oi kings, 


eee eee 


CHAP. v. 


As how Candidu; was 4 great prince, but not ſatiſ- 


fed. 
Hiloſophy inſpires men with the love of their fel - 


low creatures: Paſcal is almoſt the fole philoſo- 


pher who ſeems endeavouring to make us hate them, 


Chap. 6. Arr For Tir BIST. 119 
Happily Candidus had never read Paſcal : he loved 
humanity with all his ſoul, Honeſt men per- 
ceived his diſpoſition; they had hitherto been kept 
at a diſtance from the Miſi Dominici of Perſia ; but 
it was not difficult for them to aſſemble in the pre- 
ſence of Candidus, and to aid him with their coun- 
ſel, He made many wile regulations for the encou- 
ragement of agriculture, population, commerce, and 
the arts, He rewarded thoſe who had made uſeful 
experiments; and even thoſe who had only written 
books, were encouraged. M hen all my ſubjects are con 
tented, (ſaid Candidus to himſelt with the molt charm · 
ing candour imaginable) then poilibly I may be hap- 
py, He was but little acquainted with human na- 
ture. His reputation was attacked in ſeditious libels, 
and he was calumniated in a work called /” Ani dert 
hommes, He found, that, by endeavouring to make 

men happy, he did but excite their ingratitude. O, 
cried Candidus, how difficult it is to govern theſe un - 
fledged animals which vegetate on the face of the earth! 
Why did I not remain on my little farm, in the com- 
pany of Maſter Pangloſs, Cunegonda, the daughter of 
Pope Urban X. who has but one buttock, Friar Girof · 
fle, and the luxurious Paquetta ! 


AXEXERERERERXERERERXERE 


CHAP, VI. 


 Candidus's pleaſures, 


Ce wrote a moſt pathetic letter-to the Right 
Reverend Ed Ivan Baal Denk, in the extremity 


of his grief; who was ſo extremely affected with the 
fad picture of his miſery, that he adviſed the Sophi to 
diſmiſs Candidus from his employment. His Majeſty, 
in recompence for his ſervices, granted him a very 
conſiderable penſion, Thus eafed of the weight or 


: 
ö 
z 
i 


130 CG ANDID US; or, Chap. 6. 


grandeur, our philoſopher ſought the optimiſm of 
Pangloſs in the pleaſures of private life. Hitherto he 
ſeemed to have lived for others, and to have 

that he had a ſeraglio. He now recollected this eir- 
cumſtance with that emotion which the very idea of 
a ſeraglio inſpires. Let all things be prepared, ſaid 
he to his prime eunuch, tor my entrance among my 
wives. My Lord, replied the {queaking gentleman, 
it is now that your Exceilence deſerves the name of 
wiſe. Men, for whom you have done ſo much, were 
unworthy your attention; but women It may be 
fo, ſaid Candidus very modeſtly. 

In the centre of a garden, in which nature was aſ- 
ſiſted by art to develop her charms, ſtood a fmal! fa- 
bric whoſe ſtructure was fimple, yet elegant, and 
therefore quite different from thoſe which are (een in 
the ſuburbs of the moſt magiiticent cities in Europe, 
Candidus appreached this te nple, bur not without a 
bluſh. The ſoft air ſpread a delicious fracrance 
round the peaceful manſion. The flowers amorouſly 
entwined, ſeemed guided by the inſtin& of pleaſure; 
nor were they only the flowers of a day: the role ne- 
ver loſt its vermillion. The remote view of a ſhag- 


gy rock, whence fell a rapid torrent, ſeemed calculat- 


ed to invite the ſoul to that ſweet melancholy which 
precedes enjoyment, Candidus trembling, entered 
the ſaloon, where taſte and magnificence were ele · 
gantly Giiplayed; a fecret charm thrilled through 
every ſenſe. He beholds, breathing upon the canvas, 
the youthful Telemachus in the midſt of the nymphs 


of Calypſo's court He then turns his eyes to a half. 


naked Diana flying into the arms of Endymion. But 
his agitation increaſed, when he beheld a Venus faith- 
fully copied from that of Medicis All at orce he is 
truck with the ſound of divine muſic; a number of 
young Circaſſian women appeared covered with their 
veils; they form around him a dance agreeab'y 


imagined, and more veritable than thoſe which are 


Chap. 6. ALL For THe Besr, 121 
exhibited upon the ſtage after the death of your Cz- 
ſars and your Pompeys., 

At a certain ſignal, their veils dropt: their expreſ- 
five features add new lite to the entertainment: they 

iſe every bewitching attitude, but without any 

rent defign : one by her leering eyes expreſſed a 
boundleſs pallion; another in a foft languor ſeemed 
to expect pleaſure without ſeeking it; a third bends 
forward, but raiſed hericli unmediately fo as to afford 
a tranſient glance at thoſe ravithing charms, which at 
Paris the fair ſex ſo protulely dilplay ; à fourth care- 
lefsly throws back the ſkirt of her robe, and diſcovers 
a leg, which ot itſeif was futhcient to inflame a man of 
delicacy. he dance ceales, and the beauntics (tand 
motionle1s. 

The ſilence that reigned recall: Candidus to him- 
felf; the fury of love ruſhes into his heart; bis infa- 
tiable looks wander on all fides; he kiffes the inffam- 
ing lips and motitened eyes; he puts his hand on balls 
w:iter than alabaſter ; their heaving and elailic mo- 
tion makes the hand recoil; he admires the due pro- 
portions; he obſerves the ruddy tips, like the buds of 
the new fpringiag role, that do not blow till re- 
created by the Letiedacent rays of the ſang he kiſſes 
them with ecſtaſy, and his mouth ſticks cloſe to 
them, 

Our pl: loſopher contemplites with attention one 
of a more delicate ſhip- nd 1 ajelttc deportment than 
the reſt; but throws his handkerchief to a young 
nymph whoſe languiſhing eyes ſ:emed peculiarly to 
court his affection, and whole beauty was improved 
by her bluthes, The ennnch iaſtantly opened the 
door of an apartment which was conſecrated to the 
myſteries of love, The lovers entered, and the eu- 
nuch ſaid to his maſter, You are now going to be hap- 
Py. Oh, replie ! Candidus I kope I am 

The cieling and the walls of this delightful cham- 
ber were covered with mirrors, and in the middle Rood 

F 


* CANDIDUS; or, Chap. 
a conch of black ſatin, Here he ſeated the fair Cir- 
caſſian, and began to undreſs ber with inconceivable 
atertneis. The good creature did not interrupt him, 
except to expreſs her affection by her kiſſes. O, my 
Lord, ſaid ſhe, like a true Mahometan, how happy 
vou have made your flave! How you honour her by 
your tranſports! Theſe few words charmed our 
philoſopher. He was loſt in ecitacy, and every t 


he beheld was entirely new to him, What difference 


between Cunegonda grown ugly, and violated by 
Bulgarian heroes, and a young Circathan of eighteen, 
who was never raviſned! This was the firſt time that 
pocr Candièus had talted pleafure. The objects 
which he devoured, were repeated in the glaſs, 
Which way ſoever he turned his eyes, he faw the 
black ſatin contraſted with the whiteſt ſkin in the u. 
niverſe. He beheld—— but I am obliged to com - 
ply with the falſe delicacy of our language. Let it 


ſuffice to ſay, that our philoſopher was completely 


happy. 
o maſter, my dear Maſter Pangloſs! cried Candi- 


dus quite tranſported, all is full as well here as in 


Eldorado; nothing but a fine woman can fatisfy the 


deſires of man. I am as happy as it is pe flible to be. 


Leibnitz is in the right, and you are a great philo- 


topher: for inftance, I mike no doubt but you, my 
lovely angel, are inclived towards optimiſm, as you 
have always been happy. Alas! replied the Circaſ- 
fizn, I know not what you mean by optimiſm ; but 
your ſlave was never happy before to day, If my 
lord will deign to hear me, I will convince him of this 
by a conciſe relation of y adventures, With all my 


| heart, ſaid Candidus: I am in a proper ſtate of tran» 
quillity to liſten to a tale: and ſo the lovely ange! 


began her Cory as follows, 


Chap. 7. Art ror Tan Bis r. 123 


WENENEEEEERERTAEIENRE 
CHAP. vn. 
The hiſtory of Zirza, 


Y father was a Chriſtian, and I alſo am a Chrif- 
tian, as he informed me. He dwelt in a ſmall 
hermitage in the neighbourhood of Cotatis, where he 
attracted the veneration ot the faithful, by his fervent 
devotion, and auſterity of manners, which was ſhock- 
ing to human nature. The women came in crouds 
to pay him homage, and took a ſingular delight in 


kiling his backſide, which was every day gored with 


ſtripes of diſcipline, I certainly owe my being to one 


of the moſt devout of them. I was brought up in a 
ſubterraneous cave near my father's cell. I was twelve 


years old, without having once iſſued from this tomb, 


as I may call it, when the earth trembled, with a ter- 


rible noiſe : the vault where I lay funk down, and 1 
was with difficulty taken from under the rubbiſh. I 
was half dead, when, for the firſt time in my life, my 


eyes were ſtruck with the light of day. My father 


took me into his hermitage as a predeſtined child: 
the whole affair appeared ſtrange to the people. My 
r cried out a miracle, and the people joined in 
1 was > ales —_ which, in the Perſian language 
ſignifies ch of Providence. It was not long before 
the beauty of your poor ſlave excited the curiofity of 
the public, The women began to viſit the hermitage 
leſs frequently, and the men much oftner. One of 
them faid he lov 1 me. Wicked wretch, cried my 


father, art thou qualified to love her? She is a trea - | 
ure which God hath committed to my care: he ap · 


Seared to me laſt night in the figure of a venerable 
| pur 2 B 


"re 


11,9099 - * 
La 5 do x 2 4 
+ ot . . _ —R—_ * 
2 * 6 — _ — 4 p 
= * — - — - 2 — 
* -< - — 
— — 
— * — _— ——— 
— 8 Fe _ ＋— —ꝛ — — - 
_ = - IE: — — 


— —_— EEEIEN 
— — coli — 


124 C AN DID US; or, Chap. 9. 
hermit, and commanded me not to part with her for 
leſs than two thouſand crowns, Be gone, vile beg- 
var, led thy impure breath ſhould contaminate her 
charms, I confeſs, anſwered the youth, that I have 
only a heart to offer her; but, monſter, art thou not 
aſhamed to proſtitute the name of the Deity to thy a- 
vaiice? With what face, wretch as thou art, doſt 
thou dare to aſſert that God ſpake to thee? It is de- 


yrading the Almighty to repreſent bim converſing 


w:th men like thee. O blaſphemy! cried my father 
in a violent paſſion: God himſelf commanded that 
 blaſphemers ſhould be toned, Saying theſe words, he 
murdered my unhappy lover, and his blood ſpurted 
in my face. Now, though 1 was yet unacquainted 
with love, I found myſelf ſo far intereſted in the fate 
of my lover, that the ſight of my tather became inſup- 


portable to me. TI reſolved to leave him: he perceiy+. 
ed my deſign. Ungrateful girl, ſaid he, it is to me 


thou art indehted for thy being; thou art my daugh. 
ter, and yet thou hateſt me! but thou ſhalt no longer 
hate me without cauſe. He kept his word but too 
religiouſly. During five ſad years which I paſſed in 
tears 2nd groans, neither my youth nor faded beauty 
had power to relax his ſeverity . Sometimes he would 


thruſt a thouſand pins into every part of my body; 


then with his diſcipline he would cover my backſide 
with blood. That give you leſs pain than the pins, 


faid Candidus. True, my Lord, replied Zirza. At 


laſt, however, I found means to eſcape ; and not dar- 
ing to confide in any man, I hid myſelf in the woods, 
1 hree days I ſpent without focd, and ſhould certainiy 
have died of hunger, but for a tyger to whom I had 


the good fortune to be agreeable, and who was kind 


enough to divide his prey with me. But w.s often 
dreadfully frightened by this terrible animal: the 


brute had once like to have raviſhed from me the 


flower, the plucking of which has given your Lord- 
ſhip fo much pain and pleaſure. My food gave me 


„ © 1 @ = © 


1 


Chap. 7. ALL Fort This BesrT, 125 
the ſcurvy: but [ was no ſooner cured than I follow - 
ed a ſlave merchant who was travelling to Tetlis, 
where the plague then raged, and I ſoon became in- 
fected. Theſe misfortunes, however, had fo little 
affected my charms, that the purveyor of the court 
thought fit t» purchaſe me for your uſe, It is now 
three months that I hve languiſhed among the reit of 
your wives: we 2 | began to imagine ourſelves deſpiſ- 
ed, O, Sir, tt you did but xnow how difagreeahle 
and impro; er thei eunuchs are to conſole neglected 
girls. In ſhort, I have not yet lived eighteen years, 
twelve of which 1 pafled in a dungeon, I have felt aa 
earthquake; I was ſprinkled wich the blood of the 
firſt amiable man I had feen; during five whole years 
I endured the moſt cruel torture; I have had the 
ſcurvy and the plague. Pining in the midſt of a 
company of black and white monſters, ſtill preſerving 
that which I had ſaved from the fury of a tyger, and 
curſing my deſtiny, I ſpent three long months in this 
ſeraglio; and ſhould moſt certainly have died of the 
green ſickneſs, it your Excellence had not honoured 
me with your embraces. 

O heavens! ſaid Candidus, is it poſſible at your 


age to have experienced ſuch ſad misfortunes ? What 


would Panglols ſay if he could hear your ſtory ? but 
your misfortunes as well as mine are at an end. Things 
are not now ſo bad; do you think they are? Siy- 
ing theſe words he renewed his careſſes, and became 
more and more confirmed in the opinions of Fan 
gloſs, | 


126 CANDID US; o, Chap 
| 
. 


erer tcer derer 
CHAP vil 


Candidus's diſguſt. A meeting which he did not ex- 
| feet. : 


UR philoſopher, in the midſt of his ſcraghio, dif. 

F tributed his favours with tolerable impartiality: th 
de enjoyed the pleaſure of variety, and returned with ca 
freſh ardour ro the fair fave. But this did not con- A 
tinue long. Ile now began to feel violent pains in his hb 
Joins, and was alſo frequently afflicted with the cho- h 
J 

1 

{ 

; 

| 


lic. Tn being happy he became emaciated, Zirza's 
neck appeared acither ſo white nor ſo admirably tura- 
ed; her ſhape loſt half it delicacy; her eyes, in the 
eyes of Candidus, ſeemed leis ſparkling ; her complexi- 
on appeared leſs beautiful, and the raviſhing veraul. 
lion of her lips ſeemed quite faded. He perceived 
that ſhe did not walk well, and was not entirely ſa- 
tisſied with her breath. He alſo diſcovered a mole 
where he had conceived no blemiſh, The impetuo 
fity of her paſlion became troubleſome. In his other 
wives he cuoly obſerved many defects, which, during 
his firſt tranſports, had eſcaped bis notice: their 
lewdneſs grew offenſive. He was aſhamed to have 
followed the example cf the wiſeſt of all men, et in 
tenit amariorem marte mulierem. 

Candidus, ſtill firm in his Chriſtian ſentiments, 
ſauntered for want of employment in the ſtreets of 
Sus; where, to his great ſurpriſe, a gentleman richly 
dreſſed, caught him in his arms, calling him by his 
name. ls it poſſible, faid Candidus, bleis my fpiric! 
It cannot be—— Yet there is ſo ſtriking a reſemblance 
Abbe Perigourdin—— It is even fo, replied Peri- 
gourdin, Candidus ſtept back three paces, and in - 
genuoufly ſaid, But are you happy, my dear Sir? A 


Chap. 8. ALL For Thr B26 7. 127 
fine queſtion truly, anſwered Perigourdin : the little 
trick which I put upon you at Paris, ſerved oaly to 
eſtabliſh my credit. The p-lice employed mea while; 
but diſagreeing with them at laſt, I threw off che 
eecleſiaſtical habit, which was of ule no longer to me, 
and went over to England, where thoſe of my pro- 
fefion are better paid, I revealed all that 1 knew, 
and all chat 1 did not know, of the ſtrength and weak 
nels of the country I had quitted. I fwore that the 
French were a rafcally people, and that London was 
the only magazine of good ſuf: ; in thort, I made a 
_ conſiderable fortune, and am cone hither to negotiates 
a treaty at the court of Perſia, in which the Sophi is 
bound to exterminate every European who [hall enter 
his do ninions in fearch of cotton or ilk, to the pre- 
judice of the Fongltth. The cbject of your eambaily, 
laid our philotopher, is doubtleſs very commendable; 
but, Sir, yon are a great raſcal : 1 do not like viilany, 
and | have thme interest at court: tremble, therefore, 
for your profperity is at an end; you will ſoon feel 
the punith:inent due to your crimes. © Moſt Noble Lord 
Candivus, ſaid Perigourdin, falling on bis knees, have 
mercy on me: I am driven to wickednels by an irre- 
filtible impulſe, ia the fame manger as you are impel- 
led to virtue. I perceived this fatal incligatioa che 
moment I was acquainted with Mr. Walſp, and be- 
came a writer in the Fealles= — * Feulles crics 
Candidus, what are thoie ? they are, replied Per1- 
gourdin, certain pamphlets of feventy Pages, in which 
the public are periodically entertained with ſcandal, 
fatire, and Billingſgate. It is an honeſt man, who 
having learned to read and write, and not being able 


This is one of the thirty or forty periodical papers printed at P. 
| tis, It is 0aly known in France, where it meets with ſucceſs among 
all ranks, But theſe looſe ſhcets of ſeventy two pages mult not be 
confounded with others, compriſed under the ſame number of pages, 
wherein the author is indulgent to himſelf, and theſe Papers, however, 
re much eſtcemed by philoſophers. 
F 4 


128 
to continue Jeſuit ſo long as he could have withed, ſet 


about this pretty little performance, in order to buy 


lace for his wife, and bring up his children in the fear 
of God, There are a Iſo a ſet of honeft gentlemen who for 
a few pence, and now and then a gill of bad wine, 
aſſiſt the other hone/# man in carrying on his work, 
This Monſieur Waltp is a member of an extraordinary 
club, whoſe chief amuſement is to make a tew drunk- 


en people deny their God: or to aſſiſt ſome poor fool 


in ſpending his ſortune, break his furniture, and then 
ſend him a challenge; theſe are ro more than little 
gentilities, which theſe gentlemen call miſtifications, 
and which nevertheleſs merit the notice of the police, 
In ſhort, this very honeſt: Monſieur Walſp, who de 
nies his ever having been ſent to the galleys, is bleſſ. d 
with a lethargy which renders him inſenſible to the 
ſevereſt truth; and it is impoſlible to rouſe him but by 
certain violent means, which he endures with a mag- 
nanimity and reſignation beyond all belief. I labour- 
ed ſome time under this celebrated author ; I became 
famous in my turn, and had juſt left Monſieur Walſp, 


with an intention to begin for myſelf, when I had the 


honour to pay my reſpects to you at Paris—— You 
are a vile rogue, faid Candidus; but your ſincerity 
moves me. Go directly to court, and preſent yourſelf 
to the Right Reverend Ed lvan Baal-Denk: I will 


write to him in your favour, on condition that you 


promiſe to become an honeſt man, and that you do 
not inſiſt on having thouſands of people killed, for 
the ſake of a little ſilk and cotton. Perigourdin pro- 
miſed all that Candidus deſired of him, and they 
parted friends. 


CANDIDUS; er, Chap. 8. 


T c mms aan Sms 


Chap. 9g. ALL For THE BE r. 129 


eee eee 


CHAP. IX. 


Candidus's diſgrace, travels, and adventures. 


o ſooner was Perigourdin arrived at court, than 
be uſed all his art to gain the miniſter, an ruin 
his bene factor. He rep-rted that Candidus was a 
traitor, and that he had ſpoken diſreſpectfully ot che 
ſacred whilkers of the king of kings. It was the 
general opinion of the courtiers, that he ought to be 
roalted at a flow fire; but the Sophi, with more hu - 
manity, was graciouſly pl-aſed to condemn him only 
to perpetual baniſhment, after having kiſſed the ſoles 
of his accuſer s feet, according to the cuſtom of Per- 
fia, Perigourdin ſet out in order to put this ſentence 
in execution: he found our philoſopher in tolzrable 
health, and almoſt diſpoſed to renew his happinels, 
My dear friend, ſaid the Engl:th ambaſſador, with the 


utmolt regret I come to acquaint you, that you mult. 


quit this kingdom with all poſſible haſte, ana alſo 


that you mult kiſs the foles of my feet with fincere 


contrition, lor the enormous crimes of which you have 
been guilty.—— Kits the ſoles of your feet! cried 
Candidus; upon my word, Mr. Abbe, you carry your 
jokes too far; I do not comprehend you. He had 


icarce ſpoken, vefore the mutes, which attended Peri- 


gourdin, entered the room, and immediately took off 
his ſhoes, He was then told, that he mult either ſub- 
mit to this humiliation, or be impaled, Candidus, 
in virtue of his free agency, killed the Abbe's feet. 
They clothed him in a robe of coarſe canvas, and the 
| hangman drove him out of the city, crying aloud.— 


He is a traitor ! ke has ſpoken diſretpectfully of the 


Sophi's whiſkers, even of the whiſkers of the great 
Ling ! 1 


* 5 


130 c AN DID vs; or, Chap. 9. 
But what was the officious Cenobite doing, whilſt 
his favourite was thus diſgraced ? I really cannot tell. 


Who can depend on prieſts or princes! 
In the mean time our hero trudged ſorrowfully a- 
long. I never in my life, ſaid he to himſelf, ſpoke of 
the king cf Perſia's whilkers. I am fallen at once 
from the pinacle of fortune into the abyſs of miſery, 
becauſe I am accuſed, by a wretch, who has violated 
all laws, of a crime which I never committed; and this 
fellow, this perſecutor of virtue, is happy. | 
Candidus, after ſeveral days march found himſelt 
on the borders of Turky. He directed his ſteps to 
wards Propontis, being determined to fix there once 
more, and to ſpend the remainder of his life in culti- 
vating his garden, In paſſing through a ſmall town, 
he obſerved a multitude of people gathered together, 
He enquired the cauſe of this effect. Tis a very odd 


affair, anſwered an old man: you mult kaow, that, 


ſome time ago, the rich Mehemet obtained in marri-' 
age the daughter of the Janifary Zamoud: he found 
her not a virgin, and very naturally, according to 


law, cut off her noſe, and ſent her back to her fa - 


ther. Zamoud, enraged at the affront, as was quite 
natural, in the firſt tranſport of his fury, cut off the 
head of his disfigured daughter, at one ſtroke of his 
ſcimitar, His eldeſt fon, who had a great affection 
for his filter, which you know is natural encugh, in 
the violence of his paſſion, very naturally plunged a 
dagger in his father's breaſt ; then like a lion, whoſe 
rage increaſes at the fight of his own blood, the young 
Zamoud flew to the houſe of Mehemet, and having 
killed half a dozen flaves who oppoſed his entrance, 
he murdered Mebewet, his wives, and two children in 
the cradie; after which he put an end to his own 


liſe with the dagger, yet recking with the blood of his | 


father, and of his enemies, which, you know, was al- 
fo quite natural. 0 norribl:! cried Candidus. © 


Poſſibly he was grown weary of patronifing Candidus. 


* 
. 


Chap 9. ALL FOR THE BEST, 121 
Maſter Pangloſs! if theſe barbarities are natural, 
would you not confeſs that nature is corrupted, anc 
that all things are not ? No, replied the old man; 
the pre-eitablithed harmony - © heavens! cried 
Candidus, am I deceived ? Are you not Pang loſs hin. 
ſe]? *Tis even fo, faid the old man; I knew you + 


| firſt, but 1 had a mind to penetrate into your fent 


ments before I diſcovered mytelf. Come, let us re. 
ſon a little upon contiagent effects: let me ſee whac 
progrels you have made in the ſchool of witlom. 
Truly, Malter Pangloſs, ſaid Candidus, you time it 
very ill: inform me rather what is become ut Cune- 
gonda, and where is Friar Girofllke, Paquetta, 281 


the daughter of Pope Urban. I know rothing of the 
matter, replie4 Pangloſs; tis now two years fince I 
left our habitation in fearch of you. I have travellzd 


over all Turky, and was now going to the court of 
Perſia, where, as | was informed, you bad made your 
fortune, I remained in this town among theſe good 


people, only to recover a little ſtrength in order to 


purſue my j urney. What do I fee! faid Canzidus 
in aſtoniſhment. Tou have loſt an arm, my dear Pan- 
glois, That's nothing at all, replied Pang loſs; there 
is nothing more common than to fee people with bur 


one eye and one arm in this beit of worlds, The ac- 


cident happened in my journey to Mecca, Our cara- 
van was attacked by a troop of Arabs; and as our e- 
ſcort made reſiſtance, the Arabs being the ſtrongeſt, 
according to the laws of war, maſſacred ns all, 
About five hundred people were killed in this affair, 
among whom were about a dozen women with child, 
For my part, I eſcaped with only a cloven ſkull, and 
with the lots of an arm. You fee I am ſtil] living, and 
have always found that every thing was for the be?, 
But you yourſelf, my dear Candidus, how happens it 
that you have a weoden leg? Candidus then related 
his adventures. Our philoſophers then returned to 
Propontis, — themſelves as they went aleng 
| F 6 


232  CANDIDUS; or, Chap. 10. 


with reaſoning on phyſical and moral evil, on free 


will and — on monades and pre-eſtabliſh- 
ed harmony. 


eee x Os 


C HAP. X. 


The arrival of Candidus and Pangloſs in Propontis, 
what they ſaw there, and what became of them, 


'7HY did you grow weary of cultivating your 


garden, my dear CandiJus? ſaid Pangloſs. 


Why could we not be content with our preſerved ei- 
tron and piſtachio nuts? Why were you ticed of be- 


ing happy? Why, becauſe all things are neceſſary in 
the beſt of worlds, it was therefore requiſite that you 


ſhould undergo the baſtinado in the preſence of the 
king of Perſia; that you ſhould have your leg cut off 
to make the Suſians happy, to try the ingratitude of 
mankind, and to draw dc wn puniſhment on the heads 
of ſome villains who deſerved to ſuffer. Thus con- 
verſing, they came to their old dwelling, The firſt 
objects which ſtruck their eyes were Martin and pa- 
quetta, in the habit of flaves. Whence comes this 
ſtrange change? ſaid Candidus, tenderly embracing 


them. Alas they replied ſighing, You have no long- | 
er a place of abode; another is intruſted with the cul- | 


tivation of your garden; he eats your preſerved citron 
and piſtachio nuts, and uſes us like negroes. Who is 
this other? ſaid Candidus, *T'is, ſaid they, the ge- 
neral of the marine, the leaſt humane of al! human 
beings. The Sultan, willing to reward his ſervices, 
without being at any expence, confiſcated all your 
poſſeſhons, under pretence that you were gone over to 
his enemy, and condemned us to fla cry, B-lieve me, 
Candidus, added Martin, and proceed on your jours 
ney, I have always told you, that cycry thing is for 


Chap. 10+» ALL FOR THE BssT, 153 


the worſt; the ſum of evil greatly exceeds the ſum of 


good ; depart, and I do not deſpair of your becoming 
2 Manichean, if you are not one already. Panylots 
was going to argue in torm; but Candidus interrupt» 
ed him by enquiring atter Cunegonda, the old wo- 
man, Friar Giroflze, and of Cacambo. Cacambo is 
here, replied Martin; he is buly in cleaning the com- 
mon fewer. The old woman is dead ot a kick on the 
brealt which was given her by an eunuch. Friar Gi- 
rofflee is entered among the Janifaries, Madam Cu- 
negonda is grown fat again, and has recover:d her 
former beauty; ihe is in our malter's ſeraglio. What 
a ſtring ot unhappy wretches ! ſaid Candidus. Was 
it necei{iry that Cunegonda ſhould recover her beauty 
to make me a cuckold ? It is ot little importance, ſaid 
Paiiglots, whether Madam Cunegouda ve handiome 
or ugly; whether the is in your arms, or in thote of 
another; it makes no difference in the general ſyltem: 
for my part, I wiſh her a numerous polterity, Phi- 
loſophers never concern themſelves by whom women 
have children, provided they have them at all. Po- 
pulation— Alas, faid Martin, philoſophers had much 
better employ themſelves in contributing to the hap- 
pineſs of a few individuals, than undertake to multi- 


ply the ſuffering ſpecies — While they were ſpeak. 


ing, they heard a great noiſe. Twas the general who 
had ordered a dozen ſlaves to be flogged for his amuſe- 
ment. P:nglois and Candidus terrified, left their 
iriends, with tears in their eyes, and haſtily took the 
road to Conitantinople, 

Here they found every body in an uproar; the fire 
began in the {ſuburbs of Pera: it had already conſum- 
ed five or ſix hundred kouſes, and two or three thou - 
fand people had periſhed in the flames. What a ſhock- 
ing diſaſter ! cried Candidus. All for the beit, ſaid 
Pangloſs: thefe little accidents happen every y-ar. It 
is very natural that fire ſhould catch wooden houſes, 


and that thoſe houſes ſhould burn. Beſides, it deli- 


4 


134 CANDIDUS; or, Chap. rt. 
vers many honeſt people from a miſerable eziſtence 
What do I hear? faid one of the cflicers of the su. 
blime Port. How, wretch ! darelt thou fay it is all 
for the beſt, when half Conltantinople i is on fire? Go, 
dog, curſed prophet, go receive the puniſhment due to 
thy preſumption. In ſaying theſe words, he took Pan- 
gloſs by the middle, and threw him headlong into the 
flames. Candidus, half dead with fear, crept, as well 
as he could, into a neighbouring quarter, where things 
were more quiet; and what became of him, we — 
ſee in the next chapter. | 


NekeMeKeMeeNeM-NeNKeKeK x 
S | 
Candidus continues his journey; and in what capacity. 


J Have now no other courſe to take, ſaid our philo- 
ſopher, than to ſell myſelf for a ſlave, or turn 
Turk. Happineſs has abandoned me ſor ever. A 
turban would corrupt all my pleafures. 1 feel myſelf 
incapable of enjoying peace of mind in a religion full 
of impoſture, and which 1 ſhould never embrace but 
from the baſe motive of intereſt. No, I ſhall never be 
content if 1 ceaſe to be an honeſt man: I will there- 
fore become a flave. No ſooner had Candidus taken 
this reſolution, than he determined to put it in prac- 
tice. He fixed upon an Armenian merchant for his 
maſter : his character was very good, and he was re- 
puted to have as much virtue as an Armenian could 
poſſibly have. This Armenian was ready to fail for 
Norway : he took Candidus with him, hoping that a 
philoſopher might be ſerviceable to him in his trade, 
They imbarked, and the wind was ſo favourable to 
them, that they made their paſſage in half the time 
which is generally required. They had no occafion 


to purchaſe a wind of the Lapland magicians, and 


Chap. 11» 
therefore thought it ſufficient to give them ſome trifle, 
that they might not interrupt their good fortune oy 


ALL Fort Tae Besr.. 135 


their witchcraft ; which ſometimes happens, it one 
may believe Moreri's dictionary. 

As ſoon as they were landed, the Armenian made 
his market of whale blubber, and ordered our philo- 
ſopher to traver ſe the country in ſearch of dry fich. 
lle acquitted himſelf of his commiſſion as well as he 
could, and was returning with a number of rein - deer 
ſoaded with this commodity, reflecting deeply on the 
amazing difference which he diſcovered between the 
Laplanders and other men, when he was accoſted by 

un extreme little Laponeſe. Her head was rather 
larger than the reſt of her body, her eyes red and fie- 
ry, her noſe flat, and her mouth reached from ear to 
ear: ſhe bid him good morrow, with the moſt engag- 
ing air imaginable, My dear little Lord, faid this a- 
nimal, who herf-lt was but one foot ten inches high, 
you are exceedingly charming; be ſo kind as to love 
me a little. 
neck. Candidus puthed her from him with inezpreſ- 
ſible horror. She cried out; her huſband advanced, 
accompanied by a number of his countrymen, What 
is the meaning of this noiſe? ſaid they. Tis, ſaid 
the little animal, only this ſtranger —— alas! I can- 
not ſpeak for grief; he deſpiſes me, I underſtand 
you, ſaid the huſband, LImpolite, uncivil, brutal, in ; 
famous, cowardly raſcal, thou haſt brought ſhame 
upon my houſe ; thou halt done me the greateſt inju- 
ry; thou haſt refuſed to lie with my wife, Is the man 
mad ? ſaid our hero. What would you have ſaid, had 
1 lain with ber? 1 ſhould have wiſhed you all manner 


of proſperity, fail the angry Laplander ; but thou 


deſerveſt my utmolt indignation. So ſaying, be ex- 
erciſed his ſtick upon the ſhoulders of Candidus with- 
out mercy, The rein · deer were ſeized by the relati- 
ons of the affronted huſband ; and Candidus, fearing 
vcrie treatment, was vbliged to betake himſelf to his 


So ſaying, ſhe threw her arms about his 


136 CANDIDUS; co, Chap. 12. 
heels, and -vermIre to renonunee his good maſter, for 


he durſt not appear before him without money, with. 
out fiſh, and without rein-deer. 


re. 


c aiFT 
Candidus continues his journey, New adventures, 


(Andidus wandered a long time, withont even 
knowing whither he wouli go: he determined, 


he had heard, things went well, He found himſelf 
poſſeſſed of ſome little money, which the Armenian 


had given him; and, with this weak ſupport, he hop- 
ed to mangle his journey. This hope kept up his 
ſpirits, and he (lll enjoyed ſome happy moments, He 
chanced, one day, to meet, in an inn, with three tra- 


vellers, who were talking with earneſtneſs of a plenum, 
and materia ſubtilis, Right, ſaid Cindidus to him- 
ſelf, theſe are phiioſophers. Gentlemen, ſaid he, 25 
to the plenum, it is inconteſtibſe: there is no vacuum 
in nature, and the materia ſubtilis is well imagined, 
Then you are a Carteſian, faid the travellers. Yes, 
ſaid Candidus ; and, what is ſlill more, I am a Leih- 
nitzian. So much the worf: for yourſelf, replied the 
philoſophers. Deſcartes and Leibnitz had not common 
ſenſe. As for us, we are New tonians, and we glory 
in the diſtinction; if we diſpute, it is only to ſtrength- 

en our own ſentiments, for we are all of the {ame mind. 

We ſeek the truth upon Newtonian principles, becauſe 
we are convinced that Newton is a great man. 
And fo is Deſcartes, fo is Leibnitz, fo is Pangloſs, laid 
Candidus: theſe are great men worth all the others. 
You are very impertinent, friend, replied the philo- 
ſophers. Are you acquainted with the laws of reiran- 
gibility, of attraction, and of motion? Have pou read 


9 


at laſt, to make the beſt of his way to Denmar ,where, | 


Chap. 12. ALL ror THE BesrT, 137 
Doctor Clarke's refutation of your Leibnitz? Do you 
know what is meant by the centritugal and centripe- 
tal force? Do you know that colours are formed by 
denſity? Have you any notion ot the theory of light, 
and of gravitation? Are you ignorant of the period 
of 25,920 years, which unfortunately does not agree 
with chronology? No; I warrant, your ideas of all 


theſe things are falle and imperfect : learn to keep i- 


lence therefore, for a pititul Manade as you are; and 


be careful how you affront gentlemen, by comparing 
them with pigmies. Gentlemen, ſaid Candidus, it 


pang loſs was here, be would teach you ſurprifing 
things, for he is a great philoſopher : he has an abſo- 


lute contempt for your Newton, and, as I am his di- 


ſciple, Newton is no great favourite of mine, The 
philoſophers, quite enraged, fell upon Candidus, and 
our poor hero was drubbed moſt philoſophically. 

Their wrath appeaſing, they begged the hero par- 
don for their raſhneis; then one of them began to 
ſpeak, and made a very beanuuiul diſcourſe on Mid- 
neſt and moderation. 

During this converſation there happened to pals by 
a very pompous funeral, whence our philoſophers toox 
_ occaſion to comment on the ridiculous vanity of man- 
kind, Would it not, ſays ove of them, be much more 
rational for the relations and lriends of the deceaſed 
to carry, without ponp, the corpſe upon their own 
ſhoulders? Wou'd not the mourntul employment 


more effecually excite the idea of death, and produce 


the mult faintary and philoſophical effect? Would 
not this reficfion naturally arite ? “ This body which 


I carry is that of my friend, my relation; he is no 
more, and, like him, I mult ceate to exiſt ?'”” Might 


not ſuch a cuſtom, in ſome meaſure, diminiſh the 
crives committed in this unhappy world, and reclaim 
beings which believe in the ſoul's immo tality ? Man- 
kind are but too willing to keep the thouglit of death 

at a diſtance, that we ſhould be afraid of reminding 


:8 CANDIDUS; or, Chap. 12. 
them of their mortality too often. Why are not the 
weeping mother or huſband preſent at this ſolemnity 2 
The plaintive accents of nature, the piercing eries of 
deſpair, would do more honour to the aſhes of the 
dead, than all thoſe ſable mutes, and that ſtring of 
clergy, jovially ſinging pſalms which they do not un- 
derſtand. It is well faid, replied Candidus: if you 
did but always talk in this manner, without beating 
people, you would be a great philoſopher, 

DODiur travellers ſeparated with marks of mutual con. 

_ Hidence and friendſhip. Candidus, ſteering his courſe 

towards Denmark, ſoon found himſeif in the middle 
of a wood: in ruminating on the misfortunes which 
had befallen him in this beſt of worlds, he loſt his 
way. The day had confiderably declined when he 
perceived his miſtake. His courage failed, and for» 
rowfully lifting up his eyes to heaven, our hero, lean» 


ing againſt a tree, expreſſed himſelf in the following 


words : I have traverſed half this globe ; I have ſeen 
fraud and calumny triumphant : my ſole intention has 
been to be ſerviceable to mankind, yet I have been con- 
flantly perſecuted. A great king honours me with 
his favour and the baſtinado. I am ſ-nt to a delight- 
fal province, but with a wooden leg: there I taſted 
pleaſure after my misfortunes, An abbe arrives, and 
I protect him: by my means he inſinuates himſelt at 
court, and I am obliged to kiſs the toles of his feet, 
I meet my poor Pangloſs again, only to ſce him burnt, 
I ſtumble upon a company of philoiophers, a ſpecies 
of animals the mildeſt and moſt ſociable of any that 
are ſpread upon the face of the earth, and they beat 
me moſt unmercifully. Yet all muſt be right, becauſe 
Pangloſs ſaid ſo; nevertheleſs | um the moit miſerable 
His meditations were ſuddenly interrupted by pierc- 
ing cries, which not far off. His curioſity led 
him on. He beheld a young woman tearing her hair 
in the moſt violent agitation of deſpair, W hoſoever. 


CG — 262 4 G B 8 BZ F313 Kaki 


COW Cwy TT Ts 


Chap. #2. ALL For THE BiSr, 139 
you are, faid ſhe, if you have a heart, follow me. He 
followed ber, and the firſt object he beheld was a man 
and a woman extended on the graſs: their aſpe& be- 
ſpoke the elevation of their minds and their diltiaguith- 
ed origin ; their teatures, though disfigured by grief, 
expreſſed ſomething ſo intereſting that Candidus ſym- 
pathiſed in their ſorrows, and could not help eagerly 
inquiring the cauſe of their misfortunes. Theſe, faid 
the young woman, are my parents ; yes, they are the 
authors of my unhappy being, continued ſhe, throw- 
ing herſelf into their arms. They were forced to fly 
to avoid the rigour of an unjuſt ſentence : I attended 
them in their flight, and was contented to ſhare their 
misfortunes, in hopes that I might be of ſome fervice 


in procuring nouriſhment for them in the defart we 


were going to enter, We ſtopt here to repoſe z while, 


and unhappily diſcovering that tree, I was deceived 


in its fruit. O Sir! lam a moſt horrid criminal! Arm 
yourſelt in defence of virtue, and puniſh me as I de- 
ſerve, Strike! T hat fruit il gave it to my pa- 
rents; they eat of it with pleaſure: I rejoiced that I 
had relieved them from the torment of thirlt, Un- 
happily, I preſented them with 2 the truit is 


Candidus ſhook with horror; his hair Rood up- 
right; a cold ſo eat covered his whole body. He im- 


mediately did all in his power to aſſiſt this wretched 


famiiy; but the poiſon had already made fo much 
progreſs, that the belt antidote would now have been 
ineffectu tl. Dear, dear child, our only hope and 
coaifort! ſaid the expicing parents, forgive thytelt ; 
we ſiacerely forgive thee ; it was thy exceſſive tender 


neſs which deprives us of life — O generous ſtran- 


ger! be careful of our daughter: her heart is noble 
and tormed for virtue : it is a treaſure which we com- 
mit to thy care, infinitely more precious than our palt 
fortune, 
braces ; mix thy tears with ours. O heaven, what 


Deareſt Zenoide, receive our laſt em- 


140 CANDIDUS; or, "1 
delightful moments are theſe ' Thou haſt opened to 
us the door of the comtortlets dungeon, in which we 
have lived forty tedious years, We bleſs thee with 
our laſt breath, pray ing that thou maytt never forget 
the leſſons which our prudence dictated; and that 


they may preſerve thee from the danger to which 


thou wilt neceſſarily be expoſed ! 

Pronouncing theſe words, they expired Candi. 
dus had great difficulty to bring Zenoide to herſelf. 
The ſolitude of the place, and the pale light of the 
moon, rendered the melancholy ſcene ſtill more af. 
fecting. The day began to dawn before Zenoide re- 
covered the uſe of her ſenſes. She no ſooner opened 
her eyes, than ſhe defired Candidus to dig a hole to 
inter the bodies: even ſhe herſelf aſüũſted with a- 
Roniſhing reſolution. This duty being diſcharged, 
ſhe gave vent to her tears, Our philoſopher perſuad- 
ed her to quit this fatal ſpot ; and they walked along 
for ſome time, without knowing whither they went, 
At length they perceived a little cottage, which was 
inhabited by an old man and his wife, who, in the 
midſt of this deſart, were always ready to render all 


the ſervice in their power to their viltrefſed brethren, 


This couple were, in fact, what Philemon and Baucis 
are ſaid to have been. They had enjoyed the ſweets 
of Hymen forty years, without one bitter draught. 
Conſtant heath, the produce of temperaucs and tran- 
quillity; a pleaſing ſimplicity of manners; an e 
hauſtleſs fund of car.dour in their 4iſp-lition ; all the 
virtues for which man is indebted to himfclt alone, 
compoled the happy lot which heaven had been pleaſ- 
ed to grant them. Th-y were held in great venera- 
tion in the neighbouring hamlets, whole inhabitants, 
happy in their ruſticity, might have paſſed tor very 
honeit people, if they had been Catholics. T hey con- 
ſide red it as their duty to ſupport Ag aton and Suname 
{ſuch were the names of this old couple) and they now 
extended their charity to the two ſtrangers. Alas! 


oO... es a ar i. ans 


Chap. 13. Aru ror THe Beer. 14 
ſaid Candidus, what pity is it that you, my poor Pan- 

. „were burnt : I know you were quite right; but 
it was not in thoſe parts of Europe and Afia, which 

ve traverſes together, that all is for the belt: it is in 
Eldorado, which it is impoſſible to reach; and in a 
little cottage, ſituated in the coldeſt, the moſt barren, 
and the moſt diſmal country in the whole univerſe. 
What pleaſure ſhould I have had to hear you, in this 
cabin, talk of pre eſtabliſhed harmony and monades / 
| ſhould like to ſpend the reſt of my days among theſe 
honeſt Lutherans ; but it would oblige me to renounce 
going to maſs, and expoſe me to the laſh of the Jaur- 
nul Chretien. 

Can tivus was very def to dw_ the adventures 
of Zenoide, Modeſty hindered him from inquiring 
She obſerved him, and ſatisfied his anxiety by the fol - 

lowing recital, 


I N N KKEK 


CHAP. XIII. 1 
| 
| 


The ſtory of Zenoide. gau Candidus became in 


love with her, and the c:nſequences, 


Am deſcended from one of the molt ancient houſes 1 
of Den Hark: ove of my anceſtors periſhed in that "i 
place where the cruel Chriſtiern cauſed ſuch a num. | | 
ber of ſenators to be killed. The accumulited riches 4 


and hogours of my family ſerved only to render their 7 
misfortunes more illuſtrious. My father had the bold- 1 
neſs to diſoblige a man in power, by ſpeaking the | 
truth; he (uborned falſe accuſers, who charged him ue 
with ſevera! imagtnary crimes The judges were de- | | 4 
ceived: Alas! what judge can always avoid the ſnares | 
which calun ny ſpreads for innocence ? My father was 18 
condemacd to be beheaded on a ſcaffold Flight on- : | 
If eculd pref.rve him, and he took refuge with a | | 


142 CANDIDUS; or, Mes 
friend, one whom he thought worthy of this amiable 
appellation, We continued ſome time concealed in a 
caltle on the ſea · ſhore which belonged to him; and 


here we might have been ſtill ſecure, if the eruel 
wretch, taking advantage of our deplorable ſituation, 


had not exated a price for his friendſhip, which made 
us conſider him with deteſtation. The infamous crea- 
ture had conceived a violent paſſion for my mother 


and me: he made an attempt on our virtue by me- 


 thods unworthy of a gentleman, and, to avoid the 
effects of his brutality, we were obliged to expoſe our- 
ſelves to the moſt frightfa! dangers : we betook our- 
ſelves to flight a ſecond time, and you know the reſt. 
Here Zenoide finiſhed her relation, and ſhe began to 
weep afreſh. Candidus dried up her tears, and faid, 
in order to comfort her: It is all for the beſt, my dear 
Miſs ; for, if your father had not been poiſoned, he 


would, molt infallibly, have been diſcovered, and they 
Would have cut off his head: your mother would have 


died of grief, perhaps; and we ſhonld not now be in 
this poor cottage, where all things are much better, 
than in the moſt charming caſtle imaginable. Alas! 
Sir, replied Zenoide, my father never told me that all 
was for the belt, We all belong to one Cod, who 
loves us; but he wiil not exempt us from the devour- 
ing cares, the cruel diſtempers, the innumerable evils 


to which human nature is liable. In America, poi» 


ſon, and the bark grow clof+to each other. The hap- 
pieſt of mortals has ſhed tears. A mixture of pleaſures 
and pain conſtitutes what we call life; that is to ſay, 
a determined ſpace of time (always too long in the o- 
pinion of wiſdom) which ought to be employed in the 
being uſeful to the ſociety of which we are members, 

to rejo ce in the works of the Almighty, without foo 

liſhly enquiring into their cauſes; to regulate our 


conduct upon the teſtimony of our conſcience; and a. 
bove all, to reſpe& our religion: happy if we could 


always obſerve its » precepts! 


TSS E2STESRED LS 


ES oe a OO  Þ "FL 35 


— 
— 


| Chap. 13. ALL ror THE Basr. 143 

In this manner have 1 heard my honoured father 
frequently ſpeak. What prefumptuous wretches, 
would he ſay, are thoſe raſh ſcribblers who ſeek to pe- 
netrate into the ſecrets of the Almighty ? On the prin- 
ciple that God expects to be honoured by the number- 
leſs atoms to whom he has given exiſtence, mankind 
have united ridiculous chimeras, with the moſt reſpe&- 
able truths. The Derviſe among the Turks, the Bra- 
min in Per ſia, the Bonze in China, the Talapoin in 
India, all worſhip the Deity in a different manner ; 
nevertheleſs they enjoy peace of mind, though bewil. 
dered in obſcurity; thoſe who would endeavour to 
diſpel the miſt, would do them no ſervice ; he cannot 
te fd t love mankind, who would remore thei pre 


| You ſpeak like a philoſopher, ſaid Candides: may 
I preſume to aſk you, my deareſt young lady, of what 
religion you are. I was brought up a Lutheran, re- 
| plied Zenoide; it is the religion of my country. Eve- 
ry thing you ſay, continued Candidus, is a ray of light 
which penetrates my ſoul; you fill me with eſteem 


and admiration.— How is it poſſible that ſo much 


ſenſe ſhould inhabit ſo fair a body? Indeed, my dear 
Miſs, I love and admire you to ſuch a degree 
Candidus ſtammered out ſomething more; but Ze- 
noide, obſerving his confuſion, retired: from that mo. 
ment, ſhe avoided all occaſions of being alone with 
him, and Candidus ſought every opportunity of beinz 
either alone with her, or entirely by himſelf. He was 
ſeized with a melancholy, which, however was not 
unpleaſing: he was violently enamoured with Zeno- 
ide, yet endeavoured to diſſemble his paſſion ; but his 
looks betrayed the ſecret of his heart. Alas! ſaid he, 
if Pangloſs was here, he would give me good advice, 
for he was a great philoſopher. 


144 CANDIDUS; or, Chap. 14. 


OOO WOODWORK o 


Continuation of Candidus's amnur. 


S was obliged to be content with the poor 
4 conſolation of converfing with the charming Ze. 
noide in the preſence of the cd man and bis wife, 
And was it poſſible, faid he one day to the miſtreſs of 
his heart, that the king whom you were aliowed to 


approach, could permit ſuch a flagrant act of inju- 


ſtice to your family? You have great reaſon to hate 


| him, Alas! replied Zenvide, who can hate their 


king ? 

Who can avoid loving him who is intruſted with 
the glictering blade of the law? Kings are the viſible 
images of the Deity; we ought never to condemn 
their conduct: obedience and reipe& are the duties of 
good ſubjects. I admire you more and more, anſwer- 
ed Candidus; pray, Miss, are you acquainted with 
the great Leibnitz, and the great Pangloſs, who was 
burnt, after having eſcaped hanging ? Do you know 
the monades, the materia /ublilis, and the vortices ? 
No, Sir, ſaid Z noide; my lather never mentioned a- 
ny of theſe things; he gave me only a flight notion 
of experimental philoſophy, and taught me to deſpiſe 
every kind of philoſophy which did not directly tend 
to promote the happineſs of mankind ; which inſpires 
him with falſe notions of his duty to himſelf and to 
his neighbour ; which does not teach h im how to re- 
gulate his manners; which ſerves only to fill his mind 
with unintelligible words, and raſh conjectures; which 
cannot give a clearer idea of the author of our being, 
than that which we form fro» bis works ard the mi- 
racks which are daily performed be re our eyes Up- 
on my word, Mis, ſaid Caucidus, I aimire you beyond 


ar 


= 
tl 
2 
to 
th 
ne 
I 
£: 


Chap. 14. ALL ror Ths BBZ r. 145 


: I am inchanted; I am raviſhed ; you are 


certainly an angel ſent from heaven to confute the ſo- 
of Maſter Pangloſs. Ignorant animal that 1 
was! Aſter having endured a prodigious number of 
kicks on the backſide, of ſtripes acroſs my ſhoulders, 
of Girokes with a bull's pizzle on the ſoles of my feet; 
aſter having ſelt an earthquake; after having been 
| preſent at the hanging of Doctor Pangloſs, and lite ly 
ſeen him burat alive; after having been ignominiouſ- 
ly uſed by a vile Perſian; after having been plunder- 
ed by order of the divan, and drubbed by a company 
of philoſophers ; notwithſtauding all this, I believed 
that all was for the beit; but | am now entirely un- 
deceived. Nevertheleſs, nature never appeared to me 
ſo beautiful as ſince I have beheld you, The rural 
concerts of birds ſtrike my ears with a harmony, to 
which, till now, I was quite inſenſible. All nature 
blooms, and the beauty of your ſentiments ſeems to 
animate every object. I feel none of that voluptuous 
languor which I experienced in my garden at Sus; 
the paſſion vou inſpire is quite different, Forbear, ſaid 
Zenoide, leſt you offend that delicacy which you ought 
to reſpect. I will be ſilent then, ſaid Candid us, but 
that will only augment my paſſion. He looked ear- 
neltly at Z-noide, as he pronounced theſe words; he 
nerceived that ſh- bluſbed, and thence, like a man of 
experience, he conceived the molt flattering hopes. 
The young Dane continued for ſome time to thun 
her lover. One day as he was walking haſtily in the 
garden, he cried out in a tranſport of love, O that [ 
had but my Eldoradonian ſheep ! Why am I not able 
to buy a little kingdom !—— What would you make 
me? ſaid a voice that ſhot through the heart of our 
philoſopher ls it you, charming Zenoide ? ſaid he, 
falling upon his knees at her feet, I thought myſelf a- 
lone. The few words you ſpoke ſeemed to flatter my 


hopes. I fhu!l never be a king, and poſſibly never ſhall 


be rich; but if I were beloved by you—-— O do not 
G 


/ 


— 


146 C AN DID US; or, Chap. 13. 
turn away thoſe charming eyes, but let me read in 
them a confeſſion which alone can make me . 
Beautiful Zenoide, I adore you: for heaven's ſake be 
mercitul —Ah! what do I ſee? You weep. Gods, 
I am too happy. Yes, faid Zenoide, you are happy; 
nothing obliges me to conceal my ſenſibility from a 
perſon who deferves it. Hitherto you have been at- 
tached to my deſliny by the ties of humanity only: 
it is now time to ſtrengthen our union with more holy 
bonds. I have deliberately conſulted my own heart; 
do you alſo maturely reflect, and above all things re- 
member, that by marrying me you engage to become 
my protector; to ſoften and participate the miſeries 
which fate may ſtill have reſerved for me. Marry 
you? ſaid Candidus; theſe words have at once open- 
ed my eyes, and ſhewn me the imprudence of my 
conduct. Alas! ſweet lady, I am unworthy of your 
_ goodneſs: Cunegonda is yet living. Cunegonda, 
who is ſhe? my wife, replied Candidus, with his uſu- 
al ingenuity. 

Our lovers ſtood ſilent for ſome moments; they 
would have ſpoken, but the words expired upon their 
lips: their eyes ſwam in tears. Candidus held both 
her hands in his: he preſſed them to his heart; he 
devoured them with kiſſes. He had the courage to 
touch her heaving breaſt, and found that ſhe breathed 
with difficulty. His ſoul roſe up to his lips, which 
by preſſing thoſe of Zenoide, brought her to herſelf. 
Candidus thought he ſaw his pardon written in her 
eyes. Dear Candidus, ſaid ſhe, my diſpleaſure would 
but ill ref ay thoſe tranfports which my heart in ſpite 
of me approves. Yet hold; you will ruin me in the 
opinion of mankind, and you will ceaſe to love me 
when I am become the object of their contempt. Stop 
then, and reſpect my weakntſs. What! ſaid Candi- 
dus, becauſe the Cupid vulgar ſay that a girl is diſ- 
honoured in making her lover bappy ia following the 


Chap. 11. ALL ror THE BR 1. 147 
| dictates of nature, which in the early ages of 
the world —— 

We ſhall not relate all this intereſting converſa- 
tion; we ſhall content ourſelves with ſaying that 
Candidus's eloquence, embellihed by the expreſſi - 
ons of love, had all the effect that he could expect, 
on a young and tender hearted female philoſo- 
Our lovers, who had hitherto paſſed their time in 
diſquietude and afflidion, were now continually intoxi 
cated with pleaſure. The filence of the forelt, the 
mountains covered with brambles and ſurrounded with 
precipices; the frozen waters, and the barren ticlids 
with which they were ſurrounded, ſerved but to per 
ſuade them ot the neceſſity of love: they reſolved ne- 
ver to leave this trighttul folitude ; but deſtiny was 


not yet weary of her perſecutions, as we ſhall fee i 
the next chapter, 


p34ojoojooÞaoopo tp ectootoote dochoajectonioes be 
C H 942. XV. 
The arrival of Volhall, Fourney to Copenhagen. 


Andidus and Zenoide amuſed themſelves with 
reaſoning on the works of the Creator, on the 
worſhip due to him from mankind, on the duties of 
ſociety, more eſpecially on charity, which, of all other 
virtues, is the molt uſeful of our fellow creatures, 
They were not content with vain declamations: Can- 
didus taught youth to reſpet the ſacred reſtrictions of 
the law, and Zenoide inſtructed yc ung maidens in 
their duty to their parents; they united their endea - 
vours to ſow the prolific ſeeds of religion in juvenile 
minds. One day as they were employed in this pious bu- 
ſineſs, Suname acquainted Zenoide, that an old gentle 
man, with ſeveral attendants, was juſt come, and in · 
G 2 


148 CANDIDUS; or, Chap. 1;, 
qu red for a perſon who, ſhe was convinced by his de- 
ſcription, could he no other than the beautiful Zenoide, 
The gentleman who followed her cloſe, entered almoſt 
at the ſame inſtant, 

Zenoide fainted away as ſoon as ſhe ſaw him; but 
Volhall, unmoved at this affecting ſight, took her by 
the hand, and dragged her with ſo much violence that 
ſhe came to herſelf; but it was only to ſhed a torrent 
of tears. It is very well, niece, ſaid ſhe, with a ſe 
vere ſmile, | have caught you in fine company; no 
wonder you ſhould prefer it to the capital, to my 
Houſe, and to your own family, Yes, Sir, replied 


Zenoide, I prefer the habitation of truth and candourto 


that of treachery and impoſture. I ſhall never behold 


without horror, the place where my misfortunes be- 
gan, where I have had ſuch convincing proofs of your 
baſeneſs, and where you are the only relation I have. 


No matter, Miſs, replied Volhall, you ſhall follow 
me, if you pleaſe, though you were to have another 
fit. 80 ſaying, he dragged her along, and put her 
into a chaiſe, She had but juſt time to bid Candi - 
dus follow her, to bleſs her kind hoſt and hoſteſs, 

promiliag to reward them for their generous hoſpita- 

lity. 

One of Volhall's ſervants, being moved with Can- 
didus's affliction, and believing he had no other intereſt 
in the young lady than what virtue in diſtreſs might 
inſpire, adviſed him to take a journey to Copenhagen. 
He told him, he could probably get him admitted in- 


to Volhall's family, if he had no other reſource, Can- 


didus accepted his offer, and being arrived, his future 
comrade preſented him as a relation for whoſe fideli - 
ty be would anſwer. Maraut, ſaid Volhall, I conſent: 
you ſhall have the honour of waiting on a man of my 
rank and diſtinction; but be careful always to pay an 
implicit obedience to ny will: anticipate my commands 
if you are endowed with ſufficient penetration: re - 
— that : a man of my diſtinction We himſclt 


x 


J * * as. ths: al » a A mM ww  me2A Mm Wor 


{ 


e. EDS 


Chap. 16. Aut ror THE Besr, 149 
by converfiig with inch a wretch as you. Our phi- 


| lolopher replie it great ſubmiſſion to this imper- 


tinent harangue, and that very day was dreſſed in his 
maſter's liver 75 

One may eaſily imagine Zenoide's amazement and 
joy, when the recol.efted her lover among her uncle's 
ſervants. She gav him all the opportunities ſh: 


could, which Candidus judicioufly improved to their 


mutual ſatisfaction. They vowed an everlaſting con - 
fancy; nevertheleis Zenoide was far from being quit: 
eaſy : ſhe ſometimes condemned her paſſion for Can- 
didus, and would now and then afflit him for amvſe. 
ment ; but Candidus adored her: he knew that per- 
fection did not fall to the lot of man, much I-fs of 
woman. Zenoide recovered her good humour in his 
arms; the conſtraint they were obliged to obſerve 
increaſed their en oyment, and taey were till hap- 


CHAP. XVI. 


Hou Candidus found his wife again. Heu he was 


deprived of his miſtreſs. 


UR hero had no hardſhip to undergo but the 


haughiineſs of his maſter, and this was not pur. 


chaſing at too dear a rate the favours ot his miitrets, 
Happy lovers cannot conceal their paſſion io eaſily as 


is commonly imagined ; they ſoon betrayed their cn 
ſecret ; their connexion was no longer a myſtery to any 
one in the houſe, except to Volhall himfelf. Candi. 
dus was honoured with felicitations that made him 


tremble ; he expected the Rorm which was about to 


burſt over his head, and was in »o doubt that the 
perſon who had been ſo dear to him, was upon the 
point of accelerating his misfortunes, | 

G 3 


Pom, 


j 
; 
| 


For ſome days paſt Candidus had obſerved a wo- 


man, whoſe face bore a ſtrong reſemblance to that of 


Cunegonda: he now ſaw her again in the court-yard, 


but her garb was mean; beſides, there was not the 


leaſt probability that the favourite miſtreſs of a rich 
Mahometon ſhould appear in the court-yard of an inn 


at Copenhagen, Nevertheleſs, this diſagreeable ob- 


ject fixed her eyes on Candidus with great attention. 
She :ow precipitately approached, and ſaluted him 
with the moſt violent box on the ear he ever received 
in his life. I was not deceived, cried our philoſo her; 
© heavens, who could have thought it! What buſi- 
neſs have you here, after ſuffering yourſelf to be ra- 


viſhed by a Mahometan? Go, perfidious ſpouſe, 1 


know nothing of you. Thou ſhalt know me by my 


fury, ſaid Cunegonda, I know all thy wicked courſes, 
thy intrigue with thy malter's niece, thy contempt of 


me. Alas! it is three months fince I was turned out 


of the ſeraglio, becauſe I was no longer uſeful, A 


merchant bought me ro mend his linen, and having 
occaſion to make a voyage to theſe parts, brought me 


along with him, Martin, Cacambo, and Paquetta, 


whom he alſo purchaſed, are of the party. Doctor 
Panglofs alſo, by the greateſt chance imaginable, was 


a paſſenger in the ſame ſhip: we were caſt away a few 


miles from hence; I efcaped with honeſt Cacambo, 
whole fleſh, I aſſure thee, is as firm as thine; and 1 
have found thee again to my ſorrow, ſor thy infidelity 
iS maniſeſt. Tremble therefore, and dread the ven- 
geance ef an injured woman, 


Candidus was fo lupified with this moving ſcene, | 


bat he ſuffered Cunegonda to depart without conſi 
dering bow necefſary ir is to keep terms with thoſe 
who are in our ſecrets, when all at once Cacambo 
preſented himfe!f to his view. They tenderly em- 
braced, Candicus enquired into the truth of what 
be had beard, and was extremely: licted for the lo's of 


the great Pangloſe, who, aſter having been havged ard 


- 


VS 


Chap. 16. ATT FOR THE Bes r. 154 
burnt, was moſt miſerably drowned. He ſpoke of 
him with that effuſion of heart, which true friend{bipin- 
ſpires. A billet which Zenoide threw out of the win- 
dow, put an end to their converſation, Candidus 
opened it, and read as follows; 
„ Fly, my dear lover, every thing is diſcovered. 
An innocent and natural inclination, which does no 
injury to ſociety, is a crime in the eſtimation of cre- 
dulous and cruel men. Volha!l has this moment left 
my chamber, after treating me with the utmolt inhu- 
mauity: he is gone to obtain an order to have you 
immured in a dungeon. Fly, therefore, my dear, 
dear lover, and ſave a life which I am no longer fſuf- 
fered to enjoy. Thoſe happy days are paſt, when our 
mutual tenderneſs — Ah! wretched Zenoide, what 
haſt thou done to deſerve the wrath ot heaven! But 
wander: O do not forget thy dear Zenoide. 
Candidus, thy image will never be effaced from my 
heart,—— No, thou never knew how much I loved 
thee, —— Oh that thou couldſt receive from my burn- 
ing lips, my laſt farewel, and my laſt ſigh! I feel 
that I am ready to follow my unhappy father: I 
hold the world in abhorrence; it is all treachery and 
guilt.“ | | 
Cacambo, always retaining his wiſdom and pru- 
dence, drew along with him Candidus, who had loſt 
all the power of his ſenſitive faculties. They went, 
by the ſhorteſt way out of the city. Candidus did 
not open his mouth ; and they had got a good diſtance 
from Copenhagen, before he was rouſed from his le- 
thargy ; but, at laſt looking on his faithful Cacambo, 


he thus ſpoke, 


152 CANDIDUS; or, Chap. 1; 


GPCR ZE RIEL ld 
| CHAP. _—_— 


How Candidus intended ts kill himſelf, and did or 
effeftuate it. What happened to him in an inn. 


TYEAR Cacambo, formerly my fervant, now my 
equal, and always my friend, thou haſt partaken 
ſome of my misfortunes, thou halt given me ſalutary 


advices, thou haſt ſeen my love for Miſs Cunegonda. 


Alas! my dear old maſter, faid Cacambo, it is ſhe who 
played you this moſt baſe trick. Being informed by 
your companioas, that you was deep in love with Ze- 
noide, as the was with you, ſhe revealed the whole 
ſcene to the barbarous Volhall. Since this is the caſe, 
ſaid Candidus, death is my only refuge. Our philo- 
ſopher then taking a penknife out of his pocket, began 
to whet it with a compoſure worthy of an ancient 
Roman, or of an Engliſhman, What do you mean? 
| faid Cacambo. To cut my throat, faid Candidus. 
An excellent thought, replied Cacambo; but wiſdom 
ſhould never determine, till after mature deliberation; 
the means of death will be always in your own power, 
if you continue in the ſame mind. Be adviſed, my dear 
malter, and put it off till to-morrow ; the longer you 
defer it, the more courageous will be theaQion. I like 
thy reaſoning, ſaid Candidus ; beſides, if I ſhould cut 
my throat now, the gazetteer of Trevoux would inſult 

my memory : it is then determined, I will not cut my 
throat for this two or three days at leaſt, Thus con- 
verſing they arrived at Elſineur, a pretty conſiderable 

town, at a little diſtance from Copenhagen: here 
they reſted that night, and Cacambo applauded him- 
ſelf for the good effect which fleep had produced in 
the mind of Candidus. They took their leave of this 
town at break of day; and Candidus, always a philc- 


* 


\ 


g | — 


Chap. 11. ALL For THE 3586. 173 
ſopher, for the prejudices of youth are not eaſily ef · 
faced, entertained his friend Cacambo with a diſſer - 

tation on moral and phyſical good, with the diſcourſes 
of the wiſe Zenoide, and the true lights he had receiv. 

ed from her learned converſation. If Pangloſs was 
not dead, faid he, I would confute his ſyſtem beyond 
contradiction, God preſerve me from becoming a 
_ Manichean. My dear Miſtreſs has taught me to 
reſpe& the impenetrable veil þy which the Deity chuſes 


to conceal his defigns from "mankind. Perhaps man 
himſelf is the cauſe of the misfortunes under which 


he groans: fruit eaters are become carnivorous ani- 
mals. The favages we have ſeen devour only the 
Jeſuits, yet they live in perfect harmony among theme 
felves; and thoſe which, by chance, are ſcattered 
through the defart, and feed only upon roots and 
herbs, are certainly happy. Society has given birth 
to the moſt hainous crimes. There are people, who, 
from their ſituation, ſeem as it were obliged to deſire 
the death of their fellow creatures. The ſhipwreck 
of a veſſel, the burning of a houſe, and the loſs of a. 


battle, is the occaſion ot grief to tome, and of joy to 


others, Things go very ill, my dear Cacambo, and 
a wiſe man has nothing to do but to cut his threat 
as gently as p«fſible. You are in the right, ſaid 
Cacambo; but I perceive an inn, you muſt be thirſ- 
ty; come, my old maſter, let us take a glaſs, and 
then we will proceed in our philotophical diſquiſiti- 
ons. 


They entered the i inn, where a croud of peaſants 


| were dancing in the mid ile of the court, to the found of 
very bad inſtruments. A chearſul fmile tat on every 


face: it was a picture worthy the pencil! of Vatau. As 
ſoon as they perceived Candidus, a young girl took 
him by the hand, intreating him to dance. My ſweet 
laſs, replied Candidus, when a man has loſt his 
miſtreſs, found his wife, and but juſt heard of the 
death of the great Pangloſs, he can have no inclina - 


184 CANDID US; o, Chap. 17. 
tion to cut capers; beſides, I intend to kill myſelf to. 
morrow; and you know, when a perſon has but a 
few hours to live, he ſhould not waſte his time in 
dancing. Cacambo then advanced, and expreſſed 
himſelf in the following manner: Great philotophers 
have always had a paſſion for glory. Cato of Utica 
killed himſelf after having ſlept ſoundly ; Socrates 
ſwallowed hemlock after familiarly converſing with 
his friends; ſeveral Eogliſamen have blown out their 

brains after coming from an entertainment : but 1 
have never heard of any great man who cut his throat 
after dancing. No, my dear maſter, this glory is 
reſerved for you. Let us dance our bellies full to 
day, and we will kill ourſelves to-morrow. Dolt thou 
not obſerve, replied Candidus, that pretty lively 
 wench? There is ſomething very ſtriking in her 
countenance, ſaid Cacambo. She ſqueezed my hand, 

replied our philoſopher. Did yen take notice, faid 
Cacambo, of her little round breaſts, when her hand. 
kerchief flew back as ſhe was dancing? Yes, I obſerved 
them well, faid Candidus : if my heart was not full 
of the charms of Mils Zenoide.— But the little black 
girl interrupted Cacambo, and again beſought him to 
dance. Our hero was at laſt perſuaded, and danced 
with the genteeleſt air imaginable. He then embraced 
the pretty peaſant, and retired to his ſeat without 
_ aiking the queen of the ball to dance. Inmediately 
there was a confuſed murmur, both the actors and 
ſpectators were ſhocked at ſuch a manifeſt neglect. 
Candidus was ignorant cf his fau't, and therefore 
could make no apology. At length a great clown 
advanced, and gave him a flap in the face, which 
was returned by Cacambo with a kick in the belly. 
The inſtruments were ſcattered about in an inſtant, 
the women loſt their caps. Candidus and Cacambo 
behaved like heroes; but they were forced to betake 
themſelves to their heels, though quite crippled wil: 
the blows they had received, 


Chap 18. Aur For run BesT., 155 

1 am very unlucky; faid Candidus, leaning on his 
friend Cacambo; I had experienced great misfortunes, 
but I never expected to have had my bones broke for 
dancing with a peaſant at her own de ſire. 


«0D xDD n S 


CHA P, XVIIl. 


Candidus and Cacambs retire to an hoſpital, Adver- 


tere there. 


AAcambo and his friend were unable to proceed; 


4 they began to give way to that diltemper ot the 


toul which deſtroys all its faculties, dejection and de- 
pair: when looking up, they eſpied an hoſpital erected 
tor travellers. Cacambo entered, and Candidus fol- 
lowed him; they were treated in the manner in which 

people are generally treated for the love of God. Their 
wounds were ſpeedily healed : but they both got the 
itch, which was not to be cured in a few days. This 
idea drew tears from the eyes of our philotopher, and, 
ſcratching himſelf, he ſaid, O my dear Cacambo, why 
did{t thou hinder me from cutting my throat? Thy 


pernicious counſel hath plunged me again into diſgrace 


and misfortune ; it I ſhuuld now cut my throat, they 
would ſay, in the Journal of Trevoux, He was a cow- 
ard; he killed himſelf becauſe he had the itch, See to 
what thou haſt expoſed me by thy injudicious friend- 
ſhip. Our misfortunes are not without a remedy, faid 
Cacambo; if you will follow my advice, we will be- 
come brothers of the hoſpital; I underſtand a little of 
ſurgery, and [ will engage torender our woful condicion 


ſupportable. Ah! cried Candidus, pox take all the 


aſſes in the world, and eſpecially thoſe chirurgical aſſes, 
fo fatal to human nature! No, I will not ſuffer thee 
to pals for what thou art not; it were a piece of 
treachery, the con ſequeaces of which might be terri- 


256 CANDIDUS; or, Chap, 18. 
ble. Beſides, if thou didſt not know, after having 
deen viceroy of a rich province, after having been 
able to purchaſe kingdoms, after having been the hap- 
py lover of Miſs Zenoide, how hard it is to reſolve to 
ſerve as mate in an hoſpital. All this 1 know full 
well; but 1 alſo know that it is very hard to die of 
hunger. Beſides, the plan which I propoſe is perhaps 
the only one to elude the cruelty of Volhall, 
Whilſt he thus ſpale, one of the brothers of the 
hoſpital happening to pals, aſked him a few quettions, 
to which he replied properly. 1 his brot!.:r aſſured 
them that the fraternity lived well, au. enjoyed 
decent liberty. Candidus reſolved: they were ad- 
mitted without ſcruple, and theſe two miſerable beings 
began to adminiſter comfort to beings yer more miſe- 
rable. 


Oue day as Candidus was diſtributing ſome bad 


broth among the patients, an old man particularly 
caught his attention. He ſeemed in the agony of 
death, Poor man, ſaid Candidus, how I pity you 
Lou mult ſuffer terribly. Indeed I do, he replied, 

with a hollow ſepulchral voice: they tell me that I 
have a complication of diſtempers, and that I am poxed 
to the very bone; if fo, I muſt needs be extremely ill. 
Nevertheleſs, it is all for the beſt, and that is my con- 
folation. No man in the world, ſaid Candidus, but 
Doctor Pangloſs, cculd maintain optimiſm in ſuch a 
deplorable fituation, when every other mortal would 
preach peil-——, Do not pronounce that deteſtable 
word, ſaid the poor old man; I am that very Panglols, 
Wretch, let me die in peace: all things are good, 
every thing is belt, The effort he made in pronoun- 


cing theſe words, colt him his laſt tooth, and in a few 


moments atter he expired, 

__ Candidus bewalled his death, aw he had a good 
heart; his obſtinacy, however, afforded matter of re- 
fexion to our philoſopher, He would frequently 
rumiaate on bis adventures. Cunegonda had remained 


* 


- W EP 
** 


ms we 4a OA aA aco_—__ 


= __ ds ar. as aus arg 


Chap. 19. Al Iro Ther Brs r. 197 


at Copenhagen, where, he was informed, ſhe mended 
ſhirts and Rockiags with great reputation, He had 
now lolt all his palliozn tor travelliag. The faithful 
Cacambo atlifled him with his advice and friend ſhip. 
He never complained at the diſpenfations of provi- 
dence: I know he would tomettwes tay, that happi- 
neſs is not the lot of humanity; it is no where to be 


found except in the got couitry of Eldorado; but it 


is not potlible to go thither. 


c b eee 
CHAP, XIX. 
New adventures. 


NAAndidus was not altogether unhappy, fer he had a 
. real friend. He had found in an American mong- 
rel valet, what we ſeck for in Europe to no purpoſe, 
Perhaps nature, who has planted fimples in America 


proper for the diſtempers of European bodies, may 


there alſo have ſown remedies for the diſorders of our 
hearts and minds. Perhaps there are a ſpecies of men 
in this new world, who are formed differently from us, 
who are not faves to felf intereſt, who are capable of 
ſincere friendſhip, Twere happy, if inſtead of bales 
of indigo and cochineal, tained with blood, they would 
bring us ſome of theſe men: this kind of commerce 
would be very advantageous to minxind, Cacambto 
was of more value to Candidus than a dozen of red 
ſheep loaded with the pebbles of Eldorado. Our phi- 
loſopher now began to be reconciled to life. He cons» 
foled himiclf that he was employed in the prefervati- 
on of the human ſpecies, and in not being an uſcleſs 
member of ſociety. Heaven rewarded the purity of 
his intentions, by reſtoring to him, as well as to his 
friend Cacambo, the bleſling of health They had 


no longer the itch, and they per ſormed the duties of 


11 


— — —— 


158 CAN DID US; or, Chap. 19. 
their function with great alacrity ; but alas! fate ſoon 
broke in upon their peaceſul ſecurity, Cunegonda, 
who had ſet her heart upon tormenting her huſband, 
fallied forth from Copenhagen in purſuit of him: 
chance directed her to the hoſpital ; ſhe was accom- 
panied by a man whom Candidus foon diſcovered to 
de the Baron of Thunder ten tronckh; his ſurpriſe 
may be eaſily ſuppoſed. The Baron, perceiving it, 
ſpoke to him in theſe words, I did not long continue 
to row in the Turkith galleys; the Jeſuits hearing ot 
wy misfortune, redeemed me tor the honour of the 
ſociety. I made a tour into Germany, were [ received 
ſome civilities of my father's heirs. I left nothing 
unattempted to get intelligence of my ſiſter; and 
hearing at Conſtantinople, that the had imbarked on 
board a veſſel which was caſt away on the coalt of 
Denmark, I diſguiſed myſelf and departed, being pro- 
vided with proper letters of recommendation to Daniſk 
merchants in connection with the ſociety ; in ſhort, ! 
have found my ſiſter again, who loves you notwith- 
 tianding you are unworthy of that honour; and ſince 
you have had the infolence to lie with her, I confent 
to the ratification, or rather a now celebration of your 
nuptials; that is to ſay, provided the gives you only 
her leſt hand, which is but reaſonable, as ſhe has no 
jefs than ſeventy one quarters, and you have none at 
all, Alas, faid Candidus, all the quarters in the 
world without beauty ——, Miſs Cunegonda was very 
ugly when I imprudently married her; ihe became 
handſome, and another has enjoyed her charms, ſhe is 
again grown ugly, and you would have me give my 
hand to her a ſecond time: no, no, Reverend Father; 
ſend her back to her ſeraglio at Conſtantinople; ſhe 
has done me but too much injury in this country. 

Ungrateful man, ſaid Cunegonda, making horrible 
contor tions, how can you be ſo hard hearted ? Do not 
oblige the Baron, now a prieſt, to waſh the blot out of 
bis eſcutcheon with your blood. Doki thou belicve me 


* 


- — 


Chap. 19. ALL ror THE Beer. 159 
capable of conſenting to the aq; of infidelity? Whac 
wouldit thou have had me done when I was in the 
power of a Turk who thought me handtone ? Nei- 
ther tears, nor my cries, had any effet cn his ſavage 
brutality: fo that, finding it in vain to refit, I con- 
trivedto be as 3 r raviſhed as poſlihle, as 
any other woman would have done ian my fituation : 
this is all my erime. But my greateſt offence is hav. 
ing robbed thee ot thy miltrets, which, on the con- 
trary, thou thoulded coniide.' as a prot of my aff-c- 
ting. "Goon come, my dear little foul ; it ever | ſhoul4 
grow bandiome again; it my breaits, which are now 
lome w hat pendent, ſhould recover their rotund elatti - 
city; it — they hal be all tor thee alone, my dear 
Candidus; we are no longer ia Turky, and I tear 
that I will never ſukter my ſelf to be ravilacd again. 
This diſcourſe made no very deep impreit en upon 
Candidus, Ile deficed a little time for conftderation, 
The Barca grante i him two hours, which be ſpent ia 
conſulting with his triend Cacambo, After having 
weighed every argument rs and cn, they determined 
t accompany the Baron and his filter to Germany. 
L£ecordiagply every thing being ſettled, they ſet out all 
together; not on ſoot, but mounted on good cavalry, 
which the jqeſuit Baron had brought along with him. 
They were now arrived at the frontiers of the king 
dom, when a tall ill favoured fellow fixed his eyes a“ 
tentively on our hero, It is the very man, ſaid he; 
pray, Sir, if I may be fo bold, is not your name Can» 
didus? Yes, Sir, replied Candidus, fo I have always 
been called, I am ex remely glad of it, ſaid the man. 
Yes indeed, you have black eyebrows, ears of a mode - 
rate fiz*, a round face, and rudily complexion, an 
you appear to be about five feet five, Yes, Sir, faid 
Candidus, that is my height ; but what are my ears, 
and my height to you? Sir, replied the man, we can- 
not be too circumſpect in our employment: permit 
me to ail: you another queſtion; Was you net in the 
i 2 


— 


+ 
l 
| 
: 


169 CANDIDUS; or, Chay. 20. 
ſervice of Squire Volhall? In truth, Sir, ſa d Candidus, 
a little diſconcerted, I do not underſtand But 1 
underſtand perfectly well that you are the perſon 
_ whoſe deſcription I have in my hand. Pleaſe to walk 
into the guard room. Soldiers, conduct the gentle - 
man in; prepare the black hole, and te | the fuith to 
make a flight chain of about thirty or forty pounds 
weight. Mr Candidus, you have got a goodlike horſe 
there; I want one of that colour; we thall agree a- 
bout kinn by and bye, 

The Baron did not dare to claim his horſe, Cune- 
gonda wept for a quarter of an hour. The J-ſuit be- 
neld the ſcene without emotion. I ſhould have been 
obliged, ſaid he to his ſiſter, either to kill him or force 
him to marry you again: and every thing confidered, 
it is the beſt that could happen for the honour of our 
family. Cunegonda and her brother ſet out for Ger- 
many; but the faithful Cacambo reſolved not to leave 
his friend in diſtreſs. 


EXENEREFERERENENEXERE 


CWAL It 


The concluſion of Candidus's misfortunes: how he 
found his miſtreſs again, and what was the confes 
quence, 


Pangloſs ! ſaid Candidus, it is a great pity that 

| you have periſhed ſo miſerably : you have been 
witneſs only to the leaſt part of my misfortunes, and 
I was in hopes to make you rejet that groundleſs 0: 
Pinion you ſo obflinately maintained, even unto death, 
There is not a man upon earth who has experienced 
greater adveriity than I have; and yet there is not a 
fingle foul who has not curſed his own exiſtence, as 
the daughter of Pope Urban very pathetically told us, 
Wat will become of me, my dear be I can: 


"aw 


Chap. 20, ALt FOR THE BEST, 161 
not tell, replied Cacambo; all I know is, that I will 


never leave you, But Cunegonda has forſaken me, 


faid Candidus, Alas! a wite is not worth an Ame 
rican friend, 
This was the converſ.tion of Candidus and Cacam. 


bo in a dungeon, from whence they were dragged in 


order to be conveyed to Copenhagen, where our pht- 
loſopher was to learn his tate. He feared it would 


be a dreadfa! one, as the reader may alſo apprehend ; 


but Candidus was miltaken, and fo is the reader. He 


was deitined to be happy at Copenhagen, where he 


was no ſooner arrived than he was appriſed of the 
death of Volhall ; this brute died unlamented, and e- 
very body concerned themſelves about Candidus. Ris 
chiins were immediately knocked off, and liberty was 
the more agreeable to him, as it furniſhed him with 


the means of flading Zenoide. He haſtened to her 


houſe ; he was a long time before he could utter a 


ſyllable, but their ſilence was ſufficiently expreflive. 


They embraced; they endeavoured to ſpeak, but they 


could only weep, Cacambo enjoyed this delightful 


ſcene like a being ot ſenſibility; he ſympathized in his 
friend's joy, and was almok in the ſame fituation. My 
dear Cacambo, my beloved Zenoide, cried Candidus, 
{ am recompenced for all my ſufferings. Love and 
friendſhip ſhall ſweeten the remainder of my lite, 
What numberlefs diſficuities have paved the way to 
this unexpected happineſs? But all is now forgotten, 
deareſt Zenoide, I fee you, you love me; all things go 
well with me now, every thing is for the beſt. 

The death of Volhall left Zenoide her own mittreſs, 
and the court allowed her a penſion out of her fa - 
ther's fortune, which had been confiſcated. She rea- 
dily ſhared with Candidus and Cacambo, whom lhe 
allowed to live in the ſame houſe, and induſtriouily 
reported, that, having received ſuch ſignal ſervices 
from theſe two ſtrangers, ſhe thought herſelf obliged 
to recowpence them with all the pleaſures of life, 


t62 CANDIDUS, Chap. 20. 
Some ſhrewd people penetrated into the motives of her 
kindneſs, w hich was not very difficult, as her intrigue 
with Candidus had unluckily tranſpired. Moſt people 
condemned her, and her conduct was approved only 
by a few people who knew the world, Zenorie, who 

paid ſome regard to the eſteen of fools, was not quite 
happy in ns feation. The drocd of Cunc gonda 
which the correſpondents of trading Jeſuits reported 
at Copenhagen, furniſhed Zenoide with an opportu - 
nity to reconcile the ſcrupulous : the ordered a pedi- 
gree to be made for Candidus; and the author, whe 
was 24 man of parts, proved hi:u to be deſcended from 
one of the molt ancient families in Europe: he even 
pretend:d that his true name was Canut, the name ot 
an ancient Daniſh king, than which nothing could 
be more probable ; for to metamorphote did into wil 
was no very extraordinary change. In confequence 
of this trifling alteration, Candidus became a noble- 
man of ciitingion. He was married publicly to Ze- 
noide ; they lived together as happily as it was pot- 
fible to live. Cacambo was their common fri-nd ; and 
Candidus frequently uſed to ſay, All things are not ſo 
well with us here as in Eldorado, but yet Se are 
g puny well, 


