a 


Fifteen  Volumes  in  an  Oak  Bookcase, 


Price  One  Guinea. 


"  Marvels  of  clear  type  and  general  neatness." — Daily  Telegraph 


MORLEY'S 

UNIVERSAL  LIBRARY 

In  Monthly  Volumes,  ONE  SHILLING  Each. 

READY   ON   THE    i$th    OF  EACH  MONTH. 


MORLEY'S  UNIVERSAL  LIBRARY. 


Complete  in  Sixty-Three  Volumes,  ONE  SHILLING  Each,  cloth,  cut  edges; 
or,  Is.  6d.  Parchment  Back,  uncut  edges. 

1.  SHERIDAN'S   PLAYS. 

2.  PLAYS  FROM   MO  LI  ERE,     By  English  Dramatists. 

3.  MARLOWE'S  FAUSTUS  &  GOETHE'S  FAUST. 
4-   CHRONICLE  OF  THE  CID. 

5.  RABELAIS'  GARGANTUA  AND  THE  HEROIC 

DEEDS  OF  PANTAGRUEL. 

6.  THE  PRINCE.     By  Machiavelli. 

7.  BACON'S  ESSAYS. 

8.  DE  FOE'S  JOURNAL  OF  THE  PLAGUE  YEAR. 

9.  LOCKE    ON    CIVIL    GOVERNMENT;     WITH 

SIR    ROBERT   FILMER'S  PATRIARCHA. 
10.   BUTLER'S  ANALOGY  OF  RELIGION. 
IT.  DRYDEN'S  VIRGIL. 

12.  SIR  WALTER  SCOTT'S  DEMONOLOGY  AND 

WITCHCRAFT. 

13.  HERRICK'S  HESPERIDES. 

14.  COLERIDGE'S     TABLE    TALK:     WITH    THE 

ANCIENT  MARINER  AND  CHRISTABEL 

15.  BOCCACCIO'S   DECAMERON. 

16.  STERNE'S  TRISTRAM   SHANDY. 

17.  HOMER'S   ILIAD,  Translated  by  George  Chapman. 

18.  MEDIAEVAL  TALES. 

19.  JOHNSON'S    RASSELAS;    AND    VOLTAIRE'S 

CANDIDE. 

20.  PLAYS  AND  POEMS    BY   BEN   JONSON. 

21.  HOBBES'S   LEVIATHAN. 

22.  BUTLER'S   HUD1BRAS. 

23.  IDEAL      COMMONWEALTHS:      MORE'S 

UTOPIA  ;  BACON'S  NEW  ATLANTIS  ;  AND  CAM- 
PANELLA'S  CITY  OF  THE  SUN. 

24.  CAVENDISH'S  LIFE    OF   WOLSEY. 
25  and  26.   DON    QUIXOTE  (Two  Volumes). 

27.  BURLESQUE   PLAYS   AND   POEMS.  [lation 

28.  DANTE'S  DIVINE  COMEDY.     Longfellow's  Trans- 

29.  GOLDSMITH'S      VICAR      OF      WAKEFIELD, 

PLAYS  AND  POEMS. 

30.  FABLES  and  PROVERBS  from  the  SANSKRIT. 
31    CHARLES   LAMB'S  ESSAYS   OF   ELIA. 


MORLEY'S  UNIVERSAL  LIBRARY. 

32.  THE     HISTORY     OF    THOMAS     ELLWOOD, 

Written  by  Himself. 

33-  EMERSON'S     ESSAYS,      REPRESENTATIVE 

MEN,  AND  SOCIETY  AND  SOLITUDE. 

34-  SOUTHEY'S  LIFE  OF  NELSON. 

35-  DE     QUINCEY'S     OPIUM     EATER,     SHAKS- 

PEARE,  GOETHE. 

36.  STORIES   OF  IRELAND.     By  Maria  Edgeworth. 

37.  THE  PLAYS  OF  ARISTOPHANES,  Translated  by 

Frere. 

38.  SPEECHES  AND   LETTERS.     By  Edmund  Burke. 
39-  THOMAS  A  KEMPIS'  IMITATION  OF  CHRIST. 

40.  POPULAR    SONGS    OF    IRELAND,    Collected   by 

Thomas  Crofton  Croker. 

41.  THE  PLAYS  of  AESCHYLUS,  Translated  by  R.  Potter. 

42.  GOETHE'S  FAUST,  the  Second  Part. 
43-   FAMOUS  PAMPHLETS. 

44.  SOPHOCLES,  Translated  by  Francklin. 

45-  TALES  OF  TERROR  AND   WONDER. 

46.  VESTIGES  OF  THE  NATURAL  HISTORY  OF 

CREATION. 

47-  THE  BARONS'  WARS,  &c.     By  Michael  Drayton. 

48.  COBBETT'S  ADVICE  TO  A  YOUNG  MAN. 

49.  THE  BANQUET  OF  DANTE.     Translated  by  Eliza- 

beth Price  Sayer. 

50.  WALKER'S  ORIGINAL. 

51.  POEMS  AND  BALLADS  BY  SCHILLER. 

52.  PEELE'S  PLAYS  AND  POEMS. 

53.  HARRINGTON'S  OCEANA. 

54.  EURIPIDES— ALCESTIS,  ETC. 

55.  ESSAYS.     By  Winthrop  Mackworth  Praed. 

56.  TRADITIONAL  TALES.     Allan  Cunningham. 

57.  HOOKER'S     ECCLESIASTICAL     POLITY. 

Books  I.  to  IV. 

58.  EURIPIDES— BACCHANALS,  ETC. 

59.  WALTON'S     LIVES    OF     DONNE,    WOTTON, 

HOOKER,   AND  GEORGE  HERBERT,   ETC. 

60.  ARISTOTLE  ON  GOVERNMENT. 

61.  EURIPIDES— HECUBA,  AND  OTHER  PLAYS. 

62.  RABELAIS'     HEROIC     DEEDS     OF     PANTA- 

GRUKL.     Books  III.,  IV.,  and  V. 
6r  A  MISCELLANY. 


•Baflantjme  .press 

BALLANTYNE,    HANSON    AND  CO. 
EDINBURGH   AND   LONDON 


VOLTAIRE'S 

CANDIDE  OR  THE  OPTIMIST 


AND 


RASSELAS  PRINCE  OF  ABYSSINIA 


BY 


WITH   AN    INTRODUCTION    BY    HENRY   MORLEY 

LL.D.,    I'ROFESSOR   OF   ENGLISH   LITERATURE   AT 
UNIVERSITY   COLLEGE,    LONDON 


THIRD     EDITION 


LONDON 
GEORGE    ROUTLEDGE    AND    SONS 

BROADWAY,   LUDGATE   HILT. 
GLASGOW    AND    NEW    YORK 

1888 


MORLEY'S    UNIVERSAL    LIBRARY. 

I. 

Sheridan's  Plays. 

32.   The  History  of  Thomas 

2. 

Plays  from  Moliere.  By 
English  Dramatists. 

Elhuood. 
33.  Emerson's  Essays,  &c. 

3- 

Marlowe's   Faustus  and 

34.  Southey's  Life  of  Nelson. 

Goethe's  Faust. 

35.  De    Quincey's    Confessions 

4- 

Chronicle  of  the  Cid. 

of  an  Opium-Eater,  &*c. 

S- 

Rabelais'  'Gargantua&n&t\\e 

36.   Stories  of  Ireland.   By  Miss 

Heroic  Deeds  of  Pantagruel. 

EDGEWORTH. 

6. 

Mac  hi  avc  Hi's  Prince. 

37.  Frere's  Aristophanes: 

7- 
8. 

Bacon's  Essays. 
Defoe's  Journal    of    the 
Plague  Year. 

Achamians,  Knights,  Birds. 
38.  Burke'  s  Speeches  and  Letters. 
39.    Thomas  ci  Kempis. 

9- 

Locke  on  Civil  Government 

40.  Popular  Songs  of  Ireland. 

and  Filme^s  "Pntriarcha." 

41.   Potter's  jQLschylus. 

10. 

Butler's  Analogy  ofRclig  ion. 

42.   Goethe's  Faust:    Part    II. 

ii. 

Dryden's  Virgil. 

ANSTER'S  Translation. 

12. 

Scott's    Dcmonology  and 

43.   Famous  Pamphlets. 

Witchcraft. 

44.  Francklin's  Sophocles. 

13- 

Herrick's  Hesperides. 

45.  M.    G.    Lewis's    Tales    of 

14. 

Coleridge's  J^able-  Talk. 

Terror  and  Wonder. 

IS- 

Boccaccio's  Decameron. 

46.    Vestiges    of  the    Natural 

1  6. 
17- 

Sterne's  Tristram  Shandy. 
Chapman'  s  Homer's  Iliad. 

History  of  Creation. 
47.   Drayton's  Barons'    Wars, 

18. 
19. 

Mediceval  Tales. 
Voltaire's  Candide,  and 

Nymphidia,  &*c. 
48.   Cobbetfs  Advice  to   Voting 
Men. 

20. 

21. 

22. 

Johnson's  Rasselas. 
yonson's  Plays  and  Poems. 
Hobbes's  Leviathan. 
Samuel  Butlers  Hudibras. 

49.    The  Banquet  of  Dante. 
50.    Walker's  Original. 
51.  Schiller's    Poems    and 

Ballads. 

23- 
24. 

25 

27 

Ideal  Commonwealths. 
Cavendish's  Life  of  IVolsey. 
&  26.   Don  Quixote. 
Burlesque  Plays  and  Poems. 

52.  Peele's  Plays  and  Poems. 
53.  Harrington's  Oceana. 
54.  Euripides  :     ALestis     and 
other  Plays. 

28. 

Dante's  Divine  Comedy. 

55.  Praed's  Essays. 

LONGFELLOW'S  Translation. 

56.    Traditional  Tales. 

29. 

Goldsmith's  Vicar  of  1  \-~ake- 

ALLAN  CUNNINGHAM. 

field,  Plays,  and  Poews. 

57.  Hooker  s  Ecclesiastical 

30. 

Fables  and  Proverbs  from 

Polity.     Books  I.-  IV. 

the  Sanskrit.     (Hitofiadesa.) 

58.   Euripides:  The  Bacchanals 

3'. 

Lamb's  Essays  of  Eha. 

and  other  Plays. 

"  Marvels  of  clear  type  aurt  general  neatness."  —  Daily  Telegraph. 

INTRODUCTION, 


WHEN  Thomas  Carlyle  spoke  of  the  eighteenth  century  as  an 
age  of  "shams  and  windy  sentimentalities,"  he  might  have 
added  that  the  great  feature  of  the  century  was  a  reaction 
against  shams,  and  that  the  windy  sentimentalities  represented 
only  some  part  of  the  reaction  as  it  touched  weak  minds. 
Rousseau's  notion  that  men  were  overcivilized — whereas  the 
most  advanced  nation  upon  earth  is,  at  this  day,  barely  half 
civilized — and  that  we  should  go  backwards  instead  of  forwards, 
returning  nearer  to  the  state  of  primitive  man,  was  expressed  in 
England,  before  Rousseau  was  born,  by  Bernard  Mandeville  in 
his  "  Fable  of  the  Bees."  Impatience  of  dead  form  in  a  corrupt 
civilization  led  to  the  question,  Whether  such  a  world  as  men 
were  living  in  could  have  been  shaped  by  a  just  God  or  directed 
by  wise  Providence  ?  Man  and  Nature  seemed  to  many  faithful 
and  earnest  searchers  through  the  darkness  to  answer  to  that 
question,  No.  Such  honest  scepticism,  born  of  aspiration  for 
the  right  and  good,  has  been  referred  to  in  the  Introduction  to 
another  volume  of  this  Library,  Butler's  "  Analogy  of  Religion, 
Natural  and  Revealed,  to  the  Constitution  and  Course  of 
Nature."  We  pass  along  one  line  of  thought  from  Leibnitz's 
"Theodice'e"  to  Pope's  "Essay  on  Man"  and  Butler's 
"  Analogy  " — all  books  that  sought  to  arm  our  reason  against 
doubt.  And  we  may  pass  also  by  another  line  of  thought,  attack- 
ing the  wide-spread  evil  in  life ;  in  Church  and  State  and  in  society, 
and  even  in  the  home ;  everywhere  dead  forms  of  dead  authority, 
dead  worship  of  conventions  that  had  no  more  in  them  of  live 
civilization  than  the  tattoo  of  the  savage ;  we  may  pass  by 
that  line  through  books  like  Swift's  "  Gulliver's  Travels,"  Gay's 
"Beggars'  Opera,"  and  more  especially  its  sequel,  "Polly," 
expressing  the  full  strength  of  the  conviction  of  wrong  that  must 
precede  the  struggle  for  a  remedy.  And  so  we  come  to  "  Can- 
dide  "  and  "  Rasselas,"  both  published  in  the  same  year,  1759. 

Voltaire  in  "  Candide,"  as  Johnson  in  "  Rasselas,"  expressed 
the  despair  of  the  time  over  the  problem  of  man's  life  on  earth. 
Voltaire  mocked  and  Johnson  mourned  over  the  notion  that 


6  INTRODUCTION. 

this  is  the  best  possible  world.  Each  taught  the  vanity  of 
human  wishes.  Voltaire,  with  no  glance  beyond,  ended  the 
first  part  of  "  Candide  "  with  a  shrug  of  light-hearted  despair  ; 
every  man  has  his  bit  work  to  do,  his  garden  to  dig,  "  he  must 
take  care  of  his  garden."  Johnson  took  good  care  of  his  garden, 
but  in  "  Rasselas "  his  glance  is  ever  across  the  waves  of  this 
life  to  the  life  beyond.  He  finds  in  time  the  schoolhouse  for 
eternity. 

It  must  not  be  forgotten  that  these  utterances  in  1759  preceded 
by  only  thirty  years  the  struggle  of  the  French  Revolution.  That 
came  upon  many  a  young  heart  as  endeavour  prompted  by  an 
ardent  hope  to  raise  men  by  one  great  effort  to  the  higher 
ground  that  we  seek  now  to  reach  only  by  slow  and  patient 
climbing.  There  is  no  reason  why,  as  men  rise  in  civilization, 
they  should  not  come  to  build  their  happiness  on  sure  founda- 
tions, paying  less  heed  to  the  "  Lo  here  "  and  "  Lo  there,"  as 
they  learn  more  surely  that  the  kingdom  of  God  is  within  them. 

Voltaire  was  about  fifteen  years  older  than  Johnson  ;  for  he 
was  born  in  February  1694,  and  Johnson  in  September  1709. 
Voltaire  was  sixty-five  years  old  when  he  published  "  Candide  ; " 
Johnson  fifty  when,  at  the  same  time,  he  published  "  Rasselas." 
Voltaire  died  in  May  1778,  Johnson  in  December  1784  ;  both 
were  dead,  therefore,  at  the  time  of  the  outburst  of  the  French 
Revolution. 

Voltaire  was  the  third  child  of  Francois  Arouet,  a  rich  notary. 
His  mother  died  when  he  was  five  years  old.  His  brother 
Armand,  ten  years  older  than  himself,  was  drawn  towards  the 
Jansenists  ;  but  he  was  himself  placed  in  a  school  of  the  Jesuits 
— the  College  Louis  le  Grand — that  was  favoured  by  the  nobility, 
among  whose  sons  he  could  make  friends  for  the  future.  He 
was  a  lively  student,  and  when  but  eleven  years  old  earned  credit 
for  his  verse.  He  won  the  favour  of  Ninon  1'Enclos,  who  left 
him  at  her  death,  in  1705,  two  thousand  livres  to  buy  books  with. 
Voltaire  left  the  Jesuit  school  in  1711,  with  the  credit  of  brilliant 
success  as  a  student,  and  much  literary  skill.  He  passed  into 
a  law  school  that  disgusted  him,  then  turned  to  literature  and 
wrote  odes  in  1712  and  1713;  that  of  1713  was  "  Sur  les 
Malheurs  du  Temps."  Then  he  began  a  tragedy  on  CEdipus. 
His  father,  to  send  him  away  from  the  temptation  to  rhyme  and 
live  idly,  attached  him  as  secretary  to  an  ambassador  to  the 
Hague. 

But  at  the  Hague  he  consoled  himself  by  an  increase  of  dis- 
sipation, and  was  sent  back  to  Paris,  where  he  had  at  first  to 
hide  from  the  wrath  of  his  father.  Then  he  allowed  himself  to 
be  placed  as  clerk  with  a  lawyer,  but  picked  up  friends  among 
young  poets,  who  became  companions  in  his  dissipation.  In  1715 
his  father  placed  Frangois-Marie  Arouet  under  the  care  of  M.  de 
Caumartin,  who  had  a  father  loud  often  in  praise  of  Henri  IV. 
Here  he  conceived  the  plan  of  his  "  Henriade,"  and  of  a  history 


INTRODUCTION.  y 

of  the  age  of  Louis  XIV.  He  worked  on  at  his  "  CEdipus,"  and 
resolved  to  give  all  energies  to  literature  that  were  not  occupied 
with  dissipation. 

Louis  XIV.  died  on  the  ist  of  September  1715,  and  soon 
afterwards  young  Arouet  was  made  answerable  for  verses  on 
the  Regent.  He  was  banished  to  Sully-sur-Loire,  and  found 
there  so  much  idle  pleasure  that  nothing,  he  said,  was  wanting 
to  his  enjoyment  of  the  place  except  the  liberty  to  leave  it.  As 
verses  had  caused  his  banishment,  verses  obtained  his  recall  to 
Paris ;  but  a  spy  having  fixed  on  him  the  writing  of  another 
satire  on  the  Regency,  he  was  arrested  in  May  1717,  and  sent 
to  the  Bastille.  There  he  remained  prisoner  for  a  year,  wrote 
the  two  first  books  of  the  "  Henriade,"  and  finished  "  CEdipus." 
It  was  when  he  left  the  Bastille  that  he  changed  his  name  to 
Voltaire.  "  I  have  been  very  unhappy,"  he  said,  "  with  the  old 
name  ;  let  me  see  whether  I  shall  do  better  with  the  new."  The 
first  sign  of  improvement  was  the  success  of  his  "  CEdipus,"  first 
acted  in  November  1718.  He  was  now  sought  as  a  poet  by 
the  world  of  fashion.  There  was  another  banishment  to  Sully, 
much  dissipation,  much  work  with  the  pen.  The  "Henriade" 
was  finished  ;  more  plays  were  written  and  acted.  In  1722,  his 
father's  death  left  Voltaire  a  fortune,  and  he  received  also  a 
pension  of  two  thousand  livres  from  the  King.  Insulted  by  the 
Chevalier  de  Rohan,  who  caused  him  to  be  fallen  upon  and 
beaten,  Voltaire  challenged  him,  and  was  again  locked  up  in  the 
Bastille.  The  indignity  and  wrong  thus  suffered  caused  Voltaire, 
when  set  free,  to  ask  for  his  passport  to  England.  He  came  to 
England  in  August  1726.  In  England,  in  1728,  he  published 
the  "Henriade."  In  the  spring  of  1729  he  returned  to  Paris. 
The  mocking  spirit  in  which  he  dealt  with  the  religion  of  England 
in  his  "  Lettres  sur  les  Anglais  "  caused  that  book  to  be  burned 
and  his  own  liberty  to  be  again  in  danger.  He  withdrew  to 
Cirey,  and  wrote  for  Madame  du  Chatelet  a  "  Traitd  de  Meta- 
physique."  His  literary  energy  remained  unbroken  ;  his  works 
multiplied.  In  1740  he  first  met  Frederick  II.  of  Prussia.  In 
1750,  after  many  changes  of  life  in  France,  he  accepted  the 
invitation  of  Frederick  to  live  with  him  at  his  Court,  with  a  large 
pension.  But  after  three  years  at  Potsdam,  he  escaped  from 
his  Majesty,  and  settled  in  France  with  a  niece,  Madame  Denis. 
He  had  bought  an  estate  at  Tourney  and  another  at  Ferney.  It 
was  not  until  1760  that  he  settled  wholly  upon  his  property  at 
Ferney,  and  became  the  patriarch  of  the  place.  Ferney  was  the 
garden  in  which  he  worked,  and  he  helped  to  transform  the 
place  from  a  poor  hamlet  into  a  town  of  thriving  watchmakers. 
Wherever  Voltaire  went  he  spent  energies  freely  for  evil  and  for 
good.  He  could  share  in  the  false  pleasures  of  life,  well  knowing 
their  emptiness,  and  mock  at  vanity  without  finding  in  it 
vexation  of  spirit.  Witty,  not  wise,  he  made  just  war  upon  all 
hypocrisies  of  life,  but  could  not  separate  them  from  its  truths. 


8  INTRODUCTION. 

Samuel  Johnson,  born  with  a  taint  of  scrofula  that  throughout 
life  unfitted  the  physical  frame  for  the  uses  of  the  mind  within, 
born  also  to  long  struggle  against  poverty,  achieved  within 
himself  that  conquest  over  difficulty  which  is  the  problem  of  the 
race  of  man. 

Johnson's  father  was  a  bookseller  in  Lichfield,  who  died,  little 
prosperous,  when  his  son,  aged  22,  had  struggled  through  a  liberal 
education  that  had  been  hard  to  secure,  and  had  included  work 
at  Pembroke  College,  Oxford,  under  conditions  of  almost  abso- 
lute penury,  and  with  depression  of  mind  that  sometimes  made 
insanity  seem  very  near.  He  struggled  on,  married,  attempted 
in  vain  to  earn  his  bread  as  a  schoolmaster,  was  forced  to  live 
by  his  pen,  and  with  a  stout  heart  and  humble  trust  in  God  bore 
toil  and  poverty,  and  infirmity  of  a  body  that  had  to  be  daily 
conquered  to  the  uses  of  the  soul.  He  lifted  no  voice  of  com- 
plaint ;  said,  "  I  hate  a  complainer."  But  he  fought  steadily  in 
the  battle  that  brings  out  those  energies  through  use  of  which 
alone  man  can  draw  nearer  to  the  life  that  is  in  God. 

As  we  toil  on  towards  a  higher  civilization,  the  difficulties 
caused  by  our  own  yet  imperfect  sense  of  right  will  slowly  pass 
away,  and  there  will  remain  only  the  healthy  battle  against  sur- 
rounding nature,  with  the  contests  of  opinion  through  which  God 
bids  us  use  our  energies  for  the  securing  of  new  power  from  new 
truth,  contests  of  which  the  issues  will  be  no  longer  obscured  by 
anger  and  evil-speaking.  Who  would  forego  the  use  of  energies 
by  which  alone  man  feels  that  he  is  made  in  the  likeness  of  God, 
to  become  one  of  many  creatures  all  born  to  attain  one  definite 
perfection  ;  to  be  as  one  cabbage  in  a  cabbage  garden,  or  one 
peach  in  the  ripe  crop  upon  a  sunny  wall  ?  All  evils  of  life, 
wittily  heaped  together  in  "Candide,"  when  they  arise  from 
man's  fraud  and  wrong-doing  are  conquerable  in  long  course  of 
time;  and  conquest  of  them  means  that -advance  of  civilization 
towards  which  we  have  begun  to  labour  in  this  century  with 
more  definite  aims  than  heretofore.  The  struggle  of  the  French 
Revolution  to  lift  men  at  once  above  those  grosser  ills  of  life 
which  pressed  upon  them  in  the  eighteenth  century,  and  wrung 
from  them  such  books  as  "  Candide  "  and  "  Rasselas,"  failed  only 
in  its  immediate  aim.  Its  highest  hope  is  with  us  still,  quickened 
though  sobered  by  the  failure  of  immediate  attainment.  A  State 
can  be  no  better  than  the  citizens  of  which  it  is  composed.  Our 
labour  now  is  not  to  mould  States  but  make  citizens. 

Voltaire,  when  in  witty  mockery  he  wrote  "  Candide,"  was 
a  rich  man  owning  two  estates.  Johnson,  when  he  wrote 
"Rasselas"  in  humble  faith,  was  very  poor.  His  old  mother 
had  just  died,  and  that  he  might  have  money  to  pay  the  little 
debts  she  left,  and  bury  her,  he  wrote  "  Rasselas  "  in  the  evenings 
and  nights  of  a  single  week. 

H.  M. 
November  1884. 


CANDIDE; 


OR, 


THE 


C  A  N  D  I  D  E. 


PART    I. 
CHAPTER    I. 

Hoiv  Candide  ivas  brought  up  in  a  magnificent  castle  ;  and  how  he  was 
driven  from  thence. 

IN  the  cour try  of  Westphalia,  in  the  castle  of  the  most  noble 
baron  of  Thunder-ten-tronckh,  lived  a  youth,  whom  nature 
had  endowed  with  a  most  sweet  disposition.  His  face  was 
the  true  index  of  his  mind.  He  had  a  solid  judgment 
joined  to  the  most  unaffected  simplicity  ;  and  hence,  I  pre- 
sume, he  had  his  name  of  Candide.  The  old  servants  of  the 
house  suspected  him  to  have  been  the  son  of  the  baron's 
sister  by  a  mighty  good  sort  of  a  gentleman  of  the  neigh- 
bourhood, whom  that  young  lady  refused  to  marry,  because 
he  could  produce  no  more  than  threescore  and  eleven  quar- 
terings  in  his  arms,  the  rest  of  the  genealogical  tree  belonging 
to  the  family  having  been  lost  through  the  injuries  of  time. 

The  baron  was  one  of  the  most  powerful  lords  in  West- 
phalia, for  his  castle  had  not  only  a  gate,  but  even  windows, 
and  his  great  hall  was  hung  with  tapestry.  He  used  to  hunt 
with  his  mastiffs  and  spaniels  instead  of  greyhounds ;  his 
groom  served  him  for  huntsman,  and  the  parson  of  the 
parish  officiated  as  his  grand  almoner.  He  was  called  "  My 


12  CANDIDE. 

Lord  "  by  all  his  people,  and  he  never  told  a  story  but  every 
one  laughed  at  it 

My  Lady  Baroness  weighed  three  hundred  and  fifty 
pounds,  consequently  was  a  person  of  no  small  considera- 
tion ;  and  then  she  did  the  honours  of  the  house  with  a 
dignity  that  commanded  universal  respect.  Her  daughter 
was  about  seventeen  years  of  age,  fresh-coloured,  comely, 
plump,  and  amiable.  The  baron's  son  seemed  to  be  a 
youth  in  every  respect  worthy  of  the  father  he  sprung  from. 
Pangloss,  the  preceptor,  was  the  oracle  of  the  family,  and 
little  Candide  listened  to  his  instructions  with  all  the  sim- 
plicity natural  to  his  age  and  disposition. 

Master  Pangloss  taught  the  metaphysico-theologo-cos- 
molo-nigology.  He  could  prove  to  admiration  that  there  is 
no  effect  without  a  cause,  and  in  this  best  of  all  possible 
worlds  the  baron's  castle  was  the  most  magnificent  of  all 
castles,  and  my  lady  the  best  of  all  possible  baronesses. 

"  It  is  demonstrable,"  said  he,  "  that  things  cannot  be 
otherwise  than  they  are  ;  for  as  all  things  have  been  created 
for  some  end,  they  must  necessarily  be  created  for  the 
best  end.  Observe,  for  instance,  the  nose  is  formed  for 
spectacles ;  therefore  we  wear  spectacles.  The  legs  are 
visibly  designed  for  stockings;  accordingly  we  wear  stockings. 
Stones  were  made  to  be  hewn  and  to  construct  castles ; 
therefore  my  lord  has  a  magnificent  castle  ;  for  the  geatest 
baron  in  the  province  ought  to  be  the  best  lodged.  Swine 
were  intended  to  be  eaten ;  therefore  we  eat  pork  all  the 
year  round.  And  they  who  assert  that  everything  is  right , 
do  not  express  themselves  correctly  ;  they  should  say  that 
everything  is  best" 

Candide  listened  attentively,  and  believed  implicitly;  for 
he  thought  Miss  Cunegund  excessively  handsome,  though 
he  never  had  the  courage  to  tell  her  so.  He  concluded 
that  next  to  the  happiness  of  being  Baron  of  Thunder-ten- 
tronckh,  the  next  was  that  of  being  Miss  Cunegund,  the 


CA^7DIDE.  I3 

next  that  of  seeing  her  every  day,  and  the  last  that  of  hear- 
ing the  doctrine  of  Master  Pangloss,  the  greatest  philosopher 
of  the  whole  province,  and  consequently  of  the  whole 
world. 

One  day,  when  Miss  Cunegund  went  to  take  a  walk  in  a 
little  neighbouring  wood,  which  was  called  a  park,  she  saw, 
through  the  bushes,  the  sage  Doctor  Pangloss  giving  a 
lecture  in  experimental  philosophy  to  her  mother's  chamber- 
maid, a  little  brown  wench,  very  pretty  and  very  tractable. 

In  her  way  back  she  happened  to  meet  Candide.  She 
blushed  ;  he  blushed  also.  She  wished  him  a  good  morning 
in  a  flattering  tone ;  he  returned  the  salute  without  knowing 
what  he  said.  The  next  day,  as  they  were  rising  from 
dinner,  Cunegund  and  Candide  slipped  behind  the  screen ; 
Miss  dropped  her  handkerchief  •  the  young  man  picked  it  up. 
She  innocently  took  hold  of  his  hand,  and  he  as  innocently 
kissed  hers  with  a  warmth,  a  sensibility,  a  grace — all  very 
particular  :  their  lips  met ;  their  eyes  sparkled  ;  their  knees 
trembled ;  their  hands  strayed.  The  baron  chanced  to 
come  by ;  he  beheld  the  cause  and  effect,  and  without 
hesitation  salutes  Candide  with  some  notable  kicks  on  the 
rear,  and  drove  him  out  of  doors.  Miss  Cunegund,  the 
tender,  the  lovely  Miss  Cunegund,  fainted  away,  and,  as 
soon  she  came  to  herself,  the  baroness  boxed  her  ears. 
Thus  a  general  consternation  was  spread  over  this  most 
magnificent  and  most  agreeable  of  all  possible  castles. 


CHAPTER  II. 

What  befell  Candide  among  the  Bulgarians. 

CANDIDE,  thus  driven  out  of  this  terrestrial  paradise,  rambled 
a  long  time  without  knowing  where  he  went ;  sometimes 
he  raised  his  eyes,  all  bedewed  with  tears,  towards  heaven, 
and  sometimes  he  cast  a  melancholy  look  towards  the  mag- 


I4  CANDIDE. 

nificent  castle,  where  dwelt  the  fairest  of  young  baronesses. 
He  laid  himself  down  to  sleep  in  a  furrow,  heart-broken  and 
supperless.  The  snow  fell  in  great  flakes,  and  in  the  morn- 
ing when  he  awoke,  he  was  almost  frozen  to  death ;  how- 
ever, he  made  shift  to  crawl  to  the  next  town,  which  was 
called  Walds-berghoff-trarbk-dikdorff,  without  a  penny  in  his 
pocket,  and  half-dead  with  hunger  and  fatigue.  He  took  up 
his  stand  at  the  door  of  an  inn.  He  had  not  been  long 
there,  before  two  men  dressed  in  blue  fixed  their  eyes  sted- 
fastly  upon  him.  "  Faith,  comrade,"  said  one  of  them  to 
the  other,  "yonder  is  a  well-made  young  fellow,  and  of  the 
right  size  ; "  upon  which  they  made  up  to  Candide,  and  with 
the  greatest  civility  and  politeness  invited  him  to  dine  with 
them.  "  Gentlemen,"  replied  Candide,  with  a  most  engaging 
modesty,  "  you  do  me  much  honour ;  but  upon  my  word  I 
have  no  money."  "  Money,  sir,"  said  one  of  the  blues  to 
him,  "  young  persons  of  your  appearance  and  merit  never 
pay  anything  •  why,  are  not  you  five  feet  five  inches  high  ?  " 
'•  Yes,  gentlemen,  that  is  really  my  size,"  replied  he,  with  a 
low  bow.  "  Come  then,  sir,  sit  down  along  with  us  ;  we  will 
not  only  pay  your  reckoning,  but  will  never  suffer  such  a 
clever  young  fellow  as  you  to  want  money.  Mankind  were 
born  to  assist  one  another."  "  You  are  perfectly  right, 
gentlemen,"  said  Candide,  "  this  is  precisely  the  doctrine  of 
Master  Pangloss ;  and  I  am  convinced  that  everything  is 
for  the  best."  His  generous  companions  next  entreat  him 
to  accept  of  a  few  crowns,  which  he  readily  complies  with, 
at  the  same  time  offering  them  his  note  for  the  payment, 
which  they  refuse,  and  sit  down  to  table.  "  Have  you  not 

a  great  affection  for "   "  O  yes ;  I  have  a  great  affection 

for  the  lovely  Miss  Cunegund."  "  Maybe  so,"  replied  one 
of  the  blues ;  "  but  that  is  not  the  question.  We  ask  you 
whether  you  have  not  a  great  affection  for  the  King  of  the 
Bulgarians  ?"  "  For  the  King  of  the  Bulgarians  ?"  said  Can- 
dide. "  Oh,  Lord !  not  at  all ;  why,  I  never  saw  him  in  my  life." 


CANDIDE.  15 

"Is  it  possible  !  Oh,  he  is  a  most  charming  king.  Come,  we 
must  drink  his  health."  "  With  all  my  heart,  gentlemen,"  says 
Candide,  and  off  he  tosses  his  glass.  "  Bravo  !  "  cry  the  blues ; 
"  you  are  now  the  support,  the  defender,  the  hero  of  the 
Bulgarians  ;  your  fortune  is  made  ;  you  are  in  the  high  road 
to  glory."  So  saying,  they  handcuff  him,  and  carry  him 
away  to  the  regiment.  There  he  is  made  to  wheel  about  to 
the  right,  to  the  left,  to  draw  his  rammer,  to  return  his 
rammer,  to  present,  to  fire,  to  march  ;  and  they  give  him 
thirty  blows  with  a  cane.  The  next  day  he  performs  his 
exercise  a  little  better,  and  they  give  him  but  twenty.  The 
day  following  he  comes  off  with  ten,  and  is  looked  upon  as  a 
young  fellow  of  surprising  genius  by  all  his  comrades. 

Candide  was  struck  with  amazement,  and  could  not,  for 
the  soul  of  him,  conceive  how  he  came  to  be  a  hero.  One 
fine  spring  morning  he  took  it  into  his  head  to  take  a  walk, 
and  he  marched  straight  forward,  conceiving  it  to  be  a  privi- 
lege of  the  human  species,  as  well  as  of  the  brute  creation, 
to  make  use  of  their  legs  how  and  when  they  pleased.  He 
had  not  gone  above  two  leagues  when  he  was  overtaken  by 
four  other  heroes,  six  feet  high,  who  bound  him  neck  and 
heels,  and  carried  him  to  a  dungeon.  A  court-martial  sat 
upon  him,  and  he  was  asked  which  he  liked  best,  either  to 
run  the  gauntlet  six-and-thirty  times  through  the  whole  regi- 
ment, or  to  have  his  brains  blown  out  with  a  dozen  of 
musket-balls.  In  vain  did  he  remonstrate  with  them,  that  the 
human  will  is  free,  and  that  he  chose  neither.  They  obliged 
him  to  make  a  choice,  and  he  determined,  in  virtue  of  that 
divine  gift  called  free-will,  to  run  the  gauntlet  six-and-thirty 
times.  He  had  gone  through  his  discipline  twice,  and  the 
regiment  being  composed  of  2,000  men,  they  composed  for 
him  exactly  4,000  strokes,  which  laid  bare  all  his  muscles 
and  nerves  from  the  nape  of  his  neck  to  his  rump.  As 
they  were  preparing  to  make  him  set  out  the  third  time,  our 
young  hero,  unable  to  support  it  any  longer,  begged  as  a 


1 6  C AND  IDE. 

favour  they  would  be  so  obliging  as  to  shoot  him  through 
the  head.  The  favour  being  granted,  a  bandage  was  tied 
over  his  eyes,  and  he  was  made  to  kneel  down.  At  that 
very  instant  his  Bulgarian  Majesty  happening  to  pass  by, 
made  a  stop,  and  inquired  into  the  delinquent's  crime,  and 
being  a  prince  of  great  penetration,  he  found,  from  what  he 
heard  of  Candide,  that  he  was  a  young  metaphysician, 
entirely  ignorant  of  the  world ;  and  therefore,  out  of  his 
great  clemency,  he  condescended  to  pardon  him,  for  which 
his  name  will  be  celebrated  in  every  journal  and  in  every 
age.  A  skilful  surgeon  made  a  cure  of  the  flagellated 
Candide  in  three  weeks,  by  means  of  emollient  unguents 
prescribed  by  Dioscorides.  His  sores  were  now  skinned 
over,  and  he  was  able  to  march,  when  the  King  of  the  Bul- 
garians gave  battle  to  the  King  of  the  Abares. 


CHAPTER  III. 

How  Candide  escaped  from  the  Bulgarians,  c.n.t  what 
befell  him  afterwards. 

NEVER  was  anything  so  gallant,  so  well  accoutred,  so  bril- 
liant, and  so  finely  disposed  as  the  two  armies.  The 
trumpets,  fifes,  hautboys,  drums,  and  cannon  made  such 
harmony  as  never  was  heard  in  hell  itself.  The  entertain- 
ment began  by  a  discharge  of  cannon,  which  in  the  twink- 
ling of  an  eye  laid  flat  about  6,000  men  on  each  side.  The 
musket  bullets  swept  away,  out  of  the  best  of  all  possible 
worlds,  nine  or  ten  thousand  scoundrels  that  infected  its 
surface.  The  bayonet  was  next  the  sufficient  reason  of  the 
deaths  of  several  thousands.  The  whole  might  amount  to 
30,000  souls.  Candide  trembled  like  a  philosopher,  and 
concealed  himself  as  well  as  he  could  during  this  heroic 
butchery. 

At  length,  while  the  two  kings  were  causing  "  Te  Deum  " 


CANDIDE.  17 

to  be  sung  in  each  of  their  camps,  Candida  took  a  resolu- 
tion to  go  and  reason  somewhere  else  upon  causes  and 
effects.  After  passing  over  heaps  of  dead  or  dying  men, 
the  first  place  he  came  to  was  a  neighbouring  village  in  the 
Abarian  territories,  which  had  been  burnt  to  the  ground 
by  the  Bulgarians,  agreeably  to  the  laws  of  war.  Here  lay 
a  number  of  old  men  covered  with  wounds,  who  beheld 
their  wives  dying  with  their  throats  cut,  and  hugging  their 
children  to  their  breasts,  all  stained  with  blood.  There 
several  young  virgins,  whose  bodies  had  been  ripped  open, 
after  they  had  satisfied  the  natural  necessities  of  the  Bulgarian 
heroes,  breathed  their  last ;  while  others,  half-burnt  in  the 
flames,  begged  to  be  despatched  out  of  the  world.  The 
ground  about  them  was  covered  with  the  brains,  arms,  and 
legs  of  dead  men. 

Candide  made  all  the  haste  he  could  to  another  village, 
which  belonged  to  the  Bulgarians,  and  there  he  found  that 
the  heroic  Abares  had  acted  the  same  tragedy.  From  thence, 
continuing  to  walk  over  palpitating  limbs  or  through  ruined 
buildings,  at  length  he  arrived  beyond  the  theatre  of  war, 
with  a  little  provision  in  his  budget  and  Miss  Cunegund's 
image  in  his  heart.  When  he  arrived  in  Holland,  his  pro- 
visions failed  him ;  but  having  heard  that  the  inhabitants  of 
that  country  were  all  rich  and  Christians,  he  made  himself 
sure  of  being  treated  by  them  in  the  same  manner  as  at 
the  baron's  castle,  before  he  had  been  driven  from  thence 
through  the  power  of  Miss  Cunegund's  bright  eyes. 

He  asked  charity  of  several  grave-looking  people,  who 
one  and  all  answered  him,  that  if  he  continued  to  follow 
this  trade,  they  would  have  him  sent  to  the  house  of  correc- 
tion, where  he  should  be  taught  to  get  his  bread. 

He  next  addressed  himself  to  a  person  who  was  just  come 
from  haranguing  a  numerous  assembly  for  a  whole  hour  on 
the  subject  of  charity.  The  orator,  squinting  at  him  under 
his  broad-brimmed  hat,  asked  him  sternly  what  brought 


i8  C AND  IDE. 

him  thither,  and  whether  he  was  for  the  good  old  cause  ? 
"Sir,"  said  Candide  in  a  submissive  manner,  "I  conceive 
there  can  be  no  effect  without  a  cause ;  everything  is  neces- 
sarily concatenated  and  arranged  for  the  best.  It  was 
necessary  that  I  should  be  banished  the  presence  of  Miss 
Cunegund ;  that  I  should  afterwards  run  the  gauntlet ;  and 
it  is  necessary  I  should  beg  my  bread,  till  I  am  able  to 
get  it :  all  this  could  not  have  been  otherwise."  "  Hark 
ye,  friend,"  said  the  orator,  "  do  you  hold  the  Pope  to  be 
Antichrist  ?  "  "  Truly,  I  never  heard  anything  about  it," 
said  Candide ;  "  but  whether  he  is  or  not,  I  am  in  want  of 
something  to  eat."  "  Thou  deservest  not  to  eat  or  to  drink," 
replied  the  orator,  ' '  wretch,  monster  that  thou  art !  Hence  ! 
avoid  my  sight,  nor  ever  come  near  me  again  while  thou 
livest."  The  orator's  wife  happened  to  put  her  head  out 
of  the  window  at  that  instant,  when,  seeing  a  man  who 
doubted  whether  the  Pope  was  Antichrist,  she  discharged 

upon  his  head  a  chamber-pot  full  of .     Good  heavens  ! 

to  what  excess  does  religious  zeal  transport  the  female 
kind ! 

A  man  who  had  never  been  christened,  an  honest  Ana- 
baptist named  James,  was  witness  to  the  cruel  and  igno- 
minious treatment  showed  to  one  of  his  brethren,  to  a 
rational,  two-footed,  unfledged  being.  Moved  with  pity,  he 
carried  him  to  his  own  house,  caused  him  to  be  cleaned, 
gave  him  meat  and  drink,  and  made  him  a  present  of  two 
florins,  at  the  same  time  proposing  to  instruct  him  in  his 
own  trade  of  weaving  Persian  silks,  which  are  fabricated 
in  Holland.  Candide,  penetrated  with  so  much  goodness, 
threw  himself  at  his  feet,  crying,  "  Now  I  am  convinced  that 
my  master  Pangloss  told  me  truth  when  he  said  that  every- 
thing was  for  the  best  in  this  world;  for  I  am  infinitely 
more  affected  with  your  extraordinary  generosity  than  with 
the  inhumanity  of  that  gentleman  in  the  black  coat,  and  his 
wife."  The  next  day,  as  Candide  was  walking  out,  he  met 


CANDIDE.  ig 

a  beggar  all  covered  with  scabs,  his  eyes  were  sunk  in  his 
head,  the  end  of  his  nose  eaten  off,  his  mouth  drawn  on 
one  side,  his  teeth  as  black  as  a  cloak,  snuffling  and  cough- 
ing most  violently,  and  every  time  he  attempted  to  spit,  out 
dropped  a  tooth. 


CHAPTER  IV. 

How  Candide  found  his  old  Master  Pangloss  again,  and 
what  happened  to  them. 

CANDIDE,  divided  between  compassion  and  horror,  but  giving 
way  to  the  former,  bestowed  on  this  shocking  figure  the  two 
florins  which  the  honest  Anabaptist  James  had  just  before 
given  to  him.  The  spectre  looked  at  him  very  earnestly, 
shed  tears,  and  threw  his  arms  about  his  neck.  Candide 
started  back  aghast.  "  Alas  ! "  said  the  one  wretch  to  the 
other,  "  don't  you  know  your  dear  Pangloss  ?  "  "  What  do 
I  hear?  Is  it  you,  my  dear  master — you  I  behold  in  this 
piteous  plight?  What  dreadful  misfortune  has  befallen 
you  ?  What  has  made  you  leave  the  most  magnificent  and 
delightful  of  all  castles  ?  What  has  become  of  Miss  Cune- 
gund,  the  mirror  of  young  ladies,  and  Nature's  master- 
piece?" "Oh  Lord!"  cried  Pangloss,  "lam  so  weak  I 
cannot  stand  ;  "  upon  which  Candide  instantly  led  him  to 
the  Anabaptist's  stable,  and  procured  him  something  to 
eat.  As  soon  as  Pangloss  had  a  little  refreshed  himself, 
Candide  began  to  repeat  his  inquiries  concerning  Miss 
Cunegund.  "  She  is  dead,"  replied  the  other.  "  Dead  ! " 
cried  Candide,  and  immediately  fainted  away.  His  friend 
recovered  him  by  the  help  of  a  little  bad  vinegar,  which  he 
found  by  chance  in  the  stable.  Candide  opened  his  eyes, 
and  again  repeated,  "  Dead  !  Is  Miss  Cunegund  dead  ? 
Ah,  where  is  the  best  of  worlds  now  ?  But  of  what  illness 
did  she  die  ?  Was  it  for  grief  upon  seeing  her  father 


20  CANDIDE. 

kick  me  out  of  his  magnificent  castle  ?  "  "  No,"  replied 
Pangloss.  "  Her  body  was  ripped  open  by  the  Bulgarian 
soldiers  after  they  had  ravished  her  as  much  as  it  was  pos- 
sible for  damsel  to  be  ravished.  They  knocked  the  baron 
her  father  on  the  head  for  attempting  to  defend  her ;  my 
lady  her  mother  was  cut  in  pieces  ;  my  poor  pupil  was 
served  just  in  the  same  manner  as  his  sister;  and  as  for  the 
castle,  they  have  not  left  one  stone  upon  another.  They 
have  destroyed  all  the  ducks  and  the  sheep,  the  barns  and 
the  trees  ;  but  we  have  had  our  revenge,  for  the  Abares 
have  done  the  very  same  thing  in  a  neighbouring  barony, 
which  belonged  to  a  Bulgarian  lord." 

At  hearing  this,  Candide  fainted  away  a  second  time, 
but  having  come  to  himself  again,  he  said  all  that  it  became 
him  to  say.  He  inquired  into  the  cause  and  effect,  as  well 
as  into  the  sufficing  reason,  that  had  reduced  Pangloss  to  so 
miserable  a  condition.  "  Alas,"  replied  the  preceptor,  "  it 
was  love  ;  love,  the  comfort  of  the  human  species  ;  love,  the 
preserver  of  the  universe  the  soul  of  all  sensible  beings ; 
love,  tender  love  ! "  "  Alas,"  replied  Candide,  "  I  have  had 
some  knowledge  of  love  myself,  this  sovereign  of  hearts,  this 
soul  of  souls ;  yet  it  never  cost  me  more  than  a  kiss  and 
twenty  kicks  in  the  rear.  But  how  could  this  beautiful 
cause  produce  in  you  so  hideous  an  effect  ?  " 

Pangloss  made  answer  in  these  terms  :  "  Oh,  my  dear 
Candide,  you  must  remember  Pacquette,  that  pretty  wench 
who  waited  on  our  noble  baroness  ;  in  her  arms  I  tasted  the 
pleasures  of  paradise,  which  produced  these  hell  torments 
with  which  you  see  me  devoured.  She  was  infected  with 
disease,  and  perhaps  is  since  dead  of  it.  She  received  this 
present  of  a  learned  cordelier,  who  derived  it  from  the 
fountain-head.  He  was  indebted  for  it  to  an  old  countess, 
who  had  it  of  a  captain  of  horse,  who  had  it  of  a  mar- 
chioness, who  had  it  of  a  page,  the  page  had  it  of  a  Jesuit, 
who  during  his  noviciate  had  it  in  a  direct  line  from  one  of 


CANDfDE.  21 

the  fellow-adventurers  of  Christopher  Columbus.  For  my 
part,  I  shall  give  it  to  nobody.  I  am  a  dying  man." 

"O  sage  Pangloss,"  cried  Candide,  "what  a  strange 
genealogy  is  this.  Is  not  the  devil  the  root  of  it  ?  "  "  Not 
at  all,"  replied  the  great  man  ;  "  it  was  a  thing  unavoidable, 
a  necessary  ingredient  in  the  best  of  worlds  ;  for  if  Columbus 
had  riot  caught  in  an  island  in  America  this  disease,  which 
is  evidently  opposite  to  the  great  end  of  nature,  we  should 
have  had  neither  chocolate  nor  cochineal.  It  is  also  to  be 
observed  that,  even  to  the  present  time,  in  this  continent  of 
ours,  this  malady,  like  our  religious  controversies,  is  peculiar 
to  ourselves.  The  Turks,  the  Indians,  the  Persians,  the 
Chinese,  the  Siamese,  and  the  Japanese  are  entirely  unac- 
quainted with  it ;  but  there  is  a  sufficing  reason  for  them  to 
know  it  in  a  few  centuries.  In  the  meantime,  it  is  making 
prodigious  havoc  among  us,  especially  in  those  armies  com- 
posed of  well-disciplined  hirelings,  who  determine  the  fate 
of  nations  ;  for  we  may  safely  affirm  that,  when  an  army  of 
30,000  men  fights  another  equal  in  number,  there  are  about 
20,000  of  them  so  diseased  on  each  side." 

"  Very  surprising  indeed,"  said  Candide,  "  but  you  must 
get  cured."  "  Lord  help  me  !  how  can  I  ?  "  said  Pangloss. 
"  My  dear  friend,  I  have  not  a  penny  in  the  world  ;  and  you 
know  one  cannot  be  bled  or  have  a  glister  without  a  fee," 

This  last  speech  had  its  effect  on  Candide.  He  flew  to 
the  charitable  Anabaptist  James.  He  flung  himself  at  his 
feet,  and  gave  him  so  striking  a  picture  of  the  miserable 
situation  of  his  friend,  that  the  good  man,  without  any  fur- 
ther hesitation,  agreed  to  take  Dr.  Pangloss  into  his  house 
and  to  pay  for  his  cure.  The  cure  was  effected  with  only 
the  loss  of  one  eye  and  an  ear.  As  he  wrote  a  good  hand 
and  understood  accounts  tolerably  well,  the  Anabaptist  made 
him  his  bookkeeper.  At  the  expiration  of  two  months, 
being  obliged  to  go  to  Lisbon  about  some  mercantile  affairs, 
he  took  the  two  philosophers  with  him  in  the  same  ship, 


22  CANDIDE. 

Pangloss  during  the  course  of  the  voyage  explained  to  him 
how  everything  was  so  constituted  that  it  could  not  be 
better.  James  did  not  quite  agree  with  him  on  this 
point.  "  Mankind,"  said  he,  "  must  in  some  things  have 
deviated  from  their  original  innocence ;  for  they  were  not 
born  wolves,  and  yet  they  worry  one  another  like  those  beasts 
of  prey.  God  never  gave  them  twenty-four  pounders  nor 
bayonets,  and  yet  they  have  made  cannon  and  bayonets  to 
destroy  one  another.  To  this  account  I  might  add  not 
only  bankruptcies,  but  the  law  which  seizes  on  the  effects  of 
bankrupts,  only  to  cheat  the  creditors."  "  All  this  was  in- 
dispensably necessary,"  replied  the  one-eyed  doctor ;  "  for 
private  misfortunes  are  public  benefits ;  so  that  the  more 
private  misfortunes  there  are  the  greater  is  the  general  good." 
While  he  was  arguing  in  this  manner  the  sky  was  overcast, 
the  winds  blew  from  the  four  quarters  of  the  compass,  and 
the  ship  was  assailed  by  a  most  terrible  tempest  within  sight 
of  the  port  of  Lisbon. 


CHAPTER  V. 

A  Tempest,  a  Shipwreck,  an  Earthquake,  and  what  else  befell 
Dr.  Pangloss,  Candide,  and  James  the  Anabaptist. 

ONE-HALF  of  the  passengers,  weakened  and  half- dead  with 
the  inconceivable  anxiety  and  sickness  which  the  rolling  of 
a  vessel  at  sea  occasions  through  the  whole  human  frame, 
were  lost  to  all  sense  of  the  danger  that  surrounded  them. 
The  other  made  loud  outcries,  or  betook  themselves  to  their 
prayers.  The  sails  were  blown  into  shivers,  and  the  masts 
were  brought  by  the  board.  The  vessel  was  a  perfect  wreck. 
Every  one  was  busily  employed,  but  nobody  could  be  either 
heard  or  obeyed.  The  Anabaptist,  being  upon  deck,  lent  a 
helping  hand  as  well  as  the  rest,  when  a  brutish  sailor  gave 
him  a  blow  and  laid  him  speechless  ;  but  with  the  violence 


C AND  IDE.  23 

of  the  blow  the  tar  himself  tumbled  head-foremost  overboard, 
and  fell  upon  a  piece  of  the  broken  mast,  which  he  imme- 
diately grasped.  Honest  James,  forgetting  the  injury  he  had 
so  lately  received  from  him,  flew  to  his  assistance,  and  with 
great  difficulty  hauled  him  in  again,  but  in  the  attempt  was, 
by  a  sudden  jerk  of  the  ship,  thrown  overboard  himself,  in 
sight  of  the  very  fellow  whom  he  had  risked  his  life  to  save, 
and  who  took  not  the  least  notice  of  him  in  this  distress. 
Candide,  who  beheld  all  that  passed,  and  saw  his  benefactor 
one  moment  rising  above  water  and  the  next  swallowed 
up  by  the  merciless  waves,  was  preparing  to  jump  after  him ; 
but  was  prevented  by  the  philosopher  Pangloss,  who  demon- 
strated to  him  that  the  coast  of  Lisbon  had  been  made  on 
purpose  for  the  Anabaptist  to  be  drowned  there.  While  he 
was  proving  his  argument  a  priori,  the  ship  foundered,  and 
the  whole  crew  perished,  except  Pangloss,  Candide,  and  the 
sailor  who  had  been  the  means  of  drowning  the  good  Ana- 
baptist. The  villain  swam  ashore,  but  Pangloss  and  Can- 
dide got  to  land  upon  a  plank. 

As  soon  as  they  had  recovered  themselves  from  their  sur- 
prise and  fatigue,  they  walked  towards  Lisbon.  With  what 
little  money  they  had  left  they  thought  to  save  themselves 
from  starving  after  having  escaped  drowning. 

Scarce  had  they  done  lamenting  the  loss  of  their  benefactor 
and  set  foot  in  the  city,  when  they  perceived  the  earth  to 
tremble  under  their  feet,  and  the  sea,  swelling  and  foaming 
in  the  harbour,  dash  in  pieces  the  vessels  that  were  riding  at 
an  anchor.  Large  sheets  of  flame  and  cinders  covered  the 
streets  and  public  places.  The  houses  tottered,  and  were 
tumbled  topsy-turvy,  even  to  their  foundations,  which  were 
themselves  destroyed ;  and  thirty  thousand  inhabitants  of 
both  sexes,  young  and  old,  were  buried  beneath  the  ruins. 
The  sailor,  whistling  and  swearing,  cried,  "'  Damn  it,  there's 
something  to  be  got  here  ! "  "  What  can  be  the  '  sufficient 
reason '  of  this  phenomenon  ? "  said  Pangloss.  "  It  is 


24  CANDIDA. 

certainly  the  Day  of  Judgment,"  said  Candide.  The  sailor, 
defying  death  in  the  pursuit  of  plunder,  rushed  into  the 
midst  of  the  ruin,  where  he  found  some  money,  with  which 
he  got  drunk,  and  after  he  had  slept  himself  sober,  he  pur- 
chased the  favours  of  the  first  good-natured  wench  that  came 
in  his  way,  amidst  the  ruins  of  demolished  houses  and  the 
groans  of  half-buried  and  expiring  persons.  Pangloss  pulled 
him  by  the  sleeve  :  "  Friend,"  said  he,  "  this  ^is  not  right ; 
you  trespass  against  the  universal  reason,  and  have  mistaken 
your  time."  "  Death  and  'ounds  !  "  answered  the  other,  "  I 
am  a  sailor  and  born  at  Batavia,  and  have  trampled  four 
times  upon  the  crucifix  in  as  many  voyages  to  Japan  ;  you 
are  come  to  a  good  hand  with  your  universal  reason" 

In  the  meantime,  Candide,  who  had  been  wounded  by 
some  pieces  of  stone  that  fell  from  the  houses,  lay  stretched 
in  the  street,  almost  covered  with  rubbish.  "  For  God's 
sake,"  said  he  to  Pangloss,  "  get  me  a  little  wine  and  oil ;  I 
am  dying."  "  This  concussion  of  the  earth  is  no  new  thing," 
replied  Pangloss  ;  "  the  city  of  Lima  in  America  experienced 
the  same  last  year  :  the  same  cause,  the  same  effect ;  there 
is  certainly  a  train  of  sulphur  all  the  way  underground  from 
Lima  to  Lisbon."  "  Nothing  more  probable,"  said  Candide ; 
"  but  for  the  love  of  God  a  little  oil  and  wine."  "  Probable  ! " 
replied  the  philosopher.  "  I  maintain  that  the  thing  is 
demonstrable."  Candide  fainted  away,  and  Pangloss  fetched 
him  some  water  from  a  neighbouring  spring. 

The  next  day,  in  searching  among  the  ruins,  they  found 
some  eatables,  with  which  they  repaired  their  exhausted 
strength.  After  this  they  assisted  the  inhabitants  in  relieving 
the  distressed  and  wounded.  Some  whom  they  had  humanely 
assisted,  gave  them  as  good  a  dinner  as  could  be  expected 
under  such  terrible  circumstances.  The  repast,  indeed,  was 
mournful,  and  the  company  moistened  their  bread  with  their 
tears;  but  Pangloss  endeavoured  to  comfort  them  under 
this  affliction  by  affirm  ing  that  things  could  not  be  otherwise 


CANDIDE.  25 

than  they  were  :  "  for,"  said  he,  "  all  this  is  for  the  very 
best  end,  for  if  there  is  a  volcano  at  Lisbon,  it  could  be  in 
no  other  spot ;  for  it  is  impossible  but  things  should  be  as 
they  are,  for  everything  is  for  the  best." 

By  the  side  of  the  preceptor  sat  a  little  man  dressed  in 
black,  who  was  one  of  the  familiars  of  the  Inquisition. 
This  person,  taking  him  up  with  great  complaisance,  said, 
"  Possibly,  my  good  sir,  you  do  not  believe  in  original  sin  ; 
for  if  everything  is  best,  there  could  have  been  no  such 
thing  as  the  fall  or  punishment  of  men." 

"  I  humbly  ask  your  excellency's  pardon,"  answered 
Pangloss,  still  more  politely ;  "  for  the  fall  of  man,  and  the 
curse  consequent  thereupon,  necessarily  entered  into  the 
system  of  the  best  of  worlds."  "  That  is  as  much  as  to  say, 
sir,"  rejoined  the  familiar,  "you  do  not  believe  in  free-will." 
"  Your  excellency  will  be  so  good  as  to  excuse  me,"  said 
Pangloss  ;  "  free-will  is  consistent  with  absolute  necessity ; 
for  it  was  necessary  we  should  be  free,  for  in  that  the 
will " 

Pangloss  was  in  the  midst  of  his  proposition  when  the 
Inquisitor  beckoned  to  his  attendant  to  help  him  to  a  glass 
of  port  wine. 


CHAPTER  VI. 

How  the  Poriugtiese  made  a  superb  Auto  da-fe  to  prei>ent  any  future 
Earthquakes,  and  how  Candide  underwent  public  flagellation. 

AFTER  the  earthquake,  which  had  destroyed  three-fourths 
of  the  city  of  Lisbon,  the  sages  of  that  country  could  think 
of  no  means  more  effectual  to  preserve  the  kingdom  from 
utter  ruin  than  to  entertain  the  people  with  an  auto-da-fe, 
it  having  been  decided  by  the  University  of  Coimbra  that 
the  burning  a  few  people  alive  by  a  slow  fire,  and  with  great 
ceremony,  is  an  infallible  secret  to  prevent  earthquakes. 


26  C AND  IDE. 

In  consequence  thereof,  they  had  seized  on  a  Biscayner 
for  marrying  his  godmother,  and  on  two  Portuguese  for 
taking  out  the  bacon  of  a  larder  pullet  they  were  eating ; 
after  dinner,  they  came  and  secured  Doctor  Pangloss  and 
his  pupil  Candide,  the  one  for  speaking  his  mind,  and  the 
other  for  seeming  to  approve  what  he  had  said.  They 
were  conducted  to  separate  apartments,  extremely  cool, 
where  they  were  never  incommoded  with  the  sun.  Eight 
days  afterwards  they  were  each  dressed  in  a  san-benito,  and 
their  heads  were  adorned  with  paper  mitres.  The  mitre 
and  san-benito  worn  by  Candide  were  painted  with  flames 
reversed,  and  with  devils  that  had  neither  tails  nor  claws ; 
but  Doctor  Pangloss's  devils  had  both  tails  and  claws,  and 
his  flames  were  upright.  In  these  habits  they  marched  in 
procession,  and  heard  a  very  pathetic  sermon,  which  was 
followed  by  an  anthem  accompanied  by  bagpipes.  Candide 
was  flogged  to  some  tune  while  the  anthem  was  singing ; 
the  Biscayner  and  the  two  men  who  would  not  eat  bacon 
were  burnt ;  and  Pangloss  was  hanged,  which  is  not  a  common 
custom  at  these  solemnities.  The  same  day  there  was 
another  earthquake,  which  made  most  dreadful  havoc. 

Candide,  amazed,  terrified,  confounded,  astonished,  all 
bloody  and  trembling  from  head  to  foot,  said  to  himself, 
"If  this  is  the  best  of  all  possible  worlds,  what  are  the 
others  ?  If  I  had  only  been  whipped,  I  could  have  put  up 
with  it,  as  I  did  among  the  Bulgarians ;  but,  oh  my  dear 
Pangloss  !  my  beloved  master  !  thou  greatest  of  philosophers ! 
that  ever  I  should  live  to  see  thee  hanged,  without  knowing 
for  what  !  O  my  dear  Anabaptist,  thou  best  of  men,  that 
it  should  be  thy  fate  to  be  drowned  in  the  very  harbour ! 
O  Miss  Cunegund,  you  mirror  of  young  ladies  !  that  it 
should  be  your  fate  to  be  ripped  open  !  " 

He  was  making  the  best  of  his  way  from  the  place  where 
he  had  been  preached  to,  whipped,  absolved,  and  received 
benediction,  when  he  was  accosted  by  an  old  woman,  who 
said  to  him,  "  Take  courage,  child,  and  follow  me." 


C AND  IDE.  27 


CHAPTER  VII. 

How  the  Old  Woman  took  care  of  Candide,  and  /i<m>  he  found  the  Object 
of  his  Love. 

CANDIDE  followed  the  old  woman,  though  without  taking 
courage,  to  a  decayed  house,  where  she  gave  him  a  pot  of 
pomatum  to  anoint  his  sores,  showed  him  a  very  neat  bed 
with  a  suit  of  clothes  hanging  up  by  it,  and  set  victuals  and 
drink  before  him.  "  There,"  said  she,  "  eat,  drink,  and 
sleep ;  and  may  our  Blessed  Lady  of  Atocha,  and  the  great 
St.  Anthony  of  Padua,  and  the  illustrious  St.  James  of  Com- 
postella,  take  you  under  their  protection.  I  shall  be  back 
to-morrow."  Candide,  struck  with  amazement  at  what  he 
had  seen,  at  what  he  had  suffered,  and  still  more  with  the 
charity  of  the  old  woman,  would  have  shown  his  acknow- 
ledgment by  kissing  her  hand.  "  It  is  not  my  hand  you 
ought  to  kiss,"  said  the  old  woman ;  "  I  shall  be  back  to- 
morrow. Anoint  your  back,  eat,  and  take  your  rest." 

Candide,  notwithstanding  so  many  disasters,  ate  and  slept. 
The  next  morning  the  old  woman  brought  him  his  break- 
fast, examined  his  back,  and  rubbed  it  herself  with  another 
ointment.  She  returned  at  the  proper  time  and  brought 
him  his  dinner,  and  at  night  she  visited  him  again  with  his 
supper.  The  next  day  she  observed  the  same  ceremonies. 
"  Who  are  you  ?  "  said  Candide  to  her.  "  What  God  has 
inspired  you  with  so  much  goodness  ?  What  return  can  I 
make  you  for  this  charitable  assistance  ? "  The  good  old 
beldame  kept  a  profound  silence.  In  the  evening  she  re- 
turned, but  without  his  supper.  "  Come  along  with  me," 
said  she,  "  but  do  not  speak  a  word."  She  took  him  under 
her  arm,  and  walked  with  him  about  a  quarter  of  a  mile  into 
the  country,  till  they  came  to  a  lonely  house  surrounded 
with  moats  and  gardens.  The  old  conductress  knocked  at 


28  CANDIDE. 

a  little  door,  which  was  immediately  opened,  and  she 
showed  him  up  a  pair  of  back-stairs  into  a  small  but  richly- 
furnished  apartment.  There  she  made  him  sit  down  on  a 
brocaded  sofa,  shut  the  door  upon  him,  and  left  him. 
Candide  thought  himself  in  a  trance ;  he  looked  upon  his 
whole  life  hitherto  as  a  frightful  dream,  and  the  present 
moment  a  very  agreeable  one. 

The  old  woman  soon  returned,  supporting,  with  great 
difficulty,  a  young  lady,  who  appeared  scarce  able  to  stand. 
She  was  of  a  majestic  mien  and  stature,  her  dress  was  rich 
and  glittering  with  diamonds,  and  her  face  was  covered 
with  a  veil.  "  Take  off  that  veil,"  said  the  old  woman  to 
Candide.  The  young  man  approaches,  and  with  a  trem- 
bling hand  takes  off  her  veil.  What  a  happy  moment ! 
What  surprise  !  He  thought  he  beheld  Miss  Cunegund. 
He  did  behold  her :  it  was  she  herself !  His  strength  fails 
him,  he  cannot  utter  a  word,  he  falls  at  her  feet.  Cunegund 
faints  upon  the  sofa.  The  old  woman  bedews  them  with 
spirits  ;  they  recover ;  they  begin  to  speak.  At  first  they 
could  express  themselves  only  in  broken  accents  •  their 
questions  and  answers  were  alternately  interrupted  with 
sighs,  tears,  and  exclamations.  The  old  woman  desired 
them  to  make  less  noise,  and  after  this  prudent  admonition, 
left  them  together.  "  Good  heavens  !  "  cried  Candide,  "  is 
it  you  ?  Is  it  Miss  Cunegund  I  behold,  and  alive  ?  Do  I 
find  you  again  in  Portugal?  Then  you  have  not  been 
ravished?  They  did  not  rip  you  open,  as  the  philo- 
sopher Pangloss  informed  me  ?  "  "  Indeed,  but  they  did," 
replied  Miss  Cunegund ;  "  but  these  two  accidents  do  not 
always  prove  mortal."  "  But  were  your  father  and  mother 
killed?"  "Alas!"  answered  she, .  "  it  is  but  too  true!" 
and  she  wept.  "And  your  brother?"  "And  my  brother 
also."  "  And  how  came  you  into  Portugal  ?  And  how  did 
you  know  of  my  being  here  ?  And  by  what  strange  adven- 
ture did  you  contrive  to  have  me  brought  into  this  house  ? 


CANDIDE.  29 

And  how "     f '  I  will  tell  you  all,"  replied  the  lady ;  "  but 

first  you  must  acquaint  me  with  all  that  has  befallen  you 
since  the  innocent  kiss  you  gave  me,  and  the  rude  kicking 
you  received  in  consequence  of  it." 

Candide,  with  the  greatest  submission,  prepared  to  obey 
the  commands  of  his  fair  mistress,  and  though  he  was  still 
wrapt  in  amazement,  though  his  voice  was  low  and  tremu- 
lous, though  his  back  pained  him,  yet  he  gave  her  a  most 
ingenious  account  of  everything  that  had  befallen  him  since 
the  moment  of  their  separation.  Cunegund,  with  her  eyes 
uplifted  to  heaven,  shed  tears  when  he  related  the  death 
of  the  good  Anabaptist  James,  and  of  Pangloss  ;  after  which 
she  thus  related  her  adventures  to  Candide,  who  lost  not  one 
syllable  she  uttered,  and  seemed  to  devour  her  with  his  eyes 
all  the  time  she  was  speaking. 


CHAPTER  VIII. 

The  History  of  Cunegund. 

"  L  WAS  in  bed  and  fast  asleep  when  it  pleased  heaven  to 
send  the  Bulgarians  to  our  delightful  castle  of  Thunder- ten- 
tronckh,  where  they  murdered  my  father  and  brother,  and 
cut  my  mother  in  pieces.  A  tall  Bulgarian  soldier,  six  feet 
high,  perceiving  that  I  had  fainted  away  at  this  sight, 
attempted  to  ravish  me.  The  operation  brought  me  to  my 
senses.  I  cried,  I  struggled,  I  bit,  I  scratched,  I  would 
have  torn  the  tall  Bulgarian's  eyes  out,  not  knowing  that 
what  had  happened  at  my  father' s  castle  was  a  customary 
thing.  The  brutal  soldier,  enraged  at  my  resistance,  gave 
me  a  cut  in  the  left  groin  with  his  hanger,  the  mark  of  which 
I  still  carry."  "  Methinks  I  long  to  see  it,"  said  Candide, 
with  all  imaginable  simplicity.  "  You  shall,''  said  Cune- 
gund ;  "  but  let  me  proceed."  "  Pray  do,"  replied  Candide. 
She  continued  :  "  A  Bulgarian  captain  came  in,  and  saw 


3o  CANDIDE. 

me  weltering  in  my  blood,  and  the  soldier  still  as  busy 
as  if  no  one  had  been  present.  The  officer,  enraged 
at  the  fellow's  want  of  respect  to  him,  killed  him  with 
one  stroke  of  his  sabre.  This  captain  took  care  of  me, 
had  me  cured,  and  carried  me  prisoner  of  war  to  his 
quarters.  I  washed  what  little  linen  he  was  master  of,  and 
dressed  his  victuals.  He  was  very  fond  of  me,  that  was 
certain  ;  neither  can  I  deny  that  he  was  well-made,  and  had 
a  white  soft  skin  ;  but  he  was  very  stupid,  and  knew  nothing 
of  philosophy.  It  might  plainly  be  perceived  that  he  had 
not  been  educated  under  Doctor  Pangloss.  In  three 
months'  time,  having  gamed  away  all  his  money,  and  being 
grown  tired  of  me,  he  sold  me  to  a  Jew  named  Don 
Issachar,  who  traded  to  Holland  and  Portugal,  and  was 
passionately  fond  of  women.  This  Jew  showed  me  great 
kindness,  in  hopes  to  gain  my  favours  ;  but  he  never  could 
prevail  on  me.  A  modest  woman  may  be  once  outraged, 
but  her  virtue  is  greatly  strengthened  thereby.  In  order  to 
make  sure  of  me,  he  brought  me  to  this  country-house  you 
now  see.  I  had  hitherto  believed  that  nothing  could  equal 
the  beauty  of  the  castle  of  Thunder-ten-tronckh,  but  I  found 
I  was  mistaken. 

"  The  Grand  Inquisitor  saw  me  one  day  at  mass,  ogled  me 
all  the  time  of  service,  and  when  it  was  over  sent  to  let  me 
know  he  wanted  to  speak  with  me  about  some  private  busi- 
ness. I  was  conducted  to  his  palace,  where  I  told  him  all 
my  story.  He  represented  to  me  how  much  it  was  beneath 
a  person  of  my  birth  to  belong  to  a  circumcised  Israelite. 
He  caused  a  proposal  to  be  made  to  Don  Issachar,  that  he 
should  resign  me  to  his  lordship.  Don  Issachar,  being  the 
court  banker  and  a  man  of  credit,  was  not  easy  to  be  pre- 
vailed upon.  His  lordship  threatened  him  with  an  auto- 
da-fe  ;  in  short,  my  Jew  was  frightened  into  a  composition, 
and  it  was  agreed  between  them  that  the  house  and  myself 
should  belong  to  both  in  common ;  that  the  Jew  should 


CAN  DID E.  3I 

have  Monday,  Wednesday,  and  the  Sabbath  to  himself,  and 
the  Inquisitor  the  other  four  days  of  the  week.  This  agree- 
ment has  subsisted  almost  six  months,  but  not  without  several 
contests  whether  the  space  from  Saturday  night  to  Sunday 
morning  belonged  to  the  old  or  the  new  law.  For  my  part, 
I  have  hitherto  withstood  them  both,  and  truly  I  believe  that 
this  is  the  very  reason  why  they  are  both  so  fond  of  me. 

"  At  length,  to  turn  aside  the  scourge  of  earthquakes,  and 
to  intimidate  Don  Issachar,  my  Lord  Inquisitor  was  pleased 
to  celebrate  an  auto-da-fe.  He  did  me  the  honour  to 
invite  me  to  the  ceremony.  I  had  a  very  good  seat ;  and 
refreshments  of  all  kinds  were  offered  the  ladies  between 
mass  and  the  execution.  I  was  dreadfully  shocked  at  the 
burning  the  two  Jews  and  the  honest  Biscayner  who 
married  his  godmother ;  but  how  great  was  my  surprise,  my 
consternation,  and  concern,  when  I  beheld  a  figure  so  like 
Pangloss,  dressed  in  a  san-benito  and  mitre  !  I  rubbed  my 
eyes,  I  looked  at  him  attentively.  I  saw  him  hanged,  and 
I  fainted  away.  Scarce  had  I  recovered  my  senses  when  I 
beheld  you,  stark  naked  :  this  was  the  height  of  horror, 
grief,  and  despair.  I  must  confess  to  you  for  a  truth,  that 
your  skin  is  far  whiter  and  more  blooming  than  that  of  the 
Bulgarian  captain.  This  spectacle  worked  me  up  to  a  pitch 
of  distraction.  I  screamed  out,  and  would  have  said,  '  Hold, 
barbarians  ! '  but  my  voice  failed  me  ;  and  indeed  my  cries 
would  have  signified  nothing.  After  you  had  been  severely 
whipped,  '  How  is  it  possible,'  said  I  to  myself,  '  that  the 
lovely  Candide  and  the  sage  Pangloss  should  be  at  Lisbon, 
the  one  to  receive  an  hundred  lashes,  and  the  other  to  be 
hanged,  by  order  of  my  Lord  Inquisitor,  of  whom  I  am  so 
great  a  favourite  ? '  Pangloss  deceived  me  most  cruelly  in 
saying  that  everything  is  fittest  and  best. 

"  Thus  agitated  and  perplexed,  now  distracted  and  lost, 
now  half- dead  with  grief,  I  revolved  in  my  mind  the  murder 
of  my  father,  mother,  and  brother,  committed  before  my 


32  CANDIDE. 

eyes ;  the  indolence  of  the  rascally  Bulgarian  soldier ;  the 
wound  he  gave  me  in  the  groin  ;  my  servitude  ;  my  being  a 
cook  wench  to  my  Bulgarian  captain  ;  my  subjection  to  the 
dirty  Jew  and  my  cruel  Inquisitor  ;  the  hanging  of  Doctor 
Pangloss  ;  the  Miserere  sung  while  you  were  whipping ;  and 
particularly  the  kiss  I  gave  you  behind  the  screen  the  last 
day  I  ever  beheld  you.  I  returned  thanks  to  God  for 
having  brought  you  to  the  place  where  I  was  after  so  many 
trials.  I  charged  the  old  woman  who  attends  me  to  bring 
you  hither  as  soon  as  was  convenient.  She  has  punctually 
executed  my  orders,  and  I  now  enjoy  the  inexpressible 
satisfaction  of  seeing  you,  hearing  you,  and  speaking  to  you. 
But  you  must  certainly  be  half-dead  with  hunger ;  I  myself 
have  a  great  inclination  to  eat ;  and  so  let  us  sit  down  to 
supper." 

Upon  this  the  two  lovers  immediately  placed  themselves 
at  table,  and  after  having  supped,  they  returned  to  seat 
themselves  again  on  the  magnificent  sofa  already  mentioned, 
where  they  were  in  amorous  dalliance  when  Signor  Don 
Issachar,  one  of  the  masters  of  the  house,  entered  unex- 
pectedly. It  was  the  Sabbath-day,  and  he  came  to  enjoy 
his  privilege,  and  sigh  forth  his  passion  at  the  feet  of  the 
fair  Cunegund. 

CHAPTER  IX. 

What  happened  to  Cunegund,  Candide,  the  Grand  Inquisitor, 
and  the  Jkw. 

THIS  same  Issachar  was  the  most  choleric  little  Hebrew 
that  had  ever  been  in  Israel  since  the  captivity  of  Babylon. 
"What,  then,"  said  he,  "  thou  Galilean  wretch?  The 
Inquisitor  was  not  enough  for  thee,  but  this  rascal  must 
come  in  for  a  share  with  me  !  "  In  uttering  these  words  he 
drew  out  a  long  poignard  which  he  always  carried  about  with 
him,  and  never  dreaming  that  his  adversary  had  any  arms, 


CANDIDE.  33 

he  attacked  him  most  furiously ;  but  our  honest  Westphalian 
had  received  a  handsome  s\vord  of  the  old  woman  with  the 
suit  of  clothes.  Candide  draws  his  rapier,  and  though  he 
was  the  most  gentle,  sweet-tempered  young  man  breathing, 
he  whips  it  into  the  Israelite,  and  lays  him  sprawling  on  the 
floor  at  the  fair  Cunegund's  feet. 

"Holy  Virgin!"  cried  she,  "what  will  become  of  us? 
A  man  killed  in  my  apartment !  If  the  peace  officers  come 
we  are  undone."  "  Had  not  Pangloss  been  hanged,"  replied 
Candide.  "  he  would  have  given  us  most  excellent  advice 
in  this  emergency,  for  he  was  a  profound  philosopher.  But 
since  he  is  not  here,  let  us  consult  the  old  woman."  She 
was  very  understanding,  and  was  beginning  to  give  her 
advice,  when  another  door  opened  on  a  sudden.  It  was 
now  one  o'clock  in  the  morning,  and  of  course  the  beginning 
of  Sunday,  which,  by  agreement,  fell  to  the  lot  of  my  Lord 
Inquisitor.  Entering,  he  discovers  the  flagellated  Candide, 
with  his  drawn  sword  in  his  hand,  a  dead  body  stretched  on 
the  floor,  Cunegund  frightened  out  of  her  wits,  and  the  old 
woman  giving  advice. 

At  that  very  moment  a  sudden  thought  came  into  Can- 
dide's  head.  "  If  this  holy  man,"  thought  he,  "  should  call 
assistance,  I  shall  most  undoubtedly  be  consigned  to  the 
flames,  and  Miss  Cunegund  may  perhaps  meet  with  no  better 
treatment.  Besides,  he  was  the  cause  of  my  being  so  cruelly 
whipped ;  he  is  my  rival ;  and  as  I  have  now  begun  to  dip 
my  hands  in  blood,  I  will  kill  away,  for  there  is  no  time  to 
hesitate."  This  whole  train  of  reasoning  was  clear  and  in- 
stantaneous ;  so  that,  without  giving  time  to  the  Inquisitor 
to  recover  from  his  surprise,  he  ran  him  through  the  body, 
and  laid  him  by  the  side  of  the  Jew.  "  Good  God  !  "  cries 
Cunegund,  "  here's  another  fine  piece  of  work !  Now  there 
can  be  no  mercy  for  us ;  we  are  excommunicated  to  all  the 
devils  in  hell ;  our  last  hour  has  come  !  But  how  in  the  name 
of  wonder  could  you,  who  are  of  so  mild  a  temper,  despatch 


34  CANDIDE. 

a  Jew  and  Inquisitor  in  two  minutes'  time  ? "  "  Beau- 
tiful miss,"  answered  Candide,  "  when  a  man  is  in  love,  is 
jealous,  and  has  been  flogged  by  the  Inquisition,  he  becomes 
lost  to  all  reflection." 

The  old  woman  then  put  in  her  word.  "  There  are  three 
Andalusian  horses  in  the  stable,"  said  she,  "  with  as  many 
bridles  and  saddles.  Let  the  brave  Candide  get  them 
ready ;  madame  has  a  parcel  of  moidores  and  jewels. 
Let  us  mount  immediately,  though  I  have  only  one  side 
to  sit  upon.  Let  us  set  out  for  Cadiz ;  it  is  the  finest 
weather  in  the  world,  and  there  is  great  pleasure  in  travel- 
ling in  the  cool  of  the  night." 

Candide,  without  any  further  hesitation,  saddles  the  three 
horses  ;  and  Miss  Cunegund,  the  old  woman,  and  he  set 
out,  and  travelled  thirty  miles  without  once  baiting.  While 
they  were  making  the  best  of  their  way,  the  Holy  Brother- 
hood entered  the  house.  My  lord  the  Inquisitor  was  interred 
in  a  magnificent  manner ;  and  Master  Issachar's  body  was 
thrown  upon  a  dunghill. 

Candide,  Cunegunde,  and  the  old  woman  had  by  this 
time  reached  the  little  town  of  Avecina,  in  the  midst  of  the 
mountains  of  Sierra  Morena,  and  were  engaged  in  the  fol- 
lowing conversation  in  an  inn  where  they  had  taken  up  their 
quarters. 

• 

CHAPTER  X. 

In  what  distress  Candide,  Cunegund,  and  the  Old  Woman  arrive  at 
Cadiz;  and  of  their  Embarkation. 

"  WHO  could  it  be  that  has  robbed  me  of  my  moidores  and 
jewels  ? "  exclaimed  Miss  Cunegund,  all  bathed  in  tears. 
"  How  shall  we  live  ?  what  shall  we  do  ?  where  shall  I  find 
Inquisitors  and  Jews  who  can  give  me  more  ?  "  "  Alas  ! " 
said  the  old  woman,  "  I  have  a  shrewd  suspicion  of  a 
reverend  Father  Cordelier,  who  lay  last  night  in  the  same  inn 


CANDIDE.  35 

with  us  at  Badajoz.  God  forbid  I  should  condemn  anyone 
wrongfully,  but  he  came  into  our  room  twice,  and  he  set  off 
in  the  morning  long  before  us."  "  Alas  !  "  said  Candide, 
'•  Pangloss  has  often  demonstrated  to  me  that  the  goods  of 
this  world  are  common  to  all  men,  and  that  every  one  has 
an  equal  right  to  the  enjoyment  of  them  ;  but  according  to 
these  principles,  the  Cordelier  ought  to  have  left  us  enough 
to  carry  us  to  the  end  of  our  journey.  Have  you  nothing 
at  all  left,  my  dear  Miss  Cunegund?  "  "Not  a  sous,"  re- 
plied she.  "  What  is  to  be  done,  then  ?  "  said  Candide. 
"  Sell  one  of  the  horses,"  replied  the  old  woman.  "  I  will 
get  behind  Miss  Cunegund,  though  I  have  only  one  side  to 
ride  on ;  and  we  shall  reach  Cadiz,  never  fear." 

In  the  same  inn  there  was  a  Benedictine  friar,  who  bought 
the  horse  very  cheap.  Candide,  Cunegund,  and  the  old 
woman,  after  passing  through  Lucina,  Chellas,  and  Letrixa, 
arrived  at  length  at  Cadiz.  A  fleet  was  then  getting  ready, 
and  troops  were  assembling,  in  order  to  reduce  the  reverend 
father  Jesuits  of  Paraguay,  who  were  accused  of  having  ex- 
cited one  of  the  Indian  tribes  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the 
town  of  the  Holy  Sacrament  to  revolt  against  the  kings  of 
Spain  and  Portugal.  Candide,  having  been  in  the  Bulgarian 
service,  performed  the  military  exercise  of  that  nation  before 
the  general  of  this  little  army  with  so  intrepid  an  air,  and  with 
such  agility  and  expedition,  that  he  gave  him  the  command 
of  a  company  of  foot.  Being  now  made  a  captain,  he  em- 
barks with  Miss  Cunegund,  the  old  woman,  two  valets,  and 
the  two  Andalusian  horses  which  had  belonged  to  the  Grand 
Inquisitor  of  Portugal. 

During  their  voyage  they  amused  themselves  with  many 
profound  reasonings  on  poor  Pangloss's  philosophy.  "  We 
are  now  going  into  another  world,  and  surely  it  must  be 
there  that  everything  is  best ;  for  I  must  confess  that  we  have 
had  some  little  reason  to  complain  of  what  passes  m  ours,  both 
as  to  the  physical  and  moral  part.  Though  I  have  a  sincere 

B  2 


36  CANDIDE. 

love  for  you,"  said  Miss  Cunegund,  "  yet  I  still  shudder  at 
the  reflection  of  what  I  have  seen  and  experienced."  "  All 
will  be  well,"  replied  Candide.  "  The  sea  of  this  new  world 
is  already  better  than  our  European  seas  ;  it  is  smoother,  and 
the  winds  blow  more  regularly."  "  God  grant  it,"  said 
Cunegund.  "  But  I  have  met  with  such  terrible  treatment 
in  this  that  I  have  almost  lost  all  hopes  of  a  better." 
"  What  murmuring  and  complaining  is  here  indeed  !  "  cried 
the  old  woman.  "  If  you  had  suffered  half  what  I  have  done 
there  might  be  some  reason  for  it."  Miss  Cunegund  could 
scarce  refrain  laughing  at  the  good  old  woman,  and  thought 
it  droll  enough  to  pretend  to  a  greater  share  of  misfortunes 
than  herself.  "  Alas  !  my  good  dame,"  said  she,  "  unless 
you  had  been  ravished  by  two  Bulgarians,  had  received  two 
deep  wounds  in  your  body,  had  seen  two  of  your  own  castles 
demolished,  had  lost  two  fathers  and  two  mothers,  and  seen 
both  of  them  barbarously  murdered  before  your  eyes,  and, 
to  sum  up  all,  had  two  lovers  whipped  at  an  auto-da-fe, 
I  cannot  see  how  you  could  be  more  unfortunate  than  I. 
Add  to  this,  though  born  a  baroness,  and  bearing  seventy- 
two  quarterings,  I  have  been  reduced  to  a  cook-wench." 
"  Miss,"  replied  the  old  woman,  "  you  do  not  know  my 
family  as  yet ;  but  if  I  were  to  show  you  everything,  you 
would  not  talk  in  this  manner,  but  suspend  your  judgment." 
This  speech  raised  a  high  curiosity  in  Candide  and 
gund,  and  the  old  Avoman  continued  as  follows. 


CHAPTER  XI. 

The  History  of  the  Old  Woman. 

"  I  HAVE  not  always  been  blear  eyed ;  my  nose  did  not 
always  touch  my  chin ;  nor  was  I  always  a  servant.  You 
must  know  that  I  am  the  daughter  of  Pope  Urban  X.  and 
of  the  Princess  of  Palestrina.  To  the  age  of  fourteen  I  was 


CANDIDE.  37 

brought  up  in  a  castle,  to  which  all  the  castles  of  the  Ger- 
man barons  would  not  have  been  fit  for  stabling,  and  one 
of  my  robes  would  have  bought  half  the  province  of  West- 
phalia. I  grew  up,  and  improved  in  beauty,  wit,  and  every 
graceful  accomplishment ;  and  in  the  midst  of  pleasures, 
homage,  and  the  highest  expectations.  I  already  began  to 
inspire  the  men  with  love.  My  breast  began  to  take  its 
right  form ;  and  such  a  breast — white,  firm,  and  formed  like 
that  of  Venus  of  Medicis.  My  eyebrows  were  as  black  as 
jet ;  and  as  for  my  eyes,  they  darted  flames,  and  eclipsed 
the  lustre  of  the  stars,  as  I  was  told  by  the  poets  of  our  part 
of  the  world.  My  maids,  when  they  dressed  and  undressed 
me,  used  to  fall  into  an  ecstasy  in  viewing  me  before  and 
behind ;  and  all  the  men  longed  to  be  in  their  places. 

I  was  contracted  to  a  sovereign  prince  of  Massa  Carara. 
Such  a  prince!  as  handsome  as  myself,  sweet-tempered, 
agreeable,  witty,  and  in  love  with  me  over  head  and  ears. 
I  loved  him  too,  as  our  sex  generally  do  for  the  first  time, 
with  rapture,  transport,  and  idolatry.  The  nuptials  were 
prepared  with  surprising  pomp  and  magnificence ;  the 
ceremony  was  attended  with  feasts,  carousals,  and  burlettas  : 
all  Italy  composed  sonnets  in  my  praise,  though  not  one  of 
them  was  tolerable.  I  was  on  the  point  of  reaching  the 
summit  of  bliss,  when  an  old  marchioness,  who  had  been 
mistress  to  the  prince  my  husband,  invited  him  to  drink 
chocolate.  In  less  than  two  hours  after  he  returned  from 
the  visit,  he  died  of  most  terrible  convulsions.  But  this  is 
a  mere  trifle.  My  mother,  distracted  to  the  highest  degree, 
and  yet  less  afflicted  than  I,  determined  to  absent  herself 
for  some  time  from  so  fatal  a  place.  As  she  had  a  very  fine 
estate  in  the  neighbourhood  of  Gaieta,  we  embarked  on 
board  a  galley,  which  was  gilded  like  the  high  altar  of  St. 
Peter's  at  Rome.  In  our  passage  we  were  boarded  by  a 
Sallee  rover.  Our  men  defended  themselves  like  true  pope's 
soldiers ;  they  flung  themselves  upon  their  knees,  laid  down 


38  C AND  IDE. 

their  arms,  and  begged  the  corsair  to  give  them  absolution 
in  articulo  mortis. 

The  Moors  presently  stripped  us  as  bare  as  ever  we  were 
born.  My  mother,  my  maids  of  honour,  and  myself,  were 
served  all  in  the  same  manner.  It  is  amazing  how  quick 
these  gentry  are  at  undressing  people.  But  what  surprised 
me  most  was,  that  they  thrust  their  fingers  into  every 
part  of  our  bodies  that  their  fingers  could  in  any  way 
reach.  I  thought  it  a  very  strange  kind  of  ceremony ; 
for  thus  we  are  generally  apt  to  judge  of  things  when 
we  have  not  seen  the  world.  I  afterwards  learnt  that  it 
was  to  discover  if  we  had  no  diamonds  concealed.  This 
practice  has  been  established  time  immemorial  among  those 
civilized  nations  that  scour  the  seas.  I  was  informed  that 
the  religious  Knights  of  Malta  never  fail  to  make  this  search 
whenever  any  Moors  of  either  sex  fall  into  their  hands.  It 
is  a  part  of  the  law  of  nations,  from  which  they  never 
deviate. 

I  need  not  tell  you  how  great  a  hardship  it  was  for  a 
young  princess  and  her  mother  to  be  made  slaves  and 
carried  to  Morocco.  You  may  easily  imagine  what  we 
must  have  suffered  on  board  a  corsair.  My  mother  was 
still  extremely  handsome,  our  maids  of  honour,  and  even 
our  common  waiting-women,  had  more  charms  than  were 
to  be  found  in  all  Africa.  As  to  myself,  I  was  enchanting ;  I 
was  beauty  itself,  and  then  I  had  my  innocence.  But,  alas  ! 
I  did  not  retain  it  long ;  this  precious  flower,  which  was 
reserved  for  the  lovely  prince  of  Massa  Carara,  was  cropt 
by  the  captain  of  the  Moorish  vessel,  who  was  a  hideous 
negro,  and  thought  he  did  me  infinite  honour.  Indeed, 
both  the  Princess  of  Palestrina  and  myself  must  have  had 
very  strong  constitutions  to  undergo  all  the  hardships  and 
violences  we  suffered  till  our  arrival  at  Morocco.  But  I 
will  not  detain  you  any  longer  with  such  common  things  ; 
they  are  hardly  worth  mentioning. 


CANDIDE.  39 

Upon  our  arrival  at  Morocco  we  found  that  kingdom 
bathed  in  blood.  Fifty  sons  of  the  Emperor  Muley  Ishmael 
were  each  at  the  head  of  a  party.  This  produced  fifty  civil 
wars  of  blacks  against  blacks,  of  tawnies  against  tawnies,  and 
of  mulattoes  against  mulattoes.  In  short,  the  whole  empire 
was  one  continued  scene  of  carcases. 

No  sooner  were  we  landed  than  a  party  of  blacks,  of  a 
contrary  faction  to  that  of  my  captain,  came  to  rob  him  of 
his  booty.  Next  to  the  money  and  jewels  we  were  the 
most  valuable  things  he  had.  I  was  witness  on  this  occasion 
to  such  a  battle  as  you  never  beheld  in  your  cold  European 
climates.  The  northern  nations  have  not  that  fermentation 
in  their  blood,  nor  that  raging  lust  for  women  that  is  so 
common  in  Africa.  The  natives  of  Europe  seem  to  have 
their  veins  filled  with  milk  only  ;  but  fire  and  vitrol  circulate 
in  those  of  the  inhabitants  of  Mount  Atlas  and  the  neigh- 
bouring provinces.  They  fought  with  the  fury  of  the  lions, 
tigers,  and  serpents  of  their  country,  to  know  who  should 
have  us.  A  Moor  seized  my  mother  by  the  right  arm,  while 
my  captain's  lieutenant  held  her  by  the  left ;  another  Moor 
laid  hold  of  her  by  the  right  leg,  and  one  of  our  corsairs 
held  her  by  the  other.  In  this  manner  were  almost  every 
one  of  our  women  dragged  between  four  soldiers.  My 
captain  kept  me  concealed  behind  him,  and  with  his  drawn 
scymetar  cut  down  every  one  who  opposed  him  ;  at  length 
I  saw  all  our  Italian  women  and  my  mother  mangled  and 
torn  in  pieces  by  the  monsters  who  contended  for  them. 
The  captives,  my  companions,  the  Moors  who  took  us,  the 
soldiers,  the  sailors,  the  blacks,  the  whites,  the  mulattoes, 
and  lastly  my  captain  himself,  were  all  slain,  and  I  remained 
alone,  expiring  upon  a  heap  of  dead  bodies.  The  like 
barbarous  scenes  were  transacted  every  day  over  the  whole 
country,  which  is  an  extent  of  three  hundred  leagues,  and 
yet  they  never  missed  the  five  stated  times  of  prayer  en- 
joined by  their  prophet  Mahomet. 


40  CANDIDA. 

I  disengaged  myself  with  great  difficulty  from  such  a.  he'ap 
of  slaughtered  bodies,  and  made  a  shift  to  crawl  to  a  large 
orange  tree  that  stood  on  the  bank  of  a  neighbouring  rivulet, 
where  I  fell  down  exhausted  with  fatigue,  and  overwhelmed 
with  horror,  despair,  and  hunger.  My  senses  being  over- 
powered, I  fell  asleep,  or  rather  seemed  to  be  in  a  trance. 
Thus  I  lay  in  a  state  of  weakness  and  insensibility,  between 
life  and  death,  when  I  felt  myself  pressed  by  something  that 
moved  up  and  down  upon  my  body.  This  brought  me  to 
myself;  I  opened  my  eyes,  and  saw  a  pretty  fair-faced  man, 
who  sighed,  and  muttered  these  words  between  his  teeth : 
"  O  che  sciagura  d'essere  senza  coglioni !  " 

CHAPTER  XII. 

The  Adventures  of  the  Old  Woman  (continued}. 

ASTONISHED  and  delighted  to  hear  my  native  language,  and 
no  less  surprised  at  the  young  man's  words,  I  told  him  that 
there  were  far  greater  misfortunes  in  the  world  than  what  he 
complained  of.  And  to  convince  him  of  it,  I  gave  him  a 
short  history  of  the  horrible  disasters  that  had  befallen  me  ; 
and  as  soon  as  I  had  finished,  fell  into  a  swoon  again.  He 
carried  me  in  his  arms  to  a  neighbouring  cottage,  where  he 
had  me  put  to  bed,  procured  me  something  to  eat,  waited 
on  me  with  the  greatest  attention,  comforted  me,  caressed 
me,  told  me  that  he  had  never  seen  anything  so  perfectly 
beautiful  as  myself,  and  that  he  had  never  so  much  regretted 
the  loss  of  what  no  one  could  restore  to  him.  "  I  was  born 
at  Naples,"  said  he,  "where  they  caponize  two  or  three 
thousand  children  every  year  ;  several  die  of  the  operation  ; 
some  acquire  voices  far  beyond  the  most  tuneful  of  your 
ladies  ;  and  others  are  sent  to  govern  states  and  empires. 
I  underwent  this  operation  very  happily,  and  was  one  of  the 
singers  in  the  Princess  of  Palestrina's  chapel."  "How," 
cried  I,  "  in  my  mother's  chapel ! "  "  The  Princess  of 


CANDIDE.  41 

Palestrina,  your  mother  !"  cried  he,  bursting  into  a  flood  of 
tears.  "  Is  it  possible  you  should  be  the  beautiful  young 
princess  whom  I  had  the  care  of  bringing  up  till  she  was  six 
years  old,  and  who  at  that  tender  age  promised  to  be  as  fair 
as  I  now  behold  you  ?  "  "I  am  the  same,"  replied  I.  "  My 
mother  lies  about  a  hundred  yards  from  hence,  cut  in  pieces, 
and  buried  under  a  heap  of  dead  bodies." 

I  then  related  to  him  all  that  had  befallen  me,  and  he,  in 
return,  acquainted  me  with  all  his  adventures,  and  how  he 
had  been  sent  to  the  court  of  the  King  of  Morocco  by  a 
Christian  prince,  to  conclude  a  treaty  with  that  monarch ;  in 
consequence  of  which  he  was  to  be  furnished  with  military 
stores  and  ships  to  enable  him  to  destroy  the  commerce  of 
other  Christian  governments.  "  I  have  executed  my  com- 
mission," said  the  eunuch  ;  "  I  am  going  to  take  shipping  at 
Ceuta,  and  I'll  take  you  along  with  me  to  Italy.  '  Ma  che 
sciagura  d'essere  senza  coglioni ! ' ': 

I  thanked  him  with  tears  of  joy;  and  instead  of  taking 
me  with  him  into  Italy,  he  carried  me  to  Algiers,  and  sold 
me  to  the  Dey  of  that  province.  I  had  not  been  long  a 
slave,  when  the  plague,  which  had  made  the  tour  of  Africa, 
Asia,  and  Europe,  broke  out  at  Algiers  with  redoubled  fury. 
You  have  seen  an  earthquake ;  but  tell  me,  miss,  had  you 
ever  the  plague  ?  "  Never,"  answered  the  young  baroness. 

If  you  ever  had  (continued  the  old  woman)  you  would 
own  an  earthquake  was  a  trifle  to  it.  It  is  very  common  in 
Africa ;  I  was  seized  with  it.  Figure  to  yourself  the  distressed 
situation  of  the  daughter  of  a  pope,  only  fifteen  years  old, 
and  who  in  less  than  three  months  had  felt  the  miseries  of 
poverty  and  slavery  ;  had  been  ravished  almost  every  day ; 
had  beheld  her  mother  cut  into  four  quarters  ;  had  experi- 
enced the  scourges  of  famine  and  war,  and  was  now  dying 
of  the  plague  at  Algiers.  I  did  not,  however,  die  of  it ;  but 
my  eunuch  and  the  Dey,  and  almost  the  whole  seraglio  of 
Algiers,  were  swept  off, 


42  CANDIDE. 

As  soon  as  the  first  fury  of  this  dreadful  pestilence  was 
over,  a  sale  was  made  of  the  Dey's  slaves.  I  was  purchased 
by  a  merchant,  who  carried  me  to  Tunis.  This  man  sold 
me  to  another  merchant,  who  sold  me  again  to  another  at 
Tripoli;  from  Tripoli  I  was  sold  to  Alexandria,  from 
Alexandria  to  Smyrna,  and  from  Smyrna  to  Constantinople. 
After  many  changes,  I  at  length  became  the  property  of  an 
aga  of  the  janissaries,  who,  soon  after  I  came  into  his  pos- 
session, was  ordered  away  to  the  defence  of  Asoph,  then 
besieged  by  the  Russians. 

The  aga,  being  very  fond  of  women,  took  his  whole 
seraglio  with  him,  and  lodged  us  in  a  small  fort,  with  two 
black  eunuchs  and  twenty  soldiers  for  our  guard.  Our  army 
made  a  great  slaughter  among  the  Russians ;  but  they  soon 
returned  us  the  compliment.  Asoph  was  taken  by  storm, 
and  the  enemy  spared  neither  age,  sex,  nor  condition,  but 
put  all  to  the  sword,  and  laid  the  city  in  ashes.  Our  little 
fort  alone  held  out  •  they  resolved  to  reduce  us  by  famine. 
The  twenty  janissaries,  who  were  left  to  defend  it,  had  bound 
themselves  by  an  oath  never  to  surrender  the  place.  Being 
reduced  to  the  extremity  of  famine,  they  found  themselves 
obliged  to  kill  our  two  eunuchs,  and  eat  them,  rather  than 
violate  their  oath.  But  this  horrible  repast  soon  failing  them, 
they  next  determined  to  support  the  remains  of  life  by 
devouring  the  women. 

We  had  a  very  pious  and  humane  iman,  who  made  them 
a  most  excellent  sermon  on  this  occasion,  exhorting  them 
not  to  kill  us  all  at  once  ;  "  Only  cut  off  one  of  the  buttocks 
of  each  of  those  ladies,"  said  he,  "  and  you  will  fare  extremely 
well ;  if  ye  are  still  under  the  necessity  of  having  recourse 
to  the  same  expedient  again,  ye  will  find  the  like  supply  a 
few  days  hence.  Heaven  will  approve  of  so  charitable  an 
action,  and  work  your  deliverance." 

By  the  force  of  this  eloquence  he  easily  persuaded  them, 
and  all  underwent  the  operation.  The  imam  applied  the 


C AND  WE.  43 

same  balsam  as  they  do  to  children  after  circumcision.  We 
were  all  ready  to  give  up  the  ghost. 

The  janissaries  had  scarcely  time  to  finish  the  repast  with 
which  we  had  supplied  them,  when  the  Russians  attacked 
the  place  by  means  of  flat-bottomed  boats,  and  not  a  single 
janissary  escaped.  The  Russians  paid  no  regard  to  the  con- 
dition we  were  in ;  but  as  there  are  French  surgeons  in  all 
parts  of  the  world,  a  skilful  operator  took  us  under  his  care, 
and  made  a  cure  of  us ;  and  I  shall  never  forget  while  I 
live,  that  as  soon  as  my  wounds  were  perfectly  healed  he 
made  me  certain  proposals.  In  general,  he  desired  us  all 
to  have  a  good  heart,  assuring  us  that  the  like  had  happened 
in  many  sieges  and  that  it  was  perfectly  agreeable  to  the 
laws  of  war. 

As  soon  as  my  companions  were  in  a  condition  to  walk, 
they  were  sent  to  Moscow.  As  for  me,  I  fell  to  the  lot  of  a 
boyard,  who  put  me  to  work  in  his  garden,  and  gave  me 
twenty  lashes  a  day.  But  this  nobleman  having  in  about 
two  years  afterwards  been  broke  alive  upon  the  wheel, 
with  about  thirty  others,  for  some  court  intrigues,  I 
took  advantage  of  the  event,  and  made  my  escape.  I 
travelled  over  great  part  of  Russia.  I  was  a  long  time  an 
innkeeper's  servant  at  Riga,  then  at  Rostock,  Wismar, 
Leipsick,  Cassel,  Utrecht,  Leyden,  the  Hague,  and  Rotter- 
dam :  I  have  grown  old  in  misery  and  disgrace,  living  with 
only  one  buttock,  and  in  the  perpetual  remembrance  that 
I  was  a  pope's  daughter.  I  have  been  an  hundred  times 
upon  the  point  of  killing  myself,  but  still  was  fond  of  life. 
This  ridiculous  weakness  is  perhaps  one  of  the  dangerous 
principles  implanted  in  our  nature.  For  what  can  be  more 
absurd  than  to  persist  in  carrying  a  burden  of  which  we 
wish  to  be  eased?  to  detest,  and  yet  to  strive  to  preserve 
our  existence?  In  a  word,  to  caress  the  serpent  that 
devours  us,  and  hug  him  close  to  our  bosoms  till  he  has 
gnawed  into  our  hearts  ? 


44  CANDIDE. 

In  the  different  countries  which  it  has  been'  my  fate  to 
traverse,  and  the  many  inns  where  I  have  been  a  servant,  I 
have  observed  a  prodigious  number  of  people  who  held 
their  existence  in  abhorrence,  and  yet  I  never  knew  more 
than  twelve  who  voluntarily  put  an  end  to  their  misery  ; 
namely,  three  negroes,  four  Englishmen,  as  many  Genoese, 
and  a  German  professor  named  Robek.  My  last  place 
was  with  the  Jew,  Don  Issachar,  who  placed  me  near  your 
person,  my  fair  lady ;  to  whose  fortunes  I  have  attached  my- 
self, and  have  been  more  affected  to  your  misfortunes  than 
my  own.  I  should  never  have  even  mentioned  the  latter  to 
you,  had  you  not  a  little  piqued  me  on  the  head  of  suffer- 
ings ;  and  if  it  was  not  customary  to  tell  stories  on  board 
a  ship  in  order  to  pass  away  the  time.  In  short,  my  dear 
miss,  I  have  a  great  deal  of  knowledge  and  experience  in  the 
world ;  therefore  take  my  advice — divert  yourself,  and  pre- 
vail upon  each  passenger  to  tell  his  story,  and  if  there  is  one 
of  them  all  that  has  not  cursed  his  existence  many  times, 
and  said  to  himself  over  and  over  again  that  he  was  the 
most  wretched  of  mortals,  I  give  you  leave  to  throw  me 
head-foremost  into  the  sea. 


CHAPTER  XIII. 

flow  Candide  was  obliged  to  leave  the  fair  Cunegund  and  the 
Old  Woman. 

THE  fair  Cunegund,  being  thus  made  acquainted  with  the 
history  of  the  old  woman's  life  and  adventures,  paid  her  all 
the  respect  and  civility  due  to  a  person  of  her  rank  and 
merit.  She  very  readily  came  into  her  proposal  of  engaging 
every  one  of  the  passengers  to  relate  their  adventures  in 
their  turns,  and  was  at  length,  as  well  as  Candide,  compelled 
to  acknowledge  that  the  old  woman  was  in  the  right.  "  It 
is  a  thousand  pities,"  said  Candide,  "  that  the  sage  Pangloss 


CANDIDE.  45 

should  have  been  hanged,  contrary  to  the  custom  of  an 
auto-da-fe,  for  he  would  have  read  us  a  most  admirable 
lecture  on  the  moral  and  physical  evil  which  overspread  the 
earth  and  sea ;  and  I  think  I  should  have  courage  enough  to 
presume  to  offer,  with  all  due  respect,  some  few  objections." 

While  every  one  was  reciting  his  adventures,  the  ship 
continued  on  her  way,  and  at  length  arrived  at  Buenos 
Ayres,  where  Cunegund,  Captain  Candide,  and  the  old 
woman  landed,  and  went  to  wait  upon  the  Governor,  Don 
Fernando  d'Ibaraa  y  Figueora  y  Mascarenes  y  Lampour- 
dos  y  Souza.  This  nobleman  carried  himself  with  a  haughti- 
ness suitable  to  a  person  who  bore  so  many  names.  He 
spoke  with  the  most  noble  disdain  to  every  one,  carried  his 
nose  so  high,  strained  his  voice  to  such  a  pitch,  assumed  so 
imperious  an  air,  and  stalked  with  so  much  loftiness  and 
pride,  that  every  one  who  had  the  honour  of  conversing 
with  him  was  violently  tempted  to  bastinade  his  excel- 
lency. He  was  immoderately  fond  of  women,  and  Miss 
Cunegund  appeared  in  his  eyes  a  paragon  of  beauty.  The 
first  thing  he  did  was  to  ask  her  if  she  was  not  the  captain's 
wife.  The  air  with  which  he  made  this  demand  alarmed 
Candide,  who  did  not  dare  to  say  he  was  married  to  her, 
because  indeed  he  was  not ;  neither  durst  he  say  she  was 
his  sister,  because  she  was  not ;  and  though  a  lie  of  this 
nature  proved  of  great  service  to  one  of  the  ancients,  and 
might  possibly  be  useful  to  some  of  the  moderns,  yet  the 
purity  of  his  heart  would  not  permit  him  to  violate  the 
truth.  "  Miss  Cunegund,"  replied  he,  "  is  to  do  me  the 
iionour  to  marry  me,  and  we  humbly  beseech  your  ex- 
cellency to  condescend  to  grace  the  ceremony  with  your 
presence." 

Don  Fernando  d'Ibaraa  y  Figueora  y  Mascarenes  y  Lam- 
pourdos  y  Souza,  twirling  his  mustachio,  and  putting  on  a 
sarcastic  smile,  ordered  Captain  Candide  to  go  and  review 
his  company.  The  gentle  Candide  obeyed,  and  the  Governor 


46  CANDIDE. 

was  left  with  Miss  Cunegund.  He  made  her  a  strong  de- 
claration of  love,  protesting  that  he  was  ready  to  give  her 
his  hand  in  the  face  of  the  Church,  or  otherwise,  as  should 
appear  most  agreeable  to  a  young  lady  of  her  prodigious 
beauty.  Cunegund  desired  leave  to  retire  a  quarter  of  an 
hour  to  consult  the  old  woman,  and  determine  how  she 
should  proceed. 

The  old  woman  gave  her  the  following  counsel :  "  Miss, 
you  have  seventy-two  quarterings  in  your  arms,  it  is  true, 
but  you  have  not  a  penny  to  bless  yourself  with.  It  is  your 
own  fault  if  you  are  not  wife  to  one  of  the  greatest  noble- 
men in  South  America,  with  an  exceeding  fine  mustachio. 
What  business  have  you  to  pride  yourself  upon  an  unshaken 
constancy  ?  You  have  been  ravished  by  a  Bulgarian  soldier ; 
a  Jew  and  an  Inquisitor  have  both  tasted  of  your  favours. 
People  take  advantage  of  misfortunes.  I  must  confess,  were 
I  in  your  place  I  should  without  the  least  scruple  give  my 
hand  to  the  Governor,  and  thereby  make  the  fortune  of  the 
brave  Captain  Candide."  While  the  old  woman  was  thus 
haranguing,  with  all  the  prudence  that  old  age  and  experi- 
ence furnish,  a  small  bark  entered  the  harbour,  in  which 
was  an  alcayde  and  his  alguazils.  Matters  had  fallen  out 
as  follows : — 

The  old  woman  rightly  guessed  that  the  Cordelier  with 
the  long  sleeves  was  the  person  who  had  taken  Miss  Cune- 
gund's  money  and  jewels,  while  they  and  Candide  were 
at  Badajoz,  in  their  flight  from  Lisbon.  This  same  friar 
attempted  to  sell  some  of  the  diamonds  to  a  jeweller,  who 
presently  knew  them  to  have  belonged  to  the  Grand  Inquisi- 
tor, and  stopped  them.  The  Cordelier,  before  he  was  hanged, 
acknowledged  that  he  had  stolen  them,  and  described  the 
persons  and  the  road  they  had  taken.  The  flight  of  Cune- 
gund and  Candide  was  already  the  town  talk.  They  sent  in 
pursuit  of  them  to  Cadiz ;  and  the  vessel  which  had  been 
sent  to  make  the  greater  despatch  had  now  reached  the  port 


CANDIDE.  47 

of  Buenos  Ayres.  A  report  was  spread  that  an  alcayde  was 
going  to  land,  and  that  he  was  in  pursuit  of  the  murderers 
of  my  lord  the  Inquisitor.  The  sage  old  woman  immediately 
saw  what  was  to  be  done.  "  You  cannot  run  away/'  said 
she  to  Cunegund  ;  "  but  you  have  nothing  to  fear.  It  was 
not  you  who  killed  my  Lord  Inquisitor.  Besides,  as  the 
Governor  is  in  love  with  you,  he  will  not  suffer  you  to  be  ill- 
treated.  Therefore  stand  your  ground."  Then  hurrying 
away  to  Candide,  "  Begone,"  said  she,  "  from  hence  this 
instant,  or  you  will  be  burnt  alive  !  "  Candide  found  there 
was  no  time  to  be  lost.  But  how  could  he  part  from  Cune- 
gund. and  whither  must  he  fly  for  shelter  ? 


CHAPTER  XIV. 

The  reception  Candide  and  Cacambo  met  with  among  the  Jesuits 
in  Paraguay. 

CANDIDE  had  brought  with  him  from  Cadiz  such  a  footman 
as  one  often  meets  with  on  the  coasts  of  Spain  and  in  the 
colonies.  He  was  the  fourth  part  of  a  Spaniard,  of  a 
mongrel  breed,  and  born  in  Tucuman.  He  had  successfully 
gone  through  the  profession  of  a  singing  boy,  sexton,  sailor, 
monk,  pedlar,  soldier,  and  lacquey.  His  name  was 
Cacambo.  He  had  a  great  affection  for  his  master,  because 
his  master  was  a  mighty  good  man.  He  immediately 
saddled  the  two  Andalusian  horses.  "  Come,  my  good 
master,  let  us  follow  the  old  woman's  advice,  and  make  all 
the  haste  we  can  from  this  place  without  staying  to  look 
behind  us."  Candide  burst  into  a  flood  of  tears  :  "  Oh,  my 
dear  Cunegund,  must  I  then  be  compelled  to  quit  you  just 
as  the  governor  was  going  to  honour  us  with  his  presence 
at  our  wedding  ?  Cunegund,  so  long  lost  and  found  again, 
what  will  now  become  of  you  ?  "  "  Lord,"  said  Cacambo, 
'•'  she  must  do  as  well  as  she  can :  women  are  never  at  a 


48  CANDIDE. 

loss.  God  takes  care  of  them,  and  so  let  us  make  the  best 
of  our  way."  "  But  whither  wilt  thou  carry  me  ?  Where 
can  we  go  ?  What  can  we  do  without  Cunegund  ?  "  cried 
the  disconsolate  Candide.  "  By  St.  James  of  Compostella," 
said  Cacambo,  "  you  were  going  to  fight  against  the  Jesuits 
of  Paraguay ;  now  let  us  e'en  go  and  fight  for  them.  I 
know  the  road  perfectly  well ;  I'll  conduct  you  to  their 
kingdom ;  they  will  be  delighted  with  a  captain  that  under- 
stands the  Bulgarian  exercise ;  you  will  certainly  make  a 
prodigious  fortune.  If  we  cannot  find  our  account  in  this 
world  we  may  in  another.  It  is  a  great  pleasure  to  see  new 
objects  and  perform  new  exploits." 

"  Then  you  have  been  to  Paraguay,"  said  Candide.  "  Ay, 
marry,  have  I,"  replied  Cacambo.  "  I  was  a  scout  in  the 
College  of  the  Assumption,  and  am  as  well  acquainted  with 
the  new  government  of  Los  Padres  as  I  am  with  the  streets 
of  Cadiz.  Oh,  it  is  an  admirable  government,  that  is  most 
certain  !  The  kingdom  is  at  present  upwards  of  three 
hundred  leagues  in  diameter,  and  divided  into  thirty 
provinces ;  the  fathers  are  there  masters  of  everything,  and 
the  people  have  no  money  at  all.  This  you  must  allow  is 
the  masterpiece  of  justice  and  reason.  For  my  part,  I 
see  nothing  so  divine  as  the  good  fathers,  who  wage  war  in 
this  part  of  the  world  against  the  troops  of  Spain  and 
Portugal,  at  the  same  time  that  they  hear  the  confessions  of 
those  very  princes  in  Europe  ;  who  kill  Spaniards  in  America, 
and  send  them  to  heaven  at  Madrid.  This  pleases  me 
exceedingly;  but  let  us  push  forward  ;  you  are  going  to  see 
the  happiest  and  most  fortunate  of  all  mortals.  How 
charmed  will  those  fathers  be  to  hear  that  a  captain  who 
understands  the  Bulgarian  exercise  is  coming  among  them." 

As  soon  as  they  reached  the  first  barrier,  Cacambo  called 
to  the  advance-guard,  and  told  them  that  a  captain  wanted 
to  speak  to  my  lord  the  general.  'Notice  was  given  to  the 
main-guard,  and  immediately  a  Paraguayan  officer  ran  to 


CANDIDE.  49 

throw  himself  at  the  feet  of  the  commandant,  to  impart  this 
news  to  him.  Candide  and  Cacambo  were  immediately 
disarmed,  and  their  two  Andalusian  horses  were  seized. 
The  two  strangers  are  now  conducted  between  two  files  of 
musketeers.  The  commandant  was  at  the  farther  end  with 
a  three-cornered  cap  on  his  head,  his  gown  tucked  up,  a 
sword  by  his  side,  and  a  half-pike  in  his  hand.  He  made 
a  sign,  and  instantly  four-and-twenty  soldiers  drew  up  round 
the  new-comers.  A  sergeant  told  them  that  they  must  wait, 
the  commandant  could  not  speak  to  them  ;  and  that  the 
reverend  father  provincial  did  not  suffer  any  Spaniard  to 
open  his  mouth  but  in  his  presence,  or  to  stay  above  three 
hours  in  the  province.  "And  where  is  the  reverend  father 
provincial  ?  "  said  Cacambo.  "  He  is  just  come  from  mass, 
and  is  at  the  parade,"  replied  the  sergeant,  "  and  in  about 
three  hours  time  you  may  possibly  have  the  honour  to  kiss 
his  spurs."  "  But,"  said  Cacambo,  "  the  captain,  who  as 
well  as  myself  is  perishing  with  hunger,  is  no  Spaniard,  but 
a  German  ;  therefore,  pray,  might  we  not  be  permitted  to 
break  our  fast  till  we  can  be  introduced  to  his  reverence  ?  " 

The  serjeant  immediately  went  and  acquainted  the  com- 
mandant with  what  he  heard.  "  God  be  praised,"  said  the 
reverend  commandant ;  "  since  he  is  a  German,  I  will  hear 
what  he  has  to  say ;  let  him  be  brought  to  my  arbour. 
Immediately  they  conducted  Candide  to  a  beautiful  pavilion 
adorned  with  a  colonnade  of  green  marble  spotted  with 
yellow,  and  with  an  intertexture  of  vines,  which  served  as  a 
kind  of  cage  for  parrots,  humming-birds,  fly-birds,  Guinea 
hens,  and  all  other  curious  kinds  of  birds.  An  excellent 
breakfast  was  provided  in  vessels  of  gold,  and  while  the 
Paraguayans  were  eating  coarse  Indian  corn  out  of  wooden 
dishes  in  the  open  air,  and  exposed  to  the  burning  heat  of 
the  sun,  the  reverend  father  commandant  retired  to  his  cool 
arbour. 

He  was  a  very  handsome  young  ma.n,  round-faced,  fair, 


50  CA^7DIDE. 

and  fresh-coloured,  his  eyebrows  were  finely  arched,  he  had 
a  piercing  eye,  the  tips  of  his  ears  were  red,  his  lips  ver- 
milion, and  he  had  a  bold  and  commanding  air ;  but  such 
a  boldness  as  neither  resembled  that  of  a  Spaniard  nor  of  a 
Jesuit.  He  ordered  Candide  and  Cacambo  to  have  their  arms 
restored  to  them,  together  with  their  two  Andalusian  horses. 
Cacambo  gave  the  poor  beasts  some  oats  to  eat  close  by  the 
arbour,  keeping  a  strict  eye  upon  them  all  the  while  for  fear 
of  surprise. 

Candide  having  kissed  the  hem  of  the  commandant's  robe, 
they  sat  down  to  table.  "  It  seems  you  are  a  German,"  says 
the  Jesuit  to  him  in  that  language.  "  Yes,  reverend  father," 
•answered  Candide.  As  they  pronounced  these  words  they 
looked  at  each  other  with  great  amazement,  and  with  an 
emotion  that  neither  could  conceal.  "  From  what  part  of 
Germany  do  you  come  ?  "  said  the  Jesuit.  "  From  the  dirty 
province  of  Westphalia,"  answered  Candide.  "  I  was  born 
in  the  castle  of  Thunder-ten-tronckh."  "  Oh  heavens  !  is 
it  possible  ?  "  said  the  commandant.  "  What  a  miracle  ! " 
cried  Candide.  "  Can  it  be  you  ?  "  said  the  commandant. 
On  this  they  both  retired  a  few  steps  backwards,  then 
running  into  each  other's  arms,  embraced,  and  let  fall  a 
shower  of  tears.  "  Is  it  you,  then,  reverend  father  ?  You 
are  the  brother  of  the  fair  Miss  Cunegund  ?  you  that  were 
slain  by  the  Bulgarians  !  you  the  baron's  son  !  you  a  Jesuit 
in  Paraguay  !  I  must  confess  this  is  a  strange  world  we  live 
in.  O  Pangloss  !  Pangloss  !  what  joy  would  this  have  given 
you  if  you  had  not  been  hanged." 

The  commandant  dismissed  the  negro  slaves  and  the 
Paraguayans,  who  presented  them  with  liquor  in  crystal 
goblets.  He  returned  thanks  to  God  and  St.  Ignatius  a 
thousand  times;  he  clasped  Candide  in  his  arms,  and  both 
their  faces  were  bathed  in  tears.  "  You  will  be  more  sur- 
prised, more  affected,  more  transported,"  said  Candide, 
"  when  I  tell  you  that  Miss  Cunegund,  your  sister,  whose 


CANDIDE.  51 

body  was  supposed  to  have  been  ripped  open,  is  in  perfect 
health."  "  Where  ?  "  "  In  your  neighbourhood,  with  the 
governor  of  Buenos  Ayres  ;  and  I  myself  was  going  to  fight 
against  you."  Every  word  they  uttered  during  this  long 
conversation  was  productive  of  some  new  matter  of  astonish- 
ment. Their  souls  fluttered  on  their  tongues,  listened  in 
their  ears,  and  sparkled  in  their  eyes.  Like  true  Germans, 
they  continued  a  long  while  at  table,  waiting  for  the  reverend 
father,  and  the  commandant  spoke  to  his  dear  Candide  as 
follows. 


CHAPTER  XV. 

HOT.V  Candide  killed  the  Brother  of  his  dear  Citnegund. 

"  NEVER  while  I  live  shall  I  lose  the  remembrance  of  that 
horrible  day  on  which  I  saw  my  father  and  brother  barba- 
rously butchered  before  my  eyes,  and  my  sister  ravished. 
When  the  Bulgarians  retired,  we  searched  in  vain  for  my  dear 
sister.  She  was  nowhere  to  be  found ;  but  the  bodies  of  my 
father,  mother,  and  myself,  with  two  servant-maids  and 
three  little  boys,  all  of  whom  had  beer  murdered  by  the 
remorseless  enemy,  were  thrown  into  a  cart  to  be  buried  in 
a  chapel  belonging  to  the  Jesuits,  within  two  leagues  of  our 
family  seat.  A  Jesuit  sprinkled  us  with  some  holy  water, 
which  was  confoundedly  salt,  and  a  few  drops  of  it  went  into 
my  eyes.  The  father  perceived  that  my  eyelids  stirred  a 
little ;  he  put  his  hand  upon  my  breast,  and  felt  my  heart 
beat,  upon  which  he  gave  me  proper  assistance,  and  at  the 
end  of  three  weeks  I  was  perfectly  recovered.  You  know, 
my  dear  Candide,  I  was  very  handsome.  I  became  still 
more  so,  and  the  reverend  father  Croust,  superior  of  that 
house,  took  a  great  fancy  to  me.  He  gave  me  the  habit  of 
the  order,  and  some  years  afterwards  I  was  sent  to  Rome. 
Our  general  stood  in  need  of  new  levies  of  young  German 


52  CANDIDE. 

Jesuits.  The  sovereigns  of  Paraguay  admit  of  as  few  Spanish 
Jesuits  as  possible ;  they  prefer  those  of  other  nations,  as 
being  more  obedient  to  command.  The  reverend  father- 
general  looked  upon  me  as  a  proper  person  to  work  in  that 
vineyard.  I  set  out  in  company  with  a  Polander  and  a 
Tyrolese.  Upon  my  arrival  I  was  honoured  with  a  sub- 
deaconship  and  a  lieutenancy.  Now  I  am  colonel  and 
priest.  We  shall  give  a  warm  reception  to  the  King  of 
Spain's  troops ;  I  can  assure  you  they  will  be  well  excom- 
municated and  beaten.  Providence  has  sent  you  hither  to 
assist  us.  But  is  it  true  that  my  dear  sister  Cunegund  is  in 
the  neighbourhood  with  the  governor  of  Buenos  Ayres  ?  " 
Candide  swore  that  nothing  could  be  more  true ;  and  the 
tears  began  again  to  trickle  down  their  cheeks. 

The  baron  knew  no  end  of  embracing  Candide ;  he  called 
him  his  brother,  his  deliverer.  "  Perhaps,"  said  he,  "  my 
dear  Candide,  we  shall  be  fortunate  enough  to  enter  the 
town  sword  in  hand,  and  recover  my  sister  Cunegund." 
"Ah!  that  would  crown  my  wishes,"  replied  Candide,  "for 
I  intended  to  marry  her ;  and  I  hope  I  shall  still  be  able  to 
effect  it."  "  Insolent  fellow  ! "  replied  the  baron.  "  You ! 
you  have  the  impudence  to  marry  my  sister,  who  bears 
seventy-two  quarterings  !  Really  I  think  you  have  an  in- 
sufferable degree  of  assurance  to  dare  so  much  as  to  mention 
such  an  audacious  design  to  me."  Candide,  thunderstruck 
at  the  oddness  of  this  speech,  answered  :  "  Reverend  father, 
all  the  quarterings  in  the  world  are  of  no  signification.  I 
have  delivered  your  sister  from  a  Jew  and  an  Inquisitor ;  she 
is  under  many  obligations  to  me,  and  she  is  resolved  to  give 
me  her  hand.  My  master  Pangloss  always  told  me  that 
mankind  are  by  nature  equal.  Therefore,  you  may  depend 
upon  it  that  I  will  marry  your  sister."  "  We  shall  see  that, 
villain !  "  said  the  Jesuit  baron  of  Thunder-ten-Tronckh,  and 
struck  him  across  the  face  with  the  flat  side  of  his  sword. 
Candide  in  an  instant  draws  his  rapier,  and  plunges  it  up  to 


CANDIDE.  53 

the  hilt  in  the  Jesuit's  body;  but  in  pulling  it  out,  reeking 
hot,  he  burst  into  tears.  "  Good  God  ! "  cried  he,  "I  have 
killed  my  old  master,  my  friend,  my  brother-in-law.  I  am 
the  best  man  in  the  world,  and  yet  I  have  already  killed 
three  men ;  and  of  these  three  two  were  priests." 

Cacambo,  who  was  standing  sentry  near  the  door  of  the 
arbour,  instantly  ran  up.  "  Nothing  remains,"  said  his 
master,  "  but  to  sell  our  lives  as  dearly  as  possible.  They 
will  undoubtedly  look  into  the  arbour ;  we  must  die  sword 
in  hand."  Cacambo,  who  had  seen  many  of  these  kind  of 
adventures,  was  not  discouraged.  He  stripped  the  baron  of 
his  Jesuit's  habit  and  put  it  upon  Candide,  then  gave  him 
the  dead  man's  three-cornered  cap,  and  made  him  mount  on 
horseback.  All  this  was  done  as  quick  as  thought.  "  Gallop, 
master,"  cried  Cacambo;  " everybody  will  take  you  for  a 
Jesuit  going  to  give  orders,  and  we  shall  have  passed  the 
frontiers  before  they  will  be  able  to  overtake  us."  He  flew 
as  he  spoke  these  words,  crying  out  aloud  in  Spanish,  "  Make 
way  !  make  way  for  the  reverend  father- colonel !  " 


CHAPTER  XVI. 

What  happened  to  <nir  hvo  Travellers  with  two  Girls,  two  Monkeys, 
and  the  Savages  calif  d  Oreillons. 

CANDIDE  and  his  valet  had  already  passed  the  frontiers 
before  it  was  known  that  the  German  Jesuit  was  dead.  The 
wary  Cacambo  had  taken  care  to  fill  his  wallet  with  bread, 
chocolate,  some  ham,  some  fruit,  and  a  few  bottles  of  wine. 
They  penetrated  with  their  Andalusian  horses  into  a  strange 
country,  where  they  could  discover  no  beaten  path.  At 
length,  a  beautiful  meadow,  intersected  with  purling  rills, 
opened  to  their  view.  Cacambo  proposed  to  his  master  to 
take  some  nourishment,  and  he  set  him  an  example.  "  How 
can  you  desire  me  to  feast  upon  ham  when  I  have  killed  the 


54  CANDIDE. 

baron's  son,  and  am  doomed  never  more  to  see  the  beauti- 
ful Cunegund  ?  What  will  it  avail  me  to  prolong  a  wretched 
life  that  might  be  spent  far  from  her  in  remorse  and  despair  ? 
And  then  what  will  the  journal  of  Trevoux  say  ?  " 

While  he  was  making  these  reflections  he  still  continued 
eating.  The  sun  was  now  on  the  point  of  setting  when  the 
ears  of  our  two  wanderers  were  assailed  with  cries  which 
seemed  to  be  uttered  by  a  female  voice.  They  could  not 
tell  whether  these  were  cries  of  grief  or  joy;  however,  they 
instantly  started  up,  full  of  that  inquietude  and  apprehension 
which  a  strange  place  naturally  inspires.  The  cries  pro- 
ceeded from  two  young  women  who  were  tripping  stark 
naked  along  the  mead,  while  two  monkeys  followed  close  at 
their  heels,  biting  their  backs.  Candide  was  touched  with 
compassion ;  he  had  learned  to  shoot  while  he  was  among 
the  Bulgarians,  and  he  could  hit  a  filbert  in  a  hedge  without 
touching  a  leaf,  Accordingly  he  takes  up  his  double-barrel 
Spanish  fusil,  pulls  the  trigger,  and  lays  the  two  monkeys 
lifeless  on  the  ground.  "  God  be  praised,  my  dear  Cacambo, 
I  have  rescued  two  poor  girls  from  a  most  perilous  situation. 
If  I  have  committed  a  sin  in  killing  an  Inquisitor  and  a 
Jesuit,  I  made  ample  amends  by  saving  the  lives  of  these 
two  distressed  damsels.  Who  knows  but  they  may  be  young 
ladies  of  a  good  family,  and  that  this  assistance  I  have  been 
so  happy  to  give  them  may  procure  us  great  advantage  in 
this  country." 

He  was  about  to  continue  when  he  felt  himself  struck 
speechless  at  seeing  the  two  girls  embracing  the  dead  bodies 
of  the  monkeys  in  the  tenderest  manner,  bathing  their 
wounds  with  their  tears,  and  rending  the  air  with  the  most 
doleful  lamentations.  "Really,"  said  he  to  Cacambo,  I 
should  not  have  expected  to  see  such  a  prodigious  share  of 
good-nature."  "  Master,"  replied  the  knowing  valet,  "  you 
have  made  a  precious  piece  of  work  of  it :  do  you  know 
that  you  have  killed  the  lovers  of  these  two  ladies." 


C AND  IDE.  55 

"  Their  lovers,  Cacambo  !  You  are  jesting;  it  cannot  be  ; 
I  can  never  believe  it."  "  Dear  sir,"  replied  Cacambo,  "  you 
are  surprised  at  everything;  why  should  you  think  it  so 
strange  that  there  should  be  a  country  where  monkeys  in- 
sinuate themselves  into  the  good  graces  of  the  ladies  ?  They 
are  the  fourth  part  of  a  man,  as  I  am  the  fourth  part  of  a 
Spaniard."  "  Alas  !  "  replied  Candide,  "  I  remember  to 
have  heard  my  master  Pangloss  say  that  such  accidents  as 
these  frequently  came  to  pass  in  former  times  ;  and  that 
these  commixtures  are  productive  of  centaurs,  fauns,  and 
satyrs ;  and  that  many  of  the  ancients  had  seen  such 
monsters;  but  I  looked  upon  the  whole  as  fabulous." 
"  Now  you  are  convinced,"  said  Cacambo,  "  that  it  is  very 
true ;  and  you  see  what  use  is  made  of  those  creatures  by 
persons  who  have  not  had  a  proper  education.  All  I  am 
afraid  of  is,  that  these  same  ladies  will  play  us  some  ugly 
trick." 

These  judicious  reflections  operated  so  far  on  Candide  as 
to  make  him  quit  the  meadow  and  strike  into  a  thicket. 
There  he  and  Cacambo  supped ;  and  after  heartily  cursing 
the  Grand  Inquisitor,  the  Governor  of  Buenos  Ayres,  and  the 
baron,  they  fell  asleep  on  the  ground.  When  they  awoke, 
they  were  surprised  to  find  that  they  could  not  move.  The 
reason  was,  that  the  Oreillons,  who  inhabit  that  country,  and 
to  whom  the  ladies  had  given  information  of  these  two 
strangers,  had  bound  them  with  cords  made  of  the  bark  of 
trees.  They  saw  themselves  surrounded  by  fifty  naked 
Oreillons,  armed  with  bows  and  arrows,  clubs,  and  hatchets 
of  flint;  some  were  making  a  fire  under  a  large  cauldron ; 
and  others  were  preparing  spits,  crying  out  one  and  all :  "  A 
Jesuit !  a  Jesuit !  We  shall  be  revenged  ;  we  shall '  have 
excellent  cheer  ;  let  us  eat  this  Jesuit ;  let  us  eat  him  up." 

"  I  told  you,  master,"  cried  Cacambo  mournfully,  "  that 
these  two  wenches  would  play  us  some  scurvy  trick.' 
Candide,  seeing  the  cauldron  and  the  spits,  cried  out,  "  I 


56  CANDIDE. 

suppose  they  are  going  either  to  boil  or  roast  us.  Ah  ! 
what  would  Pangloss  say  if  he  was  to  see  how  pure  nature 
is  formed  ?  Everything  is  right.  It  may  be  so ;  but  I  must 
confess  it  is  something  hard  to  be  bereft  of  dear  Miss 
Cunegund,  and  to  be  spitted  like  a  rabbit  by  these  barbarous 
Oreillons."  Cacambo,  who  never  lost  his  presence  of  mind 
in  distress,  said  to  the  disconsolate  Candide  :  "  Do  not 
despair.  I  understand  a  little  of  the  jargon  of  these  people ; 
I  will  speak  to  them."  "  Ay,  pray  do,"  said  Candide  ;  "  and 
be  sure  you  make  them  sensible  of  the  horrid  barbarity  of 
boiling  and  roasting  of  human  creatures,  and  how  little  of 
Christianity  there  is  in  such  practices." 

"  Gentlemen,"  said  Cacambo,  "you  think  perhaps  you  are 
going  to  feast  upon  a  Jesuit ;  if  so,  it  is  mighty  well ;  nothing 
can  be  more  agreeable  to  justice  than  thus  to  treat  your 
enemies.  Indeed,  the  law  of  nature  teaches  us  to  kill  our 
neighbour ;  and  accordingly  we  find  this  practised  all  over 
the  world ;  and  if  we  do  not  indulge  ourselves  in  eating 
human  flesh,  it  is  because  we  have  much  better  fare ;  but 
for  your  parts,  who  have  not  such  resources  as  we,  it  is  cer- 
tainly much  better  judged  to  feast  upon  your  enemies  than 
to  throw  their  bodies  to  the  fowls  of  the  air,  and  thus  lose 
all  the  fruits  of  your  victory.  But  surely,  gentlemen,  you 
would  not  choose  to  eat  your  friends.  You  imagine  you  are 
going  to  roast  a  Jesuit,  whereas  my  master  is  your  friend, 
your  defender ;  and  you  are  going  to  spit  the  very  man  who 
has  been  destroying  your  enemies.  As  to  myself,  I  am 
your  countryman ;  this  gentleman  is  my  master ;  and  so  far 
from  being  a  Jesuit,  give  me  leave  to  tell  you  he  has  very 
lately  killed  one  of  that  order,  whose  spoils  he  now  wears, 
and  which  have  probably  occasioned  your  mistake.  To 
convince  you  of  the  truth  of  what  I  say,  take  the  habit  he 
has  now  on,  and  carry  it  to  the  first  barrier  of  the  Jesuits' 
kingdom,  and  inquire  whether  my  master  did  not  kill  one  of 
their  officers.  There  will  be  little  or  no  time  lost  by  this, 


C AND  WE.  $7 

and  you  may  still  reserve  our  bodies  in  your  power  to  feast 
on,  if  you  should  find  what  we  have  told  you  to  be  false ; 
but,  on  the  contrary,  if  you  find  it  to  be  true,  I  am  persuaded 
you  are  too  well  acquainted  with  the  prmciples  of  the  laws  of 
society,  humanity,  and  justice,  not  to  use  us  courteously,  and 
suffer  us  to  depart  unhurt.'' 

This  speech  appeared  very  reasonable  to  the  Oreillons. 
They  deputed  two  of  their  people  with  all  expedition  to 
inquire  into  the  truth  of  this  affair,  who  acquitted  themselves 
of  their  commission  like  men  of  sense,  and  soon  returned 
with  good  tidings  for  our  distressed  adventurers.  Upon 
this  they  were  both  loosed,  and  those  who  were  so  lately 
going  to  roast  and  boil  them,  now  showed  them  all  sorts  of 
civilities,  offered  them  friends,  gave  them  refreshments,  and 
reconducted  them  to  the  confines  of  their  country,  crying 
before  them  all  the  way,  in  token  of  joy,  "  He  is  no  Jesuit, 
he  is  no  Jesuit." 

Candide  could  not  help  admiring  the  cause  of  his  de- 
liverance. "  What  men  !  what  manners  !  "  cried  he ;  "  if  I 
had  not  fortunately  run  my  sword  up  to  the  hilt  in  the  body 
of  Miss  Cunegund's  brother,  I  should  have  infallibly  been 
eaten  alive.  But,  after  all,  pure  nature  is  an  excellent 
thing  ;  since  these  people,  instead  of  eating  me,  showed  me 
a  thousand  civilities  as  soon  as  they  knew  I  was  not  a 
Jesuit." 

CHAPTER  XVII. 

Candid,:  and  his  Valet  arrive  in  the  Country  of  El  Dorado. 
What  they  saw  there. 

WHEN  they  got  to  the  frontiers  of  the  Oreillons,  "  You  see," 
said  Cacambo  to  Candide,  "  this  hemisphere  is  not  better 
than  the  other ;  e'en  take  my  advice,  and  let  us  return  to 
Europe  by  the  shortest  way  possible."  "  But  how  can  we 
get  back,"  s:ud  Candide,  "  and  whither  shall  we  go?  To 


5  8  CANDIDE. 

my  own  country  ?  The  Bulgarians  and  the  Abares  are 
laying  that  waste  with  fire  and  sword ;  or  shall  we  go  to 
Portugal  ?  There  I  shall  be  burnt ;  and  if  we  abide  here,  we 
are  every  moment  in  danger  of  being  spitted.  But  how  can 
I  bring  myself  to  quit  that  part  of  the  world  where  my  dear 
Miss  Cunegund  has  her  residence  ?  " 

"  Let  us  turn  towards  Cayenne,"  said  Cacambo  ;  "  there 
we  shall  meet  with  some  Frenchmen  ;  for  you  know  those 
gentry  ramble  all  over  the  world ;  perhaps  they  will  assist 
us,  and  God  will  look  with  pity  on  our  distress." 

It  was  not  so  easy  to  get  to  Cayenne.  They  knew  pretty 
nearly  whereabouts  it  lay ;  but  the  mountains,  rivers,  preci- 
pices, robbers,  savages,  were  dreadful  obstacles  in  the  way. 
Their  horses  died  with  fatigue,  and  their  provisions  were 
at  an  end.  They  subsisted  a  whole  month  upon  wild  fruit, 
till  at  length  they  came  to  a  little  river  bordered  with  cocoa 
trees,  the  sight  of  which  at  once  revived  their  droop- 
ing spirits,  and  furnished  nourishment  for  their  enfeebled 
bodies. 

Cacambo,  who  was  always  giving  as  good  advice  as  the 
old  woman  herself,  said  to  Candide  :  "  You  see  there  is  no 
holding  out  any  longer ;  we  have  travelled  enough  on  foot. 
I  spy  an  empty  canoe  near  the  river-side;  let  us  fill  it  with 
cocoa-nuts,  get  into  it,  and  go  down  with  the  stream  :  a 
river  always  leads  to  some  inhabited  place.  If  we  do  not 
meet  with  agreeable  things,  we  shall  at  least  meet  with 
something  new."  "Agreed,"  replied  Candide ;  "let  us 
recommend  ourselves  to  Providence." 

They  rowed  a  few  leagues  down  the  river,  the  banks  of 
which  were  in  some  places  covered  with  flowers,  in  others 
barren ;  in  some  parts  smooth  and  level,  and  in  others  steep 
and  rugged.  The  stream  widened  as  they  went  farther 
on,  till  at  length  it  passed  under  one  of  the  frightful  rocks 
whose  summits  seemed  to  reach  the  clouds.  Here  our 
two  travellers  had  the  courage  to  commit  themselves  to  the 


CANDIDE.  59 

stream,  which,  contracting  in  this  part,  hurried  them  along 
with  a  dreadful  noise  and  rapidity.  At  the  end  of  four-and- 
twenty  hours  they  saw  daylight  again  ;  but  their  canoe  was 
dashed  to  pieces  against  the  rocks.  They  were  obliged  to 
creep  along  from  rock  to  rock  for  the  space  of  a  league,  till 
at  length  a  spacious  plain  presented  itself  to  their  sight. 
This  place  was  bounded  by  a  chain  of  inaccessible  mountains. 
The  country  appeared  cultivated  equally  for  pleasure  and 
to  produce  the  necessaries  of  life.  The  useful  and  agreeable 
were  here  equally  blended.  The  roads  were  covered,  or 
rather  adorned,  with  carriages  formed  of  glittering  materials, 
in  which  were  men  and  women  of  a  surprising  beauty,  drawn 
with  great  rapidity  by  red  sheep  of  a  very  large  size,  which 
far  surpassed  the  finest  coursers  of  Andalusia,  Tetuan,  or 
Mecquinez. 

"  Here  is  a  country,  however,"  said  Candide,  "  preferable 
to  Westphalia."  He  and  Cacambo  landed  near  the  first 
village  they  saw,  at  the  entrance  of  which  they  perceived 
some  children,  covered  with  tattered  garments  of  the  richest 
brocade,  playing  at  quoits.  Our  two  inhabitants  of  the 
other  hemisphere  amused  themselves  greatly  with  what  they 
saw.  The  quoits  were  large  round  pieces,  yellow,  red,  and 
green,  which  cast  a  most  glorious  lustre.  Our  travellers 
picked  some  of  them  up,  and  they  proved  to  be  gold, 
emeralds,  rubies,  and  diamonds,  the  least  of  which  would 
have  been  the  greatest  ornament  to  the  superb  throne  of  the 
Great  Mogul.  "  Without  doubt,"  said  Cacambo,  "  those 
children  must  be  the  king's  sons  that  are  playing  at  quoits." 
As  he  was  uttering  these  words  the  schoolmaster  of  the 
village  appeared,  who  came  to  call  them  to  school.  "There," 
said  Candide,  "  is  the  preceptor  of  the  royal  family." 

The  little  ragamuffins  immediately  quitted  their  diversion, 
leaving  the  quoits  on  the  ground  with  all  their  otlier  play- 
things. Candide  gathers  them  up,  runs  to  the  schoolmaster, 
and,  with  a  most  respectful  bow,  presents  them  to  him, 


60  CANDIDE. 

giving  him  to  understand  by  signs,  that  their  royal  highnesses 
had  forgot  their  gold  and  precious  stones.  The  school- 
master, with  a  smile,  flung  them  upon  the  ground ;  then 
examining  Candide  from  head  to  foot  with  an  air  of 
admiration,  he  turned  his  back  and  went  on  his  way. 

Our  travellers  took  care,  however,  to  gather  up  the  gold, 
the  rubies,  and  the  emeralds.  "  Where  are  we  ?  "  cried 
Candide  :  "  The  king's  children  in  this  country  must  have 
an  excellent  education,  since  they  are  taught  to  show  such 
a  contempt  for  gold  and  precious  stones."  Cacambo  was 
as  much  surprised  as  his  master.  They  then  drew  near  the 
first  house  in  the  village,  which  was  built  after  the  manner 
of  an  European  palace.  There  was  a  crowd  of  people 
about  the  door,  and  a  still  greater  number  in  the  house. 
The  sound  of  the  most  delightful  instruments  of  music  was 
heard,  and  the  most  agreeable  smell  came  from  the  kitchen. 
Cacambo  went  up  to  the  door,  and  heard  those  within  talk- 
ing in  the  Peruvian  language,  which  was  his  mother  tongue  ; 
for  every  one  knows  that  Cacambo  was  born  in  a  village  of 
Tucuman,  where  no  other  language  is  spoken.  "  I  will  be 
your  interpreter  here,"  said  he  to  Candide,  "  let  us  go  in  ; 
this  is  an  eating-house." 

Immediately  two  waiters  and  two  servant -girls,  dressed 
in  cloth  of  gold,  and  their  hair  braided  with  ribbands  of 
tissue,  accost  the  strangers,  and  invite  them  to  sit  down 
to  the  ordinary.  Their  dinner  consisted  of  four  dishes  of 
different  soups,  each  garnished  with  two  young  paroquets,  a 
large  dish  of  bouille  that  weighed  two  hundredweight,  two 
roasted  monkeys  of  a  delicious  flavour,  three  hundred 
humming-birds  in  one  dish,  and  six  hundred  fly-birds  in 
another ;  some  excellent  ragouts,  delicate  tarts,  and  the 
whole  served  up  in  dishes  of  rock-crystal.  Several  sorts  of 
liquors,  extracted  from  the  sugar-cane,  were  handed  about 
by  the  servants  who  attended. 

Most  of  the  company  were  chapmen  and  waggoners,  all 


CANDIDE.  6 1 

extremely  polite  ;  they  aske  d  Cacambo  a  few  questions  with 
the  utmost  discretion  and  circumspection ;  and  replied  to 
his  in  a  most  obliging  and  satisfactory  manner. 

As  soon  as  dinner  was  over,  both  Candide  and  Cacambo 
thought  they  should  pay  very  handsomely  for  their  enter- 
tainment by  laying  down  two  of  those  large  gold  pieces 
which  they  had  picked  off  the  ground ;  but  the  landlord  and 
landlady  burst  into  a  fit  of  laughing,  and  held  their  sides  for 
some  time.  When  the  fit  was  over  :  "  Gentlemen,"  said  the 
landlord,  "  I  plainly  perceive  you  are  strangers,  and  such  we 
are  not  accustomed  to  see  ;  pardon  us  therefore  for  laughing 
when  you  offered  us  the  common  pebbles  of  our  highways 
for  payment  of  your  reckoning.  To  be  sure,  you  have  none 
of  the  coin  of  this  kingdom  ;  but  there  is  no  necessity  for 
having  any  money  at  all  to  dine  in  this  house.  All  the  inns 
which  are  established  for  the  convenience  of  those  who  carry 
on  the  trade  of  this  nation,  are  maintained  by  the  govern- 
ment. You  have  found  but  very  indifferent  entertainment 
here,  because  this  is  only  a  poor  village ;  but  in  almost  every 
other  of  these  public-houses  you  will  meet  with  a  reception 
worthy  of  persons  of  your  merit."  Cacambo  explained  the 
whole  of  this  speech  of  the  landlord  to  Candide,  who  listened 
to  it  with  the  same  astonishment  with  which  his  friend  com- 
municated it.  "  What  sort  of  a  country  is  this,"  said  the 
one  to  the  other,  "  that  is  unknown  to  all  the  world,  and  in 
which  Nature  has  everywhere  so  different  an  appearance  to 
what  she  has  in  ours  ?  Possibly  this  is  that  part  of  the 
globe  where  everything  is  right,  for  there  must  certainly 
be  some  such  place.  And  for  all  that  Master  Pangloss 
could  say,  I  often  perceived  that  things  went  very  ill  in 
Westphalia." 


62  CANDIDE. 

CHAPTER   XVIII. 

What  they  saw  in  the  Country  of  El  Dot-ado. 

CACAMBO  vented  all  his  curiosity  upon  his  landlord  by  a 
thousand  different  questions :  the  honest  man  answered 
him  thus  :  "I  am  very  ignorant,  sir,  but  I  am  contented 
with  my  ignorance ;  however,  we  have  in  this  neighbour- 
hood an  old  man  retired  from  Court,  who  is  the  most  learned 
and  communicative  person  in  the  kingdom."  He  then 
carried  Cacambo  to  the  old  man  ;  Candide  acted  now 
only  a  second  character,  and  attended  his  valet.  They 
entered  a  very  plain  house,  for  the  door  was  nothing  but 
silver,  and  the  ceiling  was  only  of  beaten  gold,  but  wrought 
in  so  elegant  a  taste  as  to  vie  with  the  richest.  The  ante- 
chamber, indeed,  was  only  incrusted  with  rubies  and 
emeralds ;  but  the  order  in  which  everything  was  disposed 
made  amends  for  this  great  simplicity. 

The  old  man  received  the  strangers  on  his  sofa,  which 
was  stuffed  with  humming-birds,  feathers,  and  ordered  his 
servants  to  present  them  with  liquors  in  golden  goblets  ; 
after  which  he  satisfied  their  curiosity  in  the  following 
terms  : — 

"  I  am  now  one  hundred  and  seventy-two  years  old ;  and 
I  learnt  of  my  late  father,  who  was  equerry  to  the  king,  the 
amazing  revolutions  of  Peru  to  which  he  had  been  an  eye- 
witness. This  kingdom  is  the  ancient  patrimony  of  the 
Incas,  who  very  imprudently  quitted  it  to  conquer  another 
part  of  the  world,  and  were  at  length  conquered  and  de- 
stroyed themselves  by  the  Spaniards. 

"  Those  princes  of  their  family  who  remained  in  their 
native  country  acted  more  wisely.  They  ordained,  with 
the  consent  of  their  whole  nation,  that  none  of  the  inha- 
bitants of  our  little  kingdom  should  ever  quit  it ;  and  to  this 


C AND  IDE  63 

wise  ordinance  we  owe  the  preservation  of  our  innocence 
and  happiness.  The  Spaniards  had  some  confused  notion 
of  this  country,  to  which  they  gave  the  name  of  El  Dorado; 
and  Sir  Walter  Raleigh,  an  Englishman,  actually  came  very 
near  it  about  three  hundred  years  ago ;  but  the  inaccessible 
rocks  and  precipices  with  which  our  country  is  surrounded 
on  all  sides,  has  hitherto  secured  us  from  the  rapacious  fury 
of  the  people  of  Europe,  who  have  an  unaccountable  fond- 
ness for  the  pebbles  and  dirt  of  our  land,  for  the  sake  of 
which  they  would  murder  us  all  to  the  very  last  man." 

The  conversation  lasted  some  time,  and  turned  chiefly 
on  the  form  of  government,  their  manners,  their  women,  their 
public  diversions,  and  the  arts.  At  length,  Candide,  who 
had  always  had  a  taste  for  metaphysics,  asked  whether  the 
people  of  that  country  had  any  religion. 

The  old  man  reddened  a  little  at  this  question.  "  Can 
you  doubt  it  ?  "  said  he.  "  Do  you  take  us  for  wretches 
lost  to  all  sense  of  gratitude  ?  "  Cacambo  asked  in  a  re- 
spectful manner  what  was  the  established  religion  of  El 
Dorado.  The  old  man  blushed  again,  and  said  :  "  Can 
there  be  two  religions  then  ?  Ours,  I  apprehend,  is  the  re- 
ligion of  the  whole  world.  We  worship  God  from  morning 
till  night."  "  Do  you  worship  but  one  God  ?"  said  Cacambo, 
who  still  acted  as  the  interpreter  of  Candide's  doubts. 
"  Certainly,"  said  the  old  man  j  "  there  are  not  two  nor 
three  nor  four  Gods.  I  must  confess  the  people  of  your 
world  ask  very  extraordinary  questions."  However,  Can- 
dide could  not. refrain  from  making  many  more  inquiries  of 
the  old  man.  He  wanted  to  know  in  what  manner  they 
prayed  to  God  in  El  Dorado.  "  We  do  not  pray  to  him  at 
all,"  said  the  reverend  sage.  "  We  have  nothing  to  ask  of 
him.  He  has  given  us  all  we  want,  and  we  give  him  thanks 
incessantly."  Candide  had  a  curiosity  to  see  some  of  their 
priests,  and  desired  Cacambo  to  ask  the  old  man  where  they 
were ;  at  which  he,  smiling,  said :  "  My  friends,  we  are  all 


64  CANDIDA. 

of  us  priests.  The  king  and  all  the  heads  of  families  sing 
solemn  hymns  of  thanksgiving  every  morning,  accompanied 
by  five  or  six  thousand  musicians."  "  What ! "  says  Cacambo, 
"  have  you  no  monks  among  you  to  dispute,  to  govern,  to 
intrigue,  and  to  burn  people  who  are  not  of  the  same  opinion 
with  themselves  ?  "  "  Do  you  take  us  for  fools  ?  "  said  the 
old  man  ;  "  here  we  are  all  of  one  opinion,  and  know  not 
what  you  mean  by  your  monks."  During  the  whole  of  this 
discourse  Candide  was  in  raptures,  and  he  said  to  himself : 
"  What  a  prodigious  difference  is  there  between  this  place 
and  Westphalia,  and  this  house  and  the  baron's  castle  !  Ah, 
Master  Pangloss  !  had  you  ever  seen  El  Dorado  you  would 
no  longer  have  maintained  that  the  castle  of  Thunder-ten- 
tronckh  was  the  finest  of  all  possible  edifices.  There  is 
nothing  like  seeing  the  world,  that's  certain." 

This  long  conversation  being  ended,  the  old  man  ordered 
six  sheep  to  be  harnessed  and  put  to  the  coach,  and  sent 
twelve  of  his  servants  to  escort  the  travellers  to  Court. 
"  Excuse  me,"  said  he,  "  for  not  waiting  on  you  in  person  ; 
my  age  deprives  me  of  that  honour.  The  king  will  receive 
you  in  such  a  manner  that  5011  will  have  no  reason  to  com- 
plain ;  and  doubtless  you  will  make  a  proper  allowance  for 
the  customs  of  the  country  if  they  should  not  happen  alto- 
gether to  please  you." 

Candide  and  Cacambo  got  into  the  coach,  the  six  sheep 
flew,  and  in  less  than  a  quarter  of  an  hour  they  arrived  at 
the  king's  palace,  which  was  situated  at  the  further  end  of 
the  capital.  At  the  entrance  was  a  portal  two  hundred  and 
twenty  feet  high,  and  one  hundred  wide  ;  but  it  is  impossible 
for  words  to  express  the  materials  of  which  it  was  built. 
The  reader,  however,  will  readily  conceive  they  must  have 
a  prodigious  superiority  over  the  pebbles  and  sand  which 
we  call  gold  and  precious  stones. 

Twenty  beautiful  young  virgins  in  waiting  received  Can- 
dide and  Cacambo  at  their  alighting  from  the  coach,  con- 


CANDIDE.  65 

ducted  them  to  the  bath,  and  clad  them  in  robes  wove  of 
the  down  of  humming-birds  ;  after '-which  they  were  intro- 
duced by  the  great  officers  of  the  Crown,  of  both  sexes,  to 
the  king's  apartment,  between  two  hies  of  musicians,  each 
file  consisting  of  a  thousand,  agreeably  to  the  custom  of  the 
country.  When  they  drew  near  to  the  presence-chamber, 
Cacambo  asked  one  of  the  officers  in  what  manner  they 
were  to  pay  their  obeisance  to  his  majesty  ;  whether  it  was 
the  custom  to  fall  upon  their  knees,  or  to  prostrate  them- 
selves upon  the  ground  ?  whether  they  were  to  put  their 
hands  upon  their  heads  or  behind  their  backs  ?  whether 
they  were  to  lick  the  dust  off  the  floor  ?  in  short,  what  was 
the  ceremony  usual  on  such  occasions  ?  "  The  custom," 
said  the  great  officer,  "is  to  embrace  the  king,  and  kiss  him 
oil  each  cheek."  Candide  and  Cacambo  accordingly  threw 
their  arms  around  his  majesty's  neck,  who  received  them  in 
the  most  gracious  manner  imaginable,  and  very  politely 
asked  them  to  sup  with  him. 

While  supper  was  preparing,  orders  were  given  to  show 
them  the  city,  where  they  saw  public  structures  that  reared 
their  lofty  heads  to  the  clouds ;  the  market-places  decorated 
with  a  thousand  columns  ;  fountains  of  spring-water,  besides 
others  of  rose-water,  and  of  liquors  drawn  from  the  sugar- 
cane, incessantly  flowing  in  the  great  squares,  which  were 
paved  with  a  kind  of  precious  stones  that  emitted  an  odour 
like  that  of  cloves  and  cinnamon.  Candide  asked  to  see 
the  High  Court  of  Justice,  the  Parliament ;  but  was  answered 
that  they  have  none  in  that  country,  being  utter  strangers  to 
lawsuits.  He  then  inquired  if  they  had  any  prisons  ;  they 
replied,  none.  But  what  gave  him  at  once  the  greatest 
surprise  and  pleasure  was  the  Palace  of  Sciences,  where  he 
saw  a  gallery,  two  thousand  feet  long,  filled  with  the  various 
apparatus  in  mathematics  and  natural  philosophy.  - 

After  having  spent  the  whole  afternoon  in  seeing  only 
about  the  thousandth  part  of  the  city,  they  were  brought  back 

c 


66  CANDIDE. 

to  the  king's  palace.  Candida  sat  down  at  the  table  with 
his  majesty,  his  valet  Cacambo,  and  several  ladies  of  the 
Court.  Never  was  entertainment  more  elegant,  nor  could 
any  one  possible  show  more  wit  than  his  majesty  displayed 
while  they  were  at  supper.  Cacambo  explained  all  the 
king's  bon  mots  to  Candide,  and  although  they  were  trans- 
lated, they  still  appeared  to  be  bon  mots.  Of  all  the  things 
that  surprised  Candide,  this  was  not  the  least.  They  spent 
a  whole  month  in  this  hospitable  place,  during  which  time 
Candide  was  continually  saying  to  Cacambo,  "  I  own,  my 
friend,  once  more  that  the  castle  where  I  was  bora  is  a  mere 
nothing  in  comparison  with  the  place  where  we  now  are ;  but 
still  Miss  Cunegund  is  not  here,  and  you  yourself  have  doubt- 
less some  fair  one  for  whom  you  sigh  in  Europe.  If  we 
remain  here,  we  shall  only  be  as  others  are ;  whereas,  if  we 
return  to  our  own  world  with  only  a  dozen  of  El  Dorado 
sheep  loaded  with  the  pebbles  of  this  country,  we  shall  be 
richer  than  all  the  kings  in  Europe  ;  we  shall  no  longer  need 
to  stand  in  awe  of  the  inquisitors  ;  and  we  may  easily  recover 
Miss  Cunegund." 

This  speech  was  perfectly  agreeable  to  Cacambo.  A  fond- 
ness for  roving,  for  making  a  figure  in  their  own  country, 
and  for  boasting  of  what  they  had  seen  in  their  travels,  was 
so  prevalent  in  our  two  wanderers,  that  they  resolved  to  be 
no  longer  happy;  and  demanded  permission  of  the  king  to 
quit  the  country. 

"  You  are  about  to  do  a  rash  and  silly  action."  said  the 
king.  "  I  am  sensible  my  kingdom  is  an  inconsiderable  spot; 
but  when  people  are  tolerably  at  their  ease  in  any  place,  I 
should  think  it  would  be  to  their  interest  to  remain  there. 
Most  assuredly  I  have  no  right  to  detain  you  or  any  strangers 
against  your  wills  :  this  is  an  act  of  tyranny  to  which  our 
manners  and  our  laws  are  equally  repugnant :  all  men  are 
by  nature  free ;  you  have  therefore  an  undoubted  liberty  to 
depart  whenever  you  please,  but  you  will  have  many  and 


C AND  WE.  67 

great  difficulties  to  encounter  in  passing  the  frontiers.  It  is 
impossible  to  ascend  that  rapid  river  which  runs  under  high 
and  vaulted  rocks,  and  by  which  you  were  conveyed  hither 
by  a  kind  of  miracle.  The  mountains  by  which  my  kingdom 
are  hemmed  in  on  all  sides,  are  ten  thousand  feet  high,  and 
perfectly  perpendicular ;  they  are  above  ten  leagues  over  each, 
and  the  descent  from  them  is  one  continued  precipice.  How- 
ever, since  you  are  determined  to  leave  us,  I  will  immediately 
give  orders  to  the  superintendent  of  my  carriages  to  cause 
one  to  be  made  that  will  convey  you  very  safe.  When  they 
have  conducted  you  to  the  back  of  the  mountains,  nobody 
can  attend  you  farther ;  for  my  subjects  have  made  a  vow 
never  to  quit  the  kingdom,  and  they  are  too  prudent  to 
break  it.  Ask  me  whatever  else  you  please."  "  All  we  shall 
ask  of  your  majesty,"  said  Cacambo,  is  only  a  few  sheep 
laden  with  provisions,  pebbles,  and  the  clay  of  your  country." 
The  king  smiled  at  the  request,  and  said,  "  I  cannot  imagine 
what  pleasure  you  Europeans  find  in  our  yellow  clay  ;  but 
take  away  as  much  of  it  as  you  will,  and  much  good  may  it 
do  you." 

He  immediately  gave  orders  to  his  engineers  to  make  a 
machine  to  hoist  these  two  extraordinary  men  out  of  the 
kingdom.  Three  thousand  good  mathematicians  went  to 
work  and  finished  it  in  about  fifteen  days ;  and  it  did  not 
cost  more  than  twenty  millions  sterling  of  that  country's 
money.  Candide  and  Cacambo  were  placed  on  this  machine, 
and  they  took  with  them  two  large  red  sheep,  bridled  and 
saddled,  to  ride  upon  when  they  got  on  the  other  side  of 
the  mountains ;  twenty  others  to  serve  as  sumpters  for 
carrying  provisions  ;  thirty  laden  with  presents  of  whatever 
was  most  curious  in  the  country;  and  fifty  with  gold, 
diamonds,  and  other  precious  stones.  The  king,  at  parting 
with  our  two  adventurers,  embraced  them  with  the  greatest 
cordiality. 

It  was  a  curious  sight  to  behold  the  manner  of  their 

c  2 


68  CANDIDE. 

setting  off,  and  the  ingenious  method  by  which  they  and 
their  sheep  were  hoisted  to  the  top  of  the  mountains.  The 
mathematicians  and  engineers  took  leave  of  them  as  soon  as 
they  had  conveyed  them  to  a  place  of  safety ;  and  Candide 
was  wholly  occupied  with  the  thoughts  of  presenting  his 
sheep  to  Miss  Cunegund.  "  Now,"  says  he,  "  thanks  to 
Heaven,  we  have  more  than  sufficient  to  pay  the  Governor  of 
Buenos  Ayres  for  Miss  Cunegund,  if  she  is  redeemable.  Let 
us  make  the  best  of  our  way  to  Cayenne,  where  we  will  take 
shipping,  and  then  we  may  at  leisure  think  of  what  kingdom 
we  shall  purchase  with  our  riches." 


CHAPTER  XIX. 

What  happened  to  (hem  at  Surinam,  and  how  Candide  cam,:  acquainted 
•with  Martin. 

OUR  travellers'  first  day's  journey  was  very  pleasant ;  they 
were  elated  with  the  prospect  of  possessing  more  riches  than 
were  to  be  found  in  Europe,  Asia,  and  Africa  together. 
Candide,  in  amorous  transports,  cut  the  name  of  Miss 
Cunegund  on  almost  every  tree  he  came  to.  The  second 
day,  two  of  their  sheep  sunk  in  a  morass,  and  were  swallowed 
up,  with  their  lading ;  two  more  died  of  fatigue ;  some  few 
days  afterwards,  seven  or  eight  perished  with  hunger  in  a 
desert ;  and  others,  at  different  times,  tumbled  down  preci- 
pices, or  were  otherwise  lost ;  so  that,  after  travelling  about 
a  hundred  days,  they  had  only  two  sheep  left  of  the  hundred 
and  two  they  brought  with  them  from  El  Dorado.  Said 
Candide  to  Cacambo  :  "  You  see,  my  dear  friend,  how 
perishable  the  riches  of  this  world  are  ;  there  is  nothing 
solid  but  virtue."  "  Very  true,"  said  Cacambo ;  "  but  we 
have  still  two  sheep  remaining,  with  more  treasure  than  ever 
the  King  of  Spain  will  be  possessed  of ;  and  I  espy  a  town 
at  a  distance,  which  I  take  to  be  Surinam,  a  town  belonging 


CANDIDE.  69 

to  the  Dutch.  We  are  now  at  the  end  of  our  troubles,  and 
at  the  beginning  of  happiness." 

As  they  drew  near  the  town,  they  saw  a  negro  stretched 
on  the  ground  with  only  one-half  of  his  habit,  which  was  a 
kind  of  linen  frock,  for  the  poor  man  had  lost  his  left  leg 
and  his  right  hand.  "  Good  God,"  said  Candide  in  Dutch  ; 
"  what  dost  thou  here,  friend,  in  this  deplorable  condition  ?  " 
"  I  am  waiting  for  my  master,  Mynheer  Vanderdendur,  the 
famous  trader,"  answered  the  negro.  "  Was  it  Mynheer 
Vanderdendur  that  used  you  in  this  cruel  manner  ?  "  "  Yes, 
sir,"  said  the  negro  ;  "it  is  the  custom  here.  They  give  a 
linen  garment  twice  a  year,  and  that  is  all  our  covering. 
When  we  labour  in  the  sugar-works,  and  the  mill  happens 
to  snatch  off  a  finger,  they  instantly  chop  off  our  hand ;  and 
when  we  attempt  to  run  away,  they  cut  off  a  leg.  Both  these 
cases  have  happened  to  me ;  and  it  is  at  this  expense  that 
you  eat  sugar  in  Europe  ;  and  yet  when  my  mother  sold  me 
for  ten  patacoons  on  the  coast  of  Guinea,  she  said  to  me  : 
'  My  dear  child,  bless  our  fetishes  •  adore  them  for  ever ; 
they  will  make  thee  live  happy ;  thou  hast  the  honour  to  be 
a  slave  to  our  lords  the  whites,  by  which  thou  wilt  make  the 
fortune  of  us  thy  parents.'  Alas !  I  know  not  whether  I 
have  made  their  fortunes  ;  but  they  have  not  made  mine. 
Dogs,  monkeys,  and  parrots  are  a  thousand  times  less 
wretched  than  I.  The  Dutch  fetishes  who  converted  me 
tell  me  every  Sunday  that  the'  blacks  and  whites  are  all 
children  of  one  father,  whom  they  call  Adam.  As  for  me, 
I  do  not  understand  anything  of  genealogies  ;  but  if  what 
these  preachers  say  is  true,  we  are  all  second  cousins ;  and 
you  must  allow  that  it  is  impossible  to  be  worse  treated  by 
our  relations  than  we  are." 

"  O  Pangloss  !  "  cried  out  Candide,  "  such  horrid  doings 
never  entered  thy  imagination.  Here  is  an  end  of  the 
matter;  I  find  myself,  after  all,  obliged  to  renounce  thy 
optimism."  "  Optimism,"  said  Cacambo,  "  what  is  that  ?  " 


70  CANDIDE. 

11  Alas  ! "  replied  Candida,  "  it  is  the  obstinacy  of  maintaining 
that  everything  is  best  when  it  is  worst ; "  and  so  saying,  he 
turned  his  eyes  towards  the  poor  negro,  and  shed  a  flood  of 
tears ;  and  in  this  weeping  mood  he  entered  the  town  of 
Surinam. 

Immediately  upon  their  arrival  our  travellers  inquired  if 
there  was  any  vessel  in  the  harbour  which  they  might  send 
to  Buenos  Ayres.  The  person  they  addressed  themselves 
to  happened  to  be  the  master  of  a  Spanish  bark,  who  offered 
to  agree  with  them  on  moderate  terms,  and  appointed  them 
a  meeting  at  a  public-house.  Thither  Candide  and  his  faith- 
ful Cacambo  went  to  wait  for  him,  taking  with  them  their 
two  sheep. 

Candide,  who  was  all  frankness  and  sincerity,  made  an 
ingenuous  recital  of  his  adventures  to  the  Spaniard,  declaring 
to  him  at  the  same  time  his  resolution  of  carrying  off  Miss 
Cunegund  from  the  Governor  of  Buenos  Ayres.  "  Oh,  oh  ! " 
said  the  shipmaster,  "  if  that  is  the  case,  get  whom  you  please 
to  carry  you  to  Buenos  Ayres  ;  for  my  part,  I  wash  my  hands 
of  the  affair.  It  would  prove  a  hanging  matter  to  us  all. 
The  fair  Cunegund  is  the  Governor's  favourite  mistress." 
These  words  were  like  a  clap  of  thunder  to  Candide ;  he 
wept  bitterly  for  a  long  time,  and,  taking  Cacambo  aside, 
he  says  to  him  :  "  I'll  tell  you,  my  dear  friend,  what  you 
must  do.  We  have  each  of  us  in  our  pockets  to  the  value 
of  five  or  six  millions  in  diamonds ;  you  are  cleverer  at 
these  matters  than  I ;  you  must  go  to  Buenos  Ayres  and 
bring  off  Miss  Cunegund.  If  the  Governor  makes  any 
difficulty,  give  him  a  million  ;  if  he  holds  out,  give  him  two  ; 
as  you  have  not  killed  an  Inquisitor,  they  will  have  no  sus- 
picion of  you  :  I'll  fit  out  another  ship,  and  go  to  Venice, 
where  I  will  wait  for  you.  Venice  is  a  free  country,  where 
we  shall  have  nothing  to  fear  from  Bulgarians,  Abares, 
Jews,  or  Inquisitors.  Cacambo  greatly  applauded  this  wise 
resolution.  He  was  inconsolable  at  the  thoughts  of  parting 


CANDIDE.  7I 

with  so  good  a  master,  who  treated  him  more  like  an 
intimate  friend  than  a  servant;  but  the  pleasure  of  being 
able  to  do  him  a  service  soon  got  the  better  of  his  sorrow. 
They  embraced  each  other  with  a  flood  of  tears.  Candide 
charged  him  not  to  forget  the  old  woman.  Cacambo  set  out 
the  same  day.  This  Cacambo  was  a  very  honest  fellow. 

Candide  continued  some  days  longer  at  Surinam,  waiting 
for  any  captain  to  carry  him  and  his  two  remaining  sheep  to 
Italy.  He  hired  domestics,  and  purchased  many  things 
necessary  for  a  long  voyage  ;  at  length,  Mynheer  Vander- 
dendur,  skipper  of  a  large  Dutch  vessel,  came  and  offered 
his  service.  "  What  will  you  have,"  said  Candide,  to  carry 
me,  my  servants,  my  baggage,  and  these  two  sheep  you 
see  here,  directly  to  Venice?"  The  skipper  asked  ten 
thousand  piastres;  and  Candide  agreed  to  his  demand 
without  hesitation. 

"  Ho,  ho  !  "  said  the  cunning  Vanderdendur  to  himself, 
"  this  stranger  must  be  very  rich  ;  he  agrees  to  give  me  ten 
thousand  piastres  without  hesitation."  Returning  a  little 
while  after,  he  tells  Candide  that,  upon  second  considera- 
tion he  could  not  undertake  the  voyage  for  less  than 
twenty  thousand.  "Very  well;  you  shall  have  them,"  said 
Candide. 

"  Zounds  !  "  said  the  skipper  to  himself,  "  this  man  agrees 
to  pay  twenty  thousand  piastres  with  as  much  ease  as  ten." 
Accordingly  he  goes  back  again,  and  tells  him  roundly  that 
he  will  not  carry  hirn  to  Venice  for  less  than  thirty  thou- 
sand piastres.  "  Then  you  shall  have  thirty  thousand,"  said 
Candide. 

"Odso  !"  said  the  Dutchman  once  more  to  himself,  "thirty 
thousand  piasters  seem  a  trifle  to  this  man.  Those  sheep 
must  certainly  be  laden  with  an  immense  treasure.  I'll  e'en 
stop  here  and  ask  no  more ;  but  make  him  pay  down  the 
thirty  thousand  piastres,  and  then  we  may  see  what  is  to  be 
done  farther."  Candide  sold  two  small  diamonds,  the  least 


;2  C AND  IDE. 

of  which  was  worth  more  than  all  the  skipper  asked.  He 
paid  him  beforehand ;  the  two  sheep  were  put  on  board,  and 
Candide  followed  in  a  small  boat  to  join  the  vessel  in  the 
roads.  The  skipper  takes  his  opportunity,  hoists  sail,  and 
puts  out  to  sea  with  a  favourable  wind.  Candide,  con- 
founded and  amazed,  soon  lost  sight  of  the  ship.  "Alas  !" 
said  he,  "  this  is  a  trick  like  those  in  our  old  world !  "  He 
returns  back  to  the  shore  overwhelmed  with  grief;  and 
indeed  he  had  lost  what  would  have  made  the  fortune  of 
twenty  monarchs. 

Immediately  upon  his  landing  he  applied  to  the  Dutch 
magistrate.  Being  transported  with  passion,  he  thunders  at 
the  door,  which  being  opened,  he  goes  in,  tells  his  case, 
and  talks  a  little  louder  than  was  necessary.  The  magis- 
trate began  with  fining  him  ten  thousand  piastres  for  his 
petulance,  and  then  listened  very  patiently  to  what  he  had 
to  say ;  promised  to  examine  into  the  affair  on  the  skipper's 
return  ;  and  ordered  him  to  pay  ten  thousand  piastres  more 
for  the  fees  of  the  court. 

This  treatment  put  Candide  out  of  all  patience.  It  is 
true  he  had  suffered  misfortunes  a  thousand  times  more 
grievous ;  but  the  cool  insolence  of  the  judge  and  the  villainy 
of  the  skipper  raised  his  choler  and  threw  him  into  a  deep 
melancholy.  The  villainy  of  mankind  presented  itself  to 
his  mind  in  all  its  deformity,  and  his  soul  was  a  prey  to  the 
most  gloomy  ideas.  After  some  time,  hearing  that  the  cap- 
tain of  a  French  ship  was  ready  to  set  sail  for  Bordeaux,  as 
he  had  no  more  sheep  loaded  with  diamonds  to  put  on  board, 
he  hired  the  cabin  at  the  usual  price  ;  and  made  it  known  in 
the  town  that  he  would  pay  the  passage  and  board  of  any 
honest  man  who  would  give  him  his  company  during  the 
voyage,  besides  making  him  a  present  of  ten  thousand  piastres, 
on  condition  that  such  person  was  the  most  dissatisfied 
with  his  condition,  and  the  most  unfortunate  in  the  whole 
province. 


CANDIDE.  ?3 

Upon  this  there  appeared  such  a  crowd  of  candidates, 
that  a  IMC«  fleet  could  not  haye  contained  them>  Candide, 
willing  to  choose  au_0  thr)se  who  appeared  most  likd  {Q 
answer  his  intention,  selected  tweuv_M  seemed  tQ  him 
the  most  sociable,  and  who  all  pretended  to  merit  •..*»  ± 
ference.  He  invited  them  to  his  inn,  and  promised  to  treat 
them  with  a  supper,  on  condition  that  every  man  should 
bind  himself  by  an  oath  to  relate  his  own  history ;  declaring 
at  the  same  time  that  he  would  make  choice  of  that  person 
who  should  appear  to  him  the  most  deserving  of  compassion 
and  the  most  justly  dissatisfied  with  his  condition  of  life,  and 
that  he  would  make  a  present  to  the  rest. 

This  extraordinary  assembly  continued  sitting  till  four  in 
the  morning.  Candide,  while  he  was  listening  to  their  adven- 
tures, called  to  mind  what  the  old  woman  had  said  to  him 
in  their  voyage  to  Buenos  Ayres,  and  the  wager  she  had  laid 
that  there  was  not  a  person  on  board  the  ship  but  had  met 
with  some  great  misfortunes.  Every  story  he  heard  put  him 
in  mind  of  Pangloss.  "  My  old  master,"  said  he,  "  would 
be  confoundedly  put  to  it  to  demonstrate  his  favourite 
system.  Would  he  were  here  !  Certainly,  if  everything  is 
for  the  best,  it  is  in  El  Dorado,  and  not  in  the  other  parts 
of  the  world."  At  length  he  determined  in  favour  of  a  poor 
scholar,  who  had  laboured  ten  years  for  the  booksellers  at 
Amsterdam,  being  of  opinion  that  no  employment  could  be 
more  detestable. 

This  scholar,  who  was  in  fact  a  very  honest  man,  had  been 
robbed  by  his  wife,  beaten  by  his  son,  and  forsaken  by  his 
daughter,  who  had  run  away  with  a  Portuguese.  He  had 
been  likewise  deprived  of  a  small  employment  on  which  he 
subsisted,  and  he  was  persecuted  by  the  clergy  of  Surinam, 
who  took  him  for  a  Socinian.  It  must  be  acknowledged 
that  the  other  competitors  were  at  least  as  wretched  as  he. 
But  Candide  was  in  hopes  that  the  company  of  a  man  of 
letters  would  relieve  the  tediousness  of  the  voyage.  All 


74  C AND  WE. 

the  other  candidates  complained  that  Candide  had  done 
them  great  injustice,  but  he  stopped  their  mouths  VJ  *  Pre- 
sent  of  a  hundred  piastres  to  each. 

CHAPTER  XX. 

What  befell  Candide  and  Martin  on  their  Passage. 

THE  old  philosopher,  whose  name  was  Martin,  took  shipping 
with  Candide  for  Bordeaux.  They  both  had  seen  and  suffered 
a  great  deal;  and  had  the  ship  been  to  go  from  Surinam  to 
Japan  round  the  Cape  of  Good  Hope,  they  could  have  found 
sufficient  entertainment  for  each  other  daring  the  whole 
voyage  in  discoursing  upon  moral  and  natural  evil. 

Candide,  however,  had  one  advantage  over  Martin ;  he 
lived  in  the  pleasing  hopes  of  seeing  Miss  Cunegund  once 
more  whereas  the  poor  philosopher  had  nothing  to  hope  for  ; 
besides,  Candide  had  money  and  jewels,  and  notwithstanding 
he  had  lost  an  hundred  red  sheep  laden  with  the  greatest 
treasure  on  the  earth,  and  though  he  still  smarted  from  the 
reflection  of  the  Dutch  skipper's  knavery,  yet  when  he 
considered  what  he  had  still  left,  and  repeated  the  name  of 
Cunegund,  especially  after  meal  times,  he  inclined  to 
Pangloss's  doctrine. 

"  And  pray,"  said  he  to  Martin,  "  what  is  your  opinion  of 
the  whole  of  this  system  ?  What  notion  have  you  of  moral 
and  natural  evil?"  "Sir,"  replied  Martin,  "our  priest 
accused  me  of  being  a  Socinian  ;  but  the  real  truth  is,  I  am 
a  Manichasan."  "  Nay,  you  are  jesting,"  said  Candide, 
"  there  are  no  Manichasans  existing  at  present  in  the 
world."  "  And  yet  I  am  one/'  said  Martin  ;  "  but  I  cannot 
help  it;  I  cannot  for  the  soul  of  me  think  otherwise." 
"  Surely  the  devil  must  be  in  you,"  said  Candide.  "  He 
concerns  himself  so  much,"  replied  Martin,  "  in  the  affairs 
of  this  world,  that  it  is  very  probable  he  may  be  in  me  as 


C AND  WE.  75 

well  as  everywhere  else ;  but  I  must  confess,  when  I  cast 
my  eye  on  this  globe,  or  rather  globule,  I  cannot  help  think- 
ing that  God  has  abandoned  it  to  some  malignant  being.  I 
always  except  El  Dorado.  I  scarce  ever  knew  a  city  that  did 
not  wish  the  destruction  of  its  neighbouring  city,  nor  a 
family  that  did  not  desire  to  exterminate  some  other  family. 
The  poor  in  all  parts  of  the  world  bear  an  inveterate  hatred 
to  the  rich,  even  while  they  creep  and  cringe  to  them  ;  and 
the  rich  treat  the  poor  like  sheep,  whose  wool  and  flesh  they 
barter  for  money  :  a  million  of  regimental  assassins  traverse 
Europe  from  one  end  to  the  other,  to  get  their  bread  by 
regular  depredation  and  murder,  because  it  is  the  most 
gentleman- like  profession.  Even  in  those  cities  which  seem 
to  enjoy  the  blessings  of  peace,  and  where  the  arts  flourish, 
the  inhabitants  are  devoured  with  envy,  care,  and  in- 
quietudes, which  are  greater  plagues  than  any  experienced 
in  a  town  besieged.  Private  chagrins  are  still  more  dread- 
ful than  public  calamities.  In  a  word,"  concluded  the 
philosopher,  "  I  have  seen  and  suffered  so  much  that  I  am 
a  Manichsean." 

"  And  yet  there  is  some  good  in  the  world,"  replied 
Candide.  '•  Maybe  so,"  said  Martin  ;  "  but  it  has  escaped 
my  knowledge." 

While  they  were  deeply  engaged  in  this  dispute  they  heard 
the  report  of  cannon,  which  redoubled  every  moment.  Each 
takes  out  his  glass,  and  they  espy  two  ships  warmly  engaged 
at  the  distance  of  about  three  miles.  The  wind  brought 
them  both  so  near  the  French  ship  that  those  on  board  her 
had  the  pleasure  of  seeing  the  fight  with  great  ease.  After 
several  smart  broadsides,  the  one  gave  the  other  a  shot 
between  wind  and  water,  which  sunk  her  outright.  Then 
could  Candide  and  Martin  plainly  perceive  an  hundred  men 
on  the  deck  of  the  vessel  which  was  sinking,  who,  withstands 
uplifted  to  heaven,  sent  forth  piercing  cries,  and  were  in  a 
moment  swallowed  up  by  the  waves. 


76  CANDIDE. 

"  Well,"  said  Martin,  you  now  see  in  what  manner  man- 
kind treat  each  other."  "  It  is  certain,"  said  Candide,  "  that 
there  is  something  diabolical  in  this  affair."  As  he  was 
speaking  thus,  he  spied  something  of  a  shining  red  hue, 
which  swam  close  to  the  vessel.  The  boat  was  hoisted  out 
to  see  what  it  might  be,  when  it  proved  to  be  one  of  his 
sheep.  Candide  felt  more  joy  at  the  recovery  of  this  one 
animal  than  he  did  grief  when  he  lost  the  other  hundred, 
though  laden  with  the  large  diamonds  of  El  Dorado. 

The  French  captain  quickly  perceived  that  the  victorious 
ship  belonged  to  the  crown  of  Spain ;  that  the  other  was  a 
Dutch  pirate,  and  the  very  same  captain  who  had  robbed 
Candide.  The  immense  riches  which  this  villain  had 
amassed  were  buried  with  him  in  the  deep,  and  only  this 
one  sheep  saved  out  of  the  whole.  "  You  see,"  said  Candide 
to  Martin,  "  that  vice  is  sometimes  punished ;  this  villain  the 
Dutch  skipper  has  met  with  the  fate  he  deserved."  "Very 
true,"  said  Martin,  "  but  why  should  the  passengers  be 
doomed  also  to  destruction  ?  God  has  punished  the  knave, 
and  the  devil  has  drowned  the  rest." 

The  French  and  Spanish  ships  continued  their  cruise,  and 
Candide  and  Martin  their  conversation.  They  disputed 
fourteen  days  successively,  at  the  end  of  which  they  were 
just  as  far  advanced  as  the  first  moment  they  began.  How- 
ever, they  had  the  satisfaction  of  disputing,  of  communicating 
their  ideas,  and  of  mutually  comforting  each  other.  Candide 
embraced  his  sheep  with  transport :  "  Since  I  have  found 
thee  again,"  said  he,"  I  may  possibly  find  my  Cunegund 
once  more," 


CANDIDE.  77 


CHAPTER  XXI. 

Candide  and  Martin,  while  thus  reasoning  with  each  other,  draio 
mar  to  the  coast  of  France. 

AT  length  they  descried  the  coast  of  France,  when  Candide 
said  to  Martin,  "  Pray,  Mr.  Martin,  were  you  ever  in 
France  ? "  "  Yes,  sir,"  said  Martin,  "  I  have  been  in 
several  provinces  of  that  kingdom.  In  some  one-half  of 
the  people  are  fools  and  madmen  ;  in  some  they  are  too 
artful ;  in  others,  again,  they  are  in  general  either  very  good- 
natured  or  very  brutal ;  while  in  others  they  affect  to  be 
witty ;  and  in  all,  their  ruling  passion  is  love,  the  next  is 
slander,  and  the  last  is  to  talk  nonsense."  "  But  pray,  Mr. 
Martin,  were  you  ever  in  Paris  ?  "  "  Yes,  sir,  I  have  been 
in  that  city,  and  it  is  a  place  that  contains  the  several  species 
just  described.  It  is  a  chaos,  a  confused  multitude,  where 
every  one  seeks  for  pleasure  without  being  able  to  find  it : 
at  least,  as  far  as  I  have  observed  during  my  short  stay  in 
that  city.  At  my  arrival  I  was  robbed  of  all  I  had  in  the 
world  by  pickpockets  and  sharpers,  at  the  fair  of  St. 
Germain.  I  was  taken  up  myself  for  a  robber,  and  confined 
in  prison  a  whole  week,  after  which  I  hired  myself  as 
corrector  to  a  press,  in  order  to  get  a  little  money  towards 
defraying  my  expenses  back  to  Holland  on  foot.  I  knew 
the  whole  tribe  of  scribblers,  malcontents,  and  fanatics.  It 
is  said  the  people  of  that  city  are  very  polite  :  I  believe  they 
may  be  so." 

"  For  my  part,  I  have  no  curiosity  to  see  France,"  said 
Candide.  "  You  may  easily  conceive,  my  friend,  that  after 
spending  a  month  at  El  Dorado,  I  can  desire  to  behold 
nothing  upon  earth  but  Miss  Cunegund  ;  I  am  going  to 
wait  for  her  at  Venice.  I  intend  to  pass  through  France  in 
my  way  to  Italy  ;  will  you  not  bear  me  company  ?  "  "  With 


7  8  CANDIDE. 

all  my  heart,"  said  Martin.  "  They  say  Venice  is  agreeable 
to  none  but  noble  Venetians,  but  that,  nevertheless, 
strangers  are  well  received  there  when  they  have  plenty  of 
money.  Now  I  have  none,  but  you  have ;  therefore  I  will 
attend  you  whither  you  please."  "  Now  we  are  upon  this 
subject,"  said  Candida,  "do  you  think  that  the  earth  was 
originally  sea,  as  we  read  in  that  great  book  which  belongs 
to  the  captain  of  the  ship  ?  "  "I  believe  nothing  of  it." 
replied  Martin,  "any  more  than  I  do  of  the  many  other 
chimeras  which  have  been  related  to  us  for  some  time  past." 
"  But  then  to  what  end,"  said  Candide,  "  was  the  world 
formed  ?  "  "  To  make  us  mad,"  said  Martin.  "  Are  you  not 
surprised,"  continued  Candide,  "at  the  love  which  the  two  girls 
in  the  country  of  the  Oreillons  had  for  those  two  monkeys  ? 
You  know  I  have  told  you  the  story."  "Surprised  !" 
replied  Martin,  "  not  in  the  least ;  I  see  nothing  strange  in 
this  passion.  I  have  seen  so  many  extraordinary,  things 
that  there  is  nothing  extraordinary  to  me  now."  "  Do  you 
think,"  said  Candide,  "that  mankind  always  massacred 
each  other  as  they  do  now  ?  Were  they  always  guilty  of 
lies,  fraud,  treachery,  ingratitude,  inconstancy,  envy,  ambi- 
tion, and  cruelty  ?  Were  they  always  thieves,  fools,  cowards, 
gluttons,  drunkards,  misers,  calumniators,  debauchees, 
fanatics,  and  hypocrites  ?  "  "  Do  you  believe,"  said  Martin, 
"  that  hawks  have  always  been  accustomed  to  eat  pigeons 
when  they  came  in  their  way  ?  "  "  Doubtless,"  said  Candide. 
"  Well,  then,"  replied  Martin,  "  if  hawks  have  always  had 
the  same  nature,  why  should  you  pretend  that  mankind 
change  theirs  ?  "  "  Oh  ! "  said  Candide,  "  there  is  a  great 

deal   of    difference  ;    for  free    will "     And  reasoning 

thus,  they  arrived  at  Bourdeaux. 


CANDIDE.  79 

CHAPTER  XXII. 

What  happened  to  Candide  and  Martin  in  France. 

CANDIDE  stayed  no  longer  at  Bourdeaux  than  was  necessary 
to  dispose  of  a  few  of  the  pebbles  he  had  brought  from 
El  Dorado,  and  to  provide  himself  with  a  post-chaise  for  two 
persons,  for  he  could  no  longer  stir  a  step  without  his 
philosopher  Martin.  The  only  thing  that  gave  him  concern 
was  the  being  obliged  to  leave  his  sheep  behind  him,  which 
he  entrusted  to  the  care  of  the  Academy  of  Sciences  at 
Bourdeaux,  who  proposed,  as  a  prize  subject  for  the  year, 
to  prove  why  the  wool  of  this  sheep  was  red ;  and  the  prize 
was  adjudged  to  a  northern  sage,  who  demonstrated  by  A 
plus  B  minus  C,  divided  by  Z,  why  the  sheep  must  neces- 
sarily be  red,  and  die  of  the  mange. 

In  the  meantime,  all  the  travellers  whom  Candide  met  with 
in  the  inns  or  on  the  road  told  him  to  a  man  that  they 
were  going  to  Paris.  This  general  eagerness  gave  him 
likewise  a  great  desire  to  see  this  capital,  and  it  was  not 
much  out  of  his  way  to  Venice. 

He  entered  the  city  by  the  suburbs  of  St.  Marceau,  and 
thought  himself  in  one  of  the  vilest  hamlets  in  all  West- 
phalia. 

Candide  had  not  been  long  at  his  inn  before  he  was 
seized  with  a  slight  disorder,  owing  to  the  fatigue  he  had 
undergone.  As  he  wore  a  diamond  of  an  enormous  size  on 
his  finger,  and  had  among  the  rest  of  his  equipage  a  strong 
box  that  seemed  very  weighty,  he  soon  found  himself 
between  two  physicians  whom  he  had  not  sent  for,  a 
number  of  intimate  friends  whom  he  had  never  seen  and 
who  would  not  quit  his  bedside,  and  two  female  /devotees, 
who  were  very  careful  in  providing  him  hot  suppers. 

"  I  remember,"  said  Martin  to  him,  "  that  the  first  time  I 


So  CANDIDE. 

came  to  Paris  I  was  likewise  taken  ill.  I  was  very  poor, 
and  accordingly  I  had  neither  friends,  nurses,  nor  physi- 
cians, and  yet  I  did  very  well." 

However,  by  dint  of  purging  and  bleeding,  Candide's  dis- 
order became  very  serious.  The  priest  of  the  parish  came 
with  all  imaginable  politeness  to  desire  a  note  of  him,  pay- 
able to  the  bearer  in  the  other  world.  Candide  refused  to 
comply  with  his  request,  but  the  two  devotees  assured  him 
that  it  was  a  new  fashion.  Candide  replied  that  he  was  not 
one  that  followed  the  fashion.  Martin  was  for  throwing  the 
priest  out  of  the  window.  The  clerk  swore  Candide  should 
not  have  Christian  burial.  Martin  swore  in  his  turn  that 
he  would  bury  the  clerk  alive  if  he  continued  to  plague  them 
any  longer.  The  dispute  grew  warm  ;  Martin  took  him  by 
the  shoulders  and  turned  him  out  of  the  room,  which  gave 
great  scandal,  and  occasioned  a  verbal  process. 

Candide  recovered,  and  till  he  was  in  a  condition  to  go 
abroad,  had  a  great  deal  of  very  good  company  to  pass  the 
evenings  with  him  in  his  chamber.  They  played  deep. 
Candide  was  surprised  to  find  he  could  never  turn  a  trick, 
and  Martin  was  not  at  all  surprised  at  the  matter. 

Among  those  who  did  him  the  honours  of  the  place  was  a 
little  spruce  Abbe  of  Perigord — one  of  those  insinuating, 
busy,  fawning,  impudent  necessary  fellows  that  lay  wait  for 
strangers  at  their  arrival,  tell  them  all  the  scandal  of  the 
town,  and  offer  to  minister  to  their  pleasures  at  various 
prices.  This  man  conducted  Candide  and  Martin  to  the 
playhouse  :  they  were  acting  a  new  tragedy.  Candide  found 
himself  placed  near  a  cluster  of  wits.  This,  however,  did 
not  prevent  him  from  shedding  tears  at  some  parts  of  the 
piece,  which  were  most  affecting  and  best  acted.  One  of 
these  talkers  said  to  him  between  the  acts  :  "  You  are  greatly 
to  blame  to  shed  tears.  That  actress  plays  horribly,  and 
the  man  that  plays  with  her  still  worse,  and  the  piece  itself 
is  still  more  execrable  than  the  representation.  The  author 


CANDIDE.  8 1 

does  not  understand  a  word  of  Arabic,  and  yet  he  has  laid 
his  scene  in  Arabia ;  and  what  is  more,  he  is  a  fellow  who 
does  not  believe  in  innate  ideas.  To-morrow  I  will  bring 
ycu  a  score  of  pamphlets  that  have  been  written  against 
hinx"  "  Pray,  sir,"  said  Candide  to  the  Abbe,  "how  many 
theatrical  pieces  have  you  in  France  ?  "  "  Five  or  six  thou- 
sand," replied  the  other.  "  Indeed  !  that  is  a  great  number," 
said  Candide ;  "  but  how  many  good  ones  may  there  be  ?  " 
"  About  fifteen  or  sixteen."  "  Oh  !  that  is  a  great  number," 
said  Martin. 

Candide  was  greatly  taken  with  an  actress  who  performed 
the  part  of  Queen  Elizabeth  in  a  dull  kind  of  tragedy  that  is 
played  sometimes.  "That  actress,"  said  he  to  Martin, 
"  pleases  me  greatly.  She  has  some  sort  of  resemblance  to 
Miss  Cunegund.  I  should  be  very  glad  to  pay  my  respects 
to  her."  The  Abbe  of  Perigord  offered  his  service  to  intro- 
duce him  to  her  at  her  own  house.  Candide,  who  was 
brought  up  in  Germany,  desired  to  know  what  might  be  the 
ceremonial  used  on  those  occasions,  and  how  a  Queen  of 
England  was  treated  in  France.  "  There  is  a  necessary 
distinction  to  be  observed  in  these  matters/'  said  the  Abbe. 
"  In  a  country  town  we  take  them  to  a  tavern  ;  here  in 
Paris  they  are  treated  with  great  respect  during  their  life- 
time, provided  they  are  handsome,  and  when  they  die  we 
throw  their  bodies  upon  a  dunghill."  "  How,"  said  Candide, 
"  throw  a  queen's  body  upon  a  dunghill !  "  "  The  gentle- 
man is  quite  right,"  said  Martin  ;  "  he  tells  you  nothing  but 
the  truth.  I  happened  to  be  at  Paris  when  Miss  Monimia 
made  her  exit,  as  one  may  say,  out  of  this  world  into 
another.  She  was  refused  what  they  call  here  the  rites  of 
sepulture ;  that  is  to  say,  she  was  denied  the  privilege  of 
rotting  in  a  churchyard  by  the  side  of  all  the  beggars  in  the 
parish.  They  buried  her  at  the  corner  of  Burgundy  Street, 
which  must  certainly  have  shocked  her  extremely,  as  she  had 
very  exalted  notions  of  things."  "This  is  acting  very  unpo- 


82  CANDIDE. 

litely,"  said  Candide.  "  Lord ! "  said  Martin,  "what  can  be 
said  to  it  ?  It  is  the  way  of  these  people.  Figure  to  yourseL' 
all  the  contradictions,  all  the  inconsistencies  possible,  ard 
you  may  meet  with  them  in  the  government,  the  courts  of 
justice,  the  churches,  and  the  public  spectacles  of  this  odd 
nation."  "  Is  it  true/'  said  Candide,  "  that  the  people  of 
Paris  are  always  laughing  ?  "  "  Yes,"  replied  the  Abbe ; 
"  but  it  is  with  anger  in  their  hearts.  They  express  all  their 
complaints  by  loud  bursts  of  laughter,  and  commit  the  most 
detestable  crimes  with  a  smile  on  their  faces." 

"  Who  was  that  great  overgrown  beast,"  said  Candide, 
"  who  spoke  so  ill  to  me  of  the  piece  with  which  I  was  so 
much  affected,  and  of  the  players  who  gave  me  so  much 
pleasure  ?  "  "A  very  good-for-nothing  sort  of  a  man,  I 
assure  you,"  answered  the  Abbe  ;  "  one  who  gets  his  liveli- 
hood by  abusing  every  new  book  and  play  that  is  written 
or  performed.  He  abominates  to  see  any  one  meet  with 
success,  like  eunuchs  who  detest  every  one  that  possesses 
those  powers  they  are  deprived  of.  He  is  one  of  those 
vipers  in  literature  who  nourish  themselves  with  their  own 
venom;  a  pamphlet-monger."  "A  pamphlet-monger?" 
said  Candide  ;  "  what  is  that  ? "  "  Why,  a  pamphlet- 
monger,"  replied  the  Abbe",  "  is  a  writer  of  pamphlets, 
a  fool." 

Candide,  Martin,  and  the  Abbe  of  Perigord  argued  thus  on 
the  staircase  while  they  stood  to  see  the  people  go  out  of 
the  playhouse.  "  Though  I  am  very  earnest  to  see  Miss 
Cunegund  again,"  said  Candide,  "yet  I  have  a  great  incli- 
nation to  sup  with  Miss  Clairon,  for  I  am  really  much  taken 
with  her." 

The  Abbe  was  not  a  person  to  show  his  face  at  this  lady's 
house,  which  was  frequented  by  none  but  the  best  company. 
"  She  is  engaged  this  evening,"  said  he  ;  "  but  I  will  do  my- 
self the  honour  to  introduce  you  to  a  lady  of  quality  of  my 
acquaintance,  at  whose  house  you  will  see  as  much  of 


CAND1DE.  83 

tne  manners  of  Paris  as  if  you  had  lived  here  for  forty 
years." 

Candide,  who  was  naturally  curious,  suffered  himself  to 
be  conducted  to  this  lady's  house,  which  was  in  the  suburbs 
of  St.  Honore-  The  company  were  engaged  at  basset ; 
:\velve  melancholy  punters  held  each  in  his  hand  a  small 
pack  of  cards,  the  corners  of  which,  doubled  down,  were  so 
many  registers  of  their  ill-fortune.  A  profound  silence 
reigned  through  the  assembly,  a  pallid  dread  had  taken 
possession  of  the  countenances  of  the  punters,  and  restless 
inquietude  stretched  every  muscle  of  the  face  of  him  who 
kept  the  bank ;  and  the  lady  of  the  house,  who  was  seated 
next  to  him,  observed  with  lynx's  eyes  every  parole  and 
sept-k-va  as  they  were  going,  as  likewise  those  who  tallied, 
and  made  them  undouble  their  cards  with  a  severe  exactness, 
though  mixed  with  a  politeness,  which  she  thought  neces- 
sary not  to  frighten  away  her  customers.  This  lady  assumed 
the  title  of  Marchioness  of  Parolignac.  Her  daughter,  a 
girl  of  about  fifteen  years  of  age,  was  one  of  the  punters, 
and  took  care  to  give  her  mamma  an  item,  by  signs,  when 
any  one  of  them  attempted  to  repair  the  rigour  of  their  ill- 
fortune  by  a  little  innocent  deception.  The  company  were 
thus  occupied,  when  Candide,  Martin,  and  the  Abbe,  made 
their  entrance.  Not  a  creature  rose  to  salute  them,  or 
indeed  took  the  least  notice  of  them,  being  wholly  intent 
upon  the  business  in  hand.  "Ah!"  said  Candide,  "my 
Lady  Baroness  of  Thunder-ten-tronckh  would  have  behaved 
more  civily." 

However,  the  Abbe  whispered  the  Marchioness  in  the  ear, 
who,  half  raising  herself  from  her  seat,  honoured  Candide 
with  a  gracious  smile,  and  gave  Martin  a  nod  of  her  head 
with  an  air  of  inexpressible  dignity.  She  then  ordered  a 
seat  for  Candide,  and  desired  him  to  make  one. at  their 
party  of  play.  He  did  so,  and  in  a  few  deals  lost  near  a 
thousand  pieces ;  after  which  they  supped  very  elegantly, 


84  CANDIDE. 

and  every  one  was  surprised  at  seeing  Candide  lose  so  much 
money,  without  appearing  to  be  the  least  disturbed  at  it. 
The  servants  in  waiting  said  to  each  other,  "  This  is  certainly 
some  English  lord." 

The  supper  was  like  most  others  of  this  kind  at  Paris. 
At  first  every  one  was  silent ;  then  followed  a  few  confused 
murmurs,  and  afterwards  several  insipid  jokes  passed  and 
repassed,  with  false  reports,  false  reasonings,  a  little  politics, 
and  a  great  deal  of  scandal.  The  conversation  then  turned 
upon  the  new  productions  in  literature.  "  Pray,"  said  the 
Abbe,  "good  folks,  have  you  seen  the  romance  written  by 
the  Sieur  Gauchat,  doctor  of  divinity?"  "  Yes,"  answered 
one  of  the  company,  "  but  I  had  not  patience  to  go 
through  it.  The  town  is  pestered  with  a  swarm  of  imperti- 
nent productions,  but  this  of  Dr.  Gauchat's  outdoes  them 
all.  In  short,  I  was  so  horribly  tired  of  reading  this  vile 
stuff,  that  I  even  resolved  to  come  here,  and  make  a  party 

at  basset."  "But  what  say  you  to  the  Archdeacon  T 's 

miscellaneous  collection,"  said  the  Abbe".  "  Oh,  my  God  !" 
cried  the  Marchioness  of  Parolignac,  never  mention  the 
tedious  creature.  Only  think  what  pains  he  is  at  to  tell  one 
things  that  all  the  world  knows ;  and  how  he  labours  an 
argument  that  is  hardly  worth  the  slightest  consideration  ! 
How  absurdly  he  makes  use  of  otfier  people's  wit !  how 
miserably  he  mangles  what  he  has  pilfered  from  them  ! 
The  man  makes  me  quite  sick.  A  few  pages  of  the  good 
archdeacon  are  enough  in  conscience  to  satisfy  any  one." 

There  was  at  the  table  a  person  of  learning  and  taste, 
•who  supported  what  the  Marchioness  had  advanced.  They 
next  began  to  talk  of  tragedies,  The  lady  desired  to  know 
how  it  came  about  that  there  were  several  tragedies  which 
still  continued  to  be  played,  though  they  would  not  bear 
reading  ?  The  man  of  taste  explained  very  clearly,  how  a 
piece  may  be  in  some  manner  interesting  without  having  a 
grain  of  merit.  He  showed,  in  a  few  words,  that  it  is  not 


CANDIDE.  85 

sufficient  to  throw  together  a  few  incidents  that  are  to  be  met 
with  in  every  romance,  and  that  dazzle  the  spectator ;  the 
thoughts  should  be  new  without  being  far-fetched ;  frequently 
sublime,  but  always  natural;  the  author  should  have  a 
thorough  knowledge  of  the  human  heart,  and  make  it  speak 
properly ;  he  should  be  a  complete  poet,  without  showing  an 
affectation  of  it  in  any  of  the  characters  of  his  piece ;  he  should 
be  a  perfect  master  of  his  language,  speak  it  with  all  its  purity 
and  with  the  utmost  harmony,  and  yet  so  as  not  to  make  the 
sense  a  slave  to  the  rhyme.  "  Whoever,"  added  he,  "  neglects 
any  one  of  these  rales,  though  he  may  write  two  or  three 
tragedies  with  tolerable  success,  will  never  be  reckoned  in  the 
number  of  good  authors.  There  are  very  few  good  tragedies ; 
some  are  idylliums,  in  well  written  and  harmonious  dialogue; 
and  others  a  chain  of  political  reasonings  that  set  one  asleep ; 
or  else  pompous  and  high-flown  amplifications,  that  disgust 
rather  than  please.  Others  again  are  the  ravings  of  a 
madman,  in  an  uncouth  style,  unmeaning  flights,  or  long 
apostrophes  to  the  deities,  for  want  of  knowing  how  to 
address  mankind  :  in  a  word,  a  collection  of  false  maxims 
and  dull  commonplace." 

Candide  listened  to  this  discourse  with  great  attention, 
and  conceived  a  high  opinion  of  the  person  who  delivered 
it ;  and  as  the  Marchioness  had  taken  care  to  place  him  near 
her  side,  he  took  the  liberty  to  whisper  her  softly  in  the 
ear,  and  ask  who  this  person  was  that  spoke  so  well.  "  He 
is  a  man  of  letters,"  replied  her  ladyship,  "  who  never  plays, 
and  whom  the  Abbe  brings  with  him  to  my  house  sometimes 
to  spend  an  evening.  He  is  a  great  judge  of  writing, 
especially  in  tragedy :  he  has  composed  one  himself,  which 
was  damned,  and  has  written  a  book  that  was  never  seen 
out  of  his  bookseller's  shop,  excepting  only  one  copy,  which 
he  sent  me  with  a  dedication,  to  which  he  had  prefixed  my 
name."  "  Oh,  the  great  man  !  "  cried  Candide  ;  "  he  is  a 
second  Pangloss," 


86  CANDIDE. 

Then  turning  towards  him  :  "  Sir,"  said  he,  you  are  doubt- 
less of  opinion  that  everything  is  for  the  best  in  the  physical 
and  moral  world,  and  that  nothing  could  be  otherwise  than 
it  is  ?  "  "  I,  sir ! "  replied  the  man  of  letters  ;  "  I  think  no  such 
thing,  I  assure  you ;  I  find  that  all  in  this  world  is  set  the 
wrong  end  uppermost.  No  one  knows  what  is  his  rank,  his 
office,  nor  what  he  does,  nor  what  he  should  do ;  and  that 
except  our  evenings,  which  we  generally  pass  tolerably 
merrily,  the  rest  of  our  time  is  spent  in  idle  disputes  and 
quarrels :  Jansenists  against  Molinists,  the  Parliament  against 
the  Church,  and  one  armed  body  of  men  against  another ; 
courtier  against  courtier,  husband  against  wife,  and  relations 
against  relations.  In  short,  this  world  is  nothing  but  one 
continued  scene  of  civil  war." 

"  Yes,"  said  Candide,  "  and  I  have  seen  worse  than  all 
that ;  and  yet  a  learned  man,  who  had  the  misfortune  to  be 
hanged,  taught  me  that  everything  was  marvellously  well, 
and  that  these  evils  you  are  speaking  of  were  only  so  many 
shades  in  a  beautiful  picture."  "  Your  hempen  sage,"  said 
Martin,  "  laughed  at  you.  These  shades,  as  you  call  them, 
are  the  most  horrible  blemishes."  "  The  men  make  these 
blemishes,"  rejoined  Candide,  "  and  they  cannot  do  other- 
wise." "  Then  it  is  not  their  fault,"  added  Martin.  The 
greatest  part  of  the  gamesters,  who  did  not  understand  a 
syllable  of  this  discourse,  amused  themselves  with  drinking, 
while  Martin  reasoned  with  the  learned  gentleman ;  and 
Candide  entertained  the  lady  of  the  house  with  a  part  of  his 
adventures. 

After  supper  the  Marchioness  conducted  Candide  into 
her  dressing-room,  and  made  him  sit  down  under  a  canopy. 
"  Well,"  said  she,  "  are  you  still  so  violently  fond  of  Miss 
Cunegund  of  Thunder-ten-tronck  ?  "  Yes,  madam,"  replied 
Candide.  The  Marchioness  says  to  him,  with  a  tender 
smile,  "  You  answer  me  like  a  young  man  born  in  West- 
phalia. A  Frenchman  would  have  said,  '  It  is  true,  madam, 


CANDIDE.  87 

I  had  a  great  passion  for  Miss  Cunegund  ;  but  since  I  have 
seen  you  I  fear  I  can  no  longer  love  her  as  I  did.'  "  "  Alas  ! 
madam,"  replied  Candide,  "  I  will  make  you  what  answer  you 
please."  "  You  fell  in  love  with  her,  I  find,  in  stooping  to  pick 
up  her  handkerchief,  which  she  had  dropped.  You  shall  pick 
up  my  garter."  "  With  all  my  heart,  madam,"  said  Candide  ; 
and  he  picked  it  up.  "  But  you  must  tie  it  on  again,"  said  the 
lady.  "  Look  ye,  young  man,"  said  the  Marchioness,  "  you 
are  a  stranger.  I  make  some  of  my  lovers  here  in  Paris  lan- 
guish for  me  a  whole  fortnight ;  but  I  surrender  to  you  the 
first  night,  because  I  am  willing  to  do  the  honours  of  my 
country  to  a  young  Westphalian."  The  fair  one  having  cast 
her  eye  on  two  very  large  diamonds  that  were  upon  the  young 
stranger's  finger,  praised  them  in  so  earnest  a  manner  that 
they  were  in  an  instant  transferred  from  his  finger  to  hers. 

As  Candide  was  going  home  with  the  Abbe  he  felt  some 
qualms  of  conscience  for  having  been  guilty  of  infidelity  to 
Miss  Cunegund.  The  Abbe  took  part  with  him  in  his  un- 
easiness. He  had  but  an  inconsiderable  share  in  the  thou- 
sand pieces  Candide  had  lost  at  play,  and  the  two  diamonds 
which  had  been  in  a  manner  extorted  from  him ;  and  there- 
fore very  prudently  designed  to  make  the  most  he  could  of 
his  new  acquaintance  which  chance  had  thrown  in  his  way. 
He  talked  much  of  Miss  Cunegund ;  and  Candide  assured 
him  that  he  would  heartily  ask  pardon  of  that  fair  one  for 
his  infidelity  to  her  when  he  saw  her  at  Venice. 

The  Abbe  redoubled  his  civilities,  and  seemed  to  in- 
terest himself  warmly  in  everything  that  Candide  said,  did, 
or  seemed  inclined  to  do. 

"  And  so,  sir,  you  have  an  engagement  at  Venice  ? " 
"  Yes,  Monsieur  1'AbbeY'  answered  Candide,  "  I  must  abso- 
lutely wait  upon  Miss  Cunegund ; "  and  then  the  pleasure 
he  took  in  talking  about  the  object  he  Icved  led  him 
insensibly  to  relate,  according  to  custom,  part  of  his 
adventures  with  that  illustrious  Westphalian  beauty. 


88  CANDIDE. 

"  I  fancy,"  said  the  Abbe",  "  Miss  Cunegund  has  a  great 
deal  of  wit,  and  that  her  letters  must  be  very  entertaining." 
"  I  never  received  any  from  her,"  said  Candide,  "  for  you 
are  to  consider  that,  being  expelled  from  the  castle  upon 
her  account,  I  could  not  write  to  her,  especially  as  soon 
after  my  departure  I  heard  she  was  dead ;  but,  thank  God,  I 
found  afterwards  she  was  living.  I  left  her  again  after  this, 
and  now  I  have  sent  a  messenger  to  her  near  two  thousand 
leagues  from  hence,  and  wait  here  for  his  return  with  an 
answer  from  her." 

The  artful  Abbe  let  not  a  word  of  all  this  escape  him, 
though  he  seemed  to  be  musing  upon  something  else.  He 
soon  took  his  leave  of  the  two  adventurers,  after  having 
embraced  them  with  the  greatest  cordiality.  The  next 
morning,  almost  as  soon  as  his  eyes  were  open,  Candide 
received  the  following  billet  : — 

"  My  dearest  Lover, — I  have  been  ill  in  this  city  these 
eight  days.  I  have  heard  of  your  arrival,  and  should  fly  to 
your  arms  were  I  able  to  stir.  I  was  informed  of  your  being 
on  the  way  hither  at  Bourdeaux,  where  I  left  the  faithful 
Cacambo  and  the  old  woman,  who  will  soon  follow  me. 
The  Governor  of  Buenos  Ayres  has  taken  everything  from 
me  but  your  heart,  which  I  still  retain.  Come  to  me 
immediately  on  receipt  of  this.  Your  presence  will  either 
give  me  new  life  or  kill  me  with  the  pleasure." 

At  the  receipt  of  this  charming,  this  unexpected  letter, 
Candide  felt  the  utmost  transports  of  joy ;  though,  on  the 
other  hand,  the  indisposition  of  his  beloved  Miss  Cunegund, 
overwhelmed  him  with  grief.  Distracted  between  these  two 
passions,  he  takes  his  gold  and  his  diamonds,  and  procured 
a  person  to  conduct  him  and  Martin  to  the  house  where 
Miss  Cunegund  lodged.  Upon  entering  the  room  he  felt 
his  limbs  tremble,  his  heart  flutter,  his  tongue  falter.  He 
attempted  to  undraw  the  curtain,  and  called  Tor  a  light  to 
the  bedside.  "  Lord,  sir,"  cried  a  maid-servant,  who  was 


CANDIDE.  89 

waiting  in  the  room,  "  take  care  what  you  do;  Miss  cannot 
bear  the  least  light."  And  so  saying,  she  pulls  the  curtain 
close  again.  "  Cunegund !  my  dear  Cunegund  !  "  cried 
Candide,  bathed  in  tears,  "  how  do  you  do  ?  If  you  cannot 
bear  the  light,  speak  to  me  at  least."  "  Alas  !  she  cannot 
speak,"  said  the  maid.  The  sick  lady  then  puts  a  plump 
hand  out  of  the  bed,  and  Candide  first  bathes  it  with  his 
tears,  then  fills  it  with  diamonds,  leaving  a  purse  of  gold 
upon  the  easy  chair. 

In  the  midst  of  his  transports  comes  an  officer  into  the 
room,  followed  by  the  Abbe  and  a  file  of  musketeers. 
"There,"  said  he,  "are  the  two  suspected  foreigners."  At 
the  same  time  he  orders  them  to  be  seized  and  carried  to 
prison.  "  Travellers  are  not  treated  in  this  manner  in  the 
country  of  El  Dorado,"  said  Candide.  "  I  am  more  of  a 
Manichaean  now  than  ever,"  said  Martin.  "  But  pray,  good 
sir,  where  are  you  going  to  carry  us,"  said  Candide.  "  To 
a  dungeon,  my  dear  sir,"  replied  the  officer. 

When  Martin  had  a  little  recovered  himself,  so  as  to  for 
a  cool  judgment  of  what  had  passed,  he  plainly  perceiveo 
that  the  person  who  had  acted  the  part  of  Miss  Cunegund 
was  a  cheat,  that  the  Abbe  of  Perigord  was  a  sharper,  who 
had  imposed  upon  the  honest  simplicity  of  Candide,  and 
that  the  officer  was  a  knave,  whom  they  might  easily  get  rid  of. 

Candide,  following  the  advice  of  his  friend  Martin,  and 
burning  with  impatience  to  see  the  real  Miss  Cunegund, 
rather  than  be  obliged  to  appear  at  a  court  of  justice,  pro- 
poses to  the  officer  to  make  him  a  present  of  three  small 
diamonds,  each  of  them  worth  three  thousand  pistoles. 
"Ah,  sir,"  said  this  understrapper  of  justice,  "had  you 
committed  ever  so  much  villainy,  this  would  render  you  the 
honestest  man  living  in  my  eyes.  Three  diamonds  worth 
three  thousand  pistoles  !  Why,  my  dear  sir,  go  far  from 
carrying  you  to  jai),  I  would  lose  my  life  to  serve  you. 
There  are  orders  for  stopping  all  strangers  ;  but  leave  it  to 


90  CANDIDE. 

me.  I  have  a  brother  at  Dieppe,  in  Normandy.  I  myself 
will  conduct  you  thither,  and  if  you  have  a  diamond  left  to 
give  him,  he  will  take  as  much  care  of  you  as  I  myself  should." 

"  But  why,"  said  Candide,  "  do  they  stop  all  strangers  ?  " 
The  Abbe  of  Perigord  made  answer  that  it  was  because  a 
poor  devil  of  the  country  of  Atrebata  heard  somebody  tell 
foolish  stories,  and  this  induced  him  to  commit  a  parricide ; 
not  such  a  one  as  that  in  the  month  of  May  1610,  but  such 
as  that  in  the  month  of  December  in  the  year  1594,  and 
such  as  many  that  have  been  perpetrated  in  other  months  and 
years  by  other  poor  devils  who  had  heard  foolish  stories. 

The  officer  then  explained  to  them  what  the  Abbe  meant. 
"  Horrid  monsters  !  "  exclaimed  Candide.  "  Is  it  possible 
that  such  scenes  should  pass  among  a  people  who  are  per- 
petually singing  and  dancing?  Is  there  no  flying  this 
abominable  country  immediately,  this  execrable  kingdom, 
where  monkeys  provoke  tigers?  I  have  seen  bears  in  my 
country,  but  men  I  have  beheld  nowhere  but  in  El  Dorado. 
In  the  name  of  God,  sir,"  said  he  to  the  officer,  "  do  me  the 
kindness  to  conduct  me  to  Venice,  where  I  am  to  wait  for 
Miss  Cunegund."  "  Really,  sir,"  replied  the  officer,  "  I 
cannot  possibly  wait  on  you  farther  than  Lower  Normandy." 
So  saying,  he  ordered  Candide's  irons  to  be  struck  off, 
acknowledged  himself  mistaken,  and  sent  his  followers  about 
their  business;  after  which  he  conducted  Candide  and 
Martin  to  Dieppe,  and  left  them  to  the  care  of  his  brother. 
There  happened  just  then  to  be  a  small  Dutch  ship  in  the 
roads.  The  Norman,  whom  the  other  three  diamonds  had 
converted  into  the  most  obliging,  serviceable  being  that  ever 
breathed,  took  care  to  see  Candide  and  his  attendants  safe 
on  board  this  vessel,  that  was  just  ready  to  sail  for  Ports- 
mouth in  England.  This  was  not  the  nearest  way  to  Venice 
indeed ;  but  Candide  thought  himself  escaped  out  of  hell, 
and  did  not  in  the  least  doubt  but  he  should  quickly  find  an 
opportunity  of  resuming  his  voyage  to  Venice. 


C AND  IDE.  91 

CHAPTER  XXIII. 

Candidc  and  Martin  touch  upon  the  English  Coast:  ivhat  they  see  there. 

"  AH,  Pangloss  !  Pangloss  !  Ah,  Martin  !  Martin  !  Ah,  my 
dear  Miss  Cunegund  !  What  sort  of  a  world  is  this  ?  "  Thus 
exclaimed  Candide  as  soon  as  he  had  got  on  board  the  Dutch 
ship.  "  Why,  something  very  foolish  and  very  abominable," 
said  Martin.  "  You  are  acquainted  with  England,"  said 
Candide ;  "  are  they  as  great  fools  in  that  country  as  in 
France  ? "  "  Yes  •  but  in  a  different  manner,"  answered 
Martin.  "  You  know  that  these  two  nations  are  at  war 
about  a  few  acres  of  barren  land  in  the  neighbourhood  of 
Canada,  and  that  they  have  expended  much  greater  sums  in 
the  contest  than  all  Canada  is  worth.  To  say  exactly 
whether  there  are  a  greater  number  fit  to  be  inhabitants  of 
a  madhouse  in  the  one  country  than  the  other,  exceeds  the 
limits  of  my  imperfect  capacity.  I  know  in  general  that 
the  people  we  are  going  to  visit  are  of  a  very  dark  and 
gloomy  disposition." 

As  they  were  chatting  thus  together  they  arrived  at  Ports- 
mouth. The  shore  on  each  side  the  harbour  was  lined  with 
a  multitude  of  people,  whose  eyes  were  stedfastly  fixed  on  a 
lusty  man  who  was  kneeling  down  on  the  deck  of  one  of 
the  men-of-war,  with  something  tied  over  his  eyes.  Oppo- 
.site  to  this  personage  stood  four  soldiers,  each  of  whom 
shot  three  bullets  into  his  skull  with  all  the  composure 
imaginable  ;  and  when  it  was  done,  the  whole  company  went 
away  perfectly  well  satisfied.  "  What  the  devil  is  all  this 
for?"  said  Candide;  "and  what  demon  or  foe  to  mankind 
lords  it  thus  tyrannically  over  the  world?"  He  then  asked 
who  was  that  lusty  man  who  had  been  sent  out  of  the  world 
with  so  much  ceremony,  when  he  received  for  answer  that 
it  was  an  admiral.  "  And  pray  why  do  you  put  your  admiral' 


92  CANDIDE, 

to  death  ?  "  "  Because  he  did  not  put  a  sufficient  number  of 
his  fellow-a  eatures  to  death.  You  must  know,  he  had  an 
engagement  with  a  French  admiral,  and  it  has  been  proved 
against  him  that  he  was  not  near  enough  to  his  antagonist." 
"  But/'  replied  Candide,  "  the  French  admiral  must  have 
been  as  far  from  him."  "  There  is  no  doubt  of  that ;  but  in 
this  country  it  is  found  requisite,  now  and  then,  to  put  one 
admiral  to  death  in  order  to  spirit  up  the  others  to  fight." 

Candide  was  so  shocked  at  what  he  saw  and  heard  that 
he  would  not  set  foot  on  shore,  but  made  a  bargain  with  the 
Dutch  skipper  (were  he  even  to  rob  him  like  the  captain  of 
Surinam)  to  carry  him  directly  to  Venice. 

The  skipper  was  ready  in  two  days.  They  sailed  along 
the  coast  of  France,  and  passed  within  sight  of  Lisbon,  at 
which  Candide  trembled.  From  thence  they  proceeded  to 
the  straits,  entered  the  Mediterranean,  and  at  length  arrived 
at  Venice.  "  God  be  praised,"  said  Candide,  embracing 
Martin,  "  this  is  the  place  where  I  am  to  behold  my 
beloved  Cunegund  once  again.  I  can  confide  in  Cacambo 
like  another  self.  All  is  well — all  very  well ;  all  as  well  as 
possible." 

CHAPTER  XXIV. 

Of  Pacqtictle  and  Friar  Girojtie. 

UPON  their  aerival  at  Venice  he  went  in  search  of  Cacambo 
at  every  inn  and  coffee-house,  and  among  all  the  ladies  of 
pleasure  ;  but  could  hear  nothing  of  him.  He  sent  every 
day  to  inquire  what  ships  were  come  in ;  still  no  news  of 
Cacambo.  "  It  is  strange,"  said  he  to  Martin,  "  very  strange, 
that  I  should  have  had  time  to  sail  from  Surinam  to  Bour- 
deaux  ;  to  travel  from  thence  to  Paris,  to  Dieppe,  to  Ports- 
mouth ;  to  sail  along  the  coast  of  Portugal  and  Spain,  and 
up  the  Mediterranean  to  spend  some  months  at  Venice ; 
and  that  my  lovely  Cunegund  should  not  be  arrived.  Instead 


CANDIDE.  93 

of  her,  I  only  met  with  a  Parisian  impostor  and  a  rascally 
Abbe  of  Perigord.  Cunegund  is  actually  dead,  and  I  have 
nothing  to  do  but  to  follow  her.  Alas  !  how  much  better 
would  it  have  been  for  me  to  have  remained  in  the  paradise 
of  El  Dorado,  than  to  have  returned  to  this  wicked  Europe  ! 
You  are  in  the  right,  my  dear  Martin ;  you  are  certainly 
in  the  right :  all  is  misery  and  deceit." 

He  fell  into  a  deep  melancholy,  and  neither  went  to  the 
opera  in  vogue,  nor  partook  of  any  of  the  diversions  of  the 
Carnival :  nay,  he  even  slighted  the  fair  sex.  Martin  said  to 
him,  "  Upon  my  word,  I  think  you  are  very  simple  to 
imagine  that  a  rascally  valet,  with  five  or  six  millions  in  his 
pocket,  would  go  in  search  of  your  mistress  to  the  further 
end  of  the  world,  and  bring  her  to  Venice  to  meet  you.  If 
he  finds  her,  he  will  take  her  for  himself;  if  he  does  not,  he 
will  take  another.  Let  me  advise  you  to  forget  your  valet 
Cacambo,  and  your  mistress  Cunegund."  Martin's  speech 
was  not  the  most  consolatory  to  the  dejected  Candide. 
His  melancholy  increased,  and  Martin  never  left  proving 
to  him,  that  there  is  very  little  virtue  or  happiness  in  this 
world — except,  perhaps,  in  El  Dorado,  where  hardly  any- 
body can  gain  admittance. 

While  they  were  disputing  on  this  important  subject,  and 
still  expecting  Miss  Cunegund,  Candide  perceived  a  young 
Theatin  friar  in  St.  Mark's  Place,  with  a  girl  under  his  arm. 
The  Theatin  looked  fresh-coloured,  plump,  and  vigorous ; 
his  eyes  sparkled  ;  his  air  and  gait  were  bold  and  lofty. 
The  girl  was  very  pretty,  and  was  singing  a  song  ;  and  every 
now  and  then  gave  her  Theatin  an  amorous  ogle,  and 
wantonly  pinched  his  ruddy  cheeks.  "  You  will  at  least 
allow,"  said  Candide  to  Martin,  "  that  these  two  are  happy. 
Hitherto  I  have  met  with  none  but  unfortunate  people  in 
the  whole  habitable  globe,  except  in  El  Dorado  ;  but  as  to 
this  couple,  I  would  venture  to  lay  a  wager  that  they  are 
happy."  "  Done  \  "  said  Martin  ;  "  they  are  not,  for  what 


94  CANDIDE. 

you  will."  "  Well,  we  have  only  to  ask  them  to  dine  with 
us,"  said  Candide,  "  and  you  will  see  whether  I  am  mistaken 
or  not." 

Thereupon  he  accosts  them,  and  with  great  politeness 
invites  them  to  his  inn  to  eat  some  macaroni,  with  Lombard 
partridges  and  caviare,  and  to  drink  a  bottle  of  Montepul- 
ciano,  Lacryma  Christi,  Cyprus  and  Samos  wine.  The  girl 
blushed ;  the  Theatin  accepted  the  invitation,  and  she  fol- 
lowed him,  eyeing  Candide  every  now  and  then  with  a 
mixture  of  surprise  and  confusion,  while  the  tears  stole  down 
her  cheeks.  No  sooner  did  she  enter  his  apartment  than 
she  cried  out :  "  How,  Mr.  Candide,  have  you  quite  forgot 
your  Pacquette  ?  Do  you  not  know  her  again  ?  "  Candide, 
who  had  not  regarded  her  with  any  degree  of  attention  be- 
fore, being  wholly  occupied  with  the  thoughts  of  his  dear 
Cunegund :  "  Ah  !  is  it  you,  child  ?  Was  it  you  that 
reduced  Doctor  Pangloss  to  that  fine  condition  I  saw  him 
in?" 

"  Alas  !  sir,"  answered  Pacquette,  "  it  was  I  indeed.  I 
find  you  are  acquainted  with  everything  ;  and  I  have  been 
informed  of  all  the  misfortunes  that  happened  to  the  whole 
family  of  my  lady  baroness  and  the  fair  Cunegund.  But  I 
can  safely  swear  to  you  that  my  lot  was  no  less  deplorable  ; 
I  was  innocence  itself  when  you  saw  me  last.  A  Cordelier, 
who  was  my  confessor,  easily  misled  me ;  the  consequences 
proved  terrible.  I  was  obliged  to  leave  the  castle  some  time 
after  the  baron  kicked  you  out  from  thence ;  and  if  a  famous 
surgeon  had  not  taken  compassion  on  me,  I  had  been  a 
dead  woman.  Gratitude  obliged  me  to  live  with  him  some 
time  as  a  companion.  His  wife,  who  was  a  very  devil  for 
jealousy,  beat  me  unmercifully  every  day.  Oh  !  she  was  a 
perfect  fury.  The  doctor  himself  was  the  most  ugly  of  all 
mortals,  and  I  the  most  wretched  creature  existing,  to  be 
continually  beaten  for  a  man  whom  I  did  not  love.  You 
are  sensible,  sir,  how  dangerous  it  was  for  an  ill-natured 


CANDIDE.  95 

woman  to  be  married  to  a  physician.  Incensed  at  the  be- 
haviour of  his  wife,  he  one  day  gave  her  so  affectionate  a 
remedy  for  a  slight  cold  she  had  caught,  that  she  died  in  less 
than  two  hours  in  most  dreadful  convulsions.  Her  relations 
prosecuted  the  husband,  who  was  obliged  to  fly,  and  I  was 
sent  to  prison.  My  innocence  would  not  have  saved  me, 
if  I  had  not  been  tolerably  handsome.  The  judge  gave  me 
my  liberty  on  condition  he  should  succeed  the  doctor.  How- 
ever, I  was  soon  supplanted  by  a  rival,  turned  off  without  a 
farthing,  and  obliged  to  continue  the  abominable  trade  which 
you  men  think  so  pleasing,  but  which  to  us  unhappy  creatures 
is  the  most  dreadful  of  all  sufferings.  At  length  I  came  to 
follow  the  business  at  Venice.  Ah,  sir  !  did  you  but  know 
what  it  is  to  be  companion  with  every  fellow — with  old  trades- 
men, with  counsellors,  with  monks,  watermen,  and  abbes; 
to  be  exposed  to  all  their  insolence  and  abuse ;  to  be  often, 
obliged  to  borrow  the  gay  clothes  we  wear;  to  be  robbed  by 
one  gallant  of  what  we  get  from  another ;  to  be  subject  to 
the  extortions  of  civil  magistrates;  and  to  have  for  ever 
before  one's  eyes  the  prospect  of  old  age,  an  hospital,  or  a 
dunghill,  you  would  conclude  that  I  am  one  of  the  most 
unhappy  wretches  breathing." 

Thus  did  Pacquette  unbosom  herself  to  honest  Candide 
in  his  closet,  in  the  presence  of  Martin,  who  took  occasion 
to  say  to  him,  "  You  see  I  have  won  the  wager  already." 

Friar  Giroflee  was  all  this  time  in  the  parlour  refreshing 
himself  with  a  glass  or  two  of  wine  till  dinner  was  ready. 
"  But,"  said  Candide  to  Pacquette,  "  you  looked  so  gay  and 
content  when  I  met  you,  you  sang  and  caressed  the  Theatin 
with  so  much  fondness,  that  I  absolutely  thought  you  as 
happy  as  you  say  you  are  now  miserable."  "  Ah  !  dear 
sir,"  said  Pacquette,  "  this  is  one  of  the  miseries  of  the  trade ; 
yesterday  I  was  stripped  and  beaten  by  an  officer,  yet  to- 
day I  must  appear  good-humoured  and  gay  to  please  a 
friar. 


96  CANDIDE. 

Candide  was  convinced,  and  acknowledged  that  Martin 
was  in  the  right.  They  sat  down  to  table  with  Pacquette 
and  the  Theatin ;  the  entertainment  was  very  agreeable,  and 
towards  the  end  they  began  to  converse  together  with  some 
freedom.  "  Father,"  said  Candide  to  the  friar,  "  you  seem 
to  me  to  enjoy  a  state  of  happiness  that  even  kings  might 
envy ;  joy  and  health  are  painted  in  your  countenance. 
You  have  a  beautiful  friend  to  divert  you ;  and  you  seem 
to  be  perfectly  well  contented  with  your  condition  as  a 
Theatin." 

"  Faith,  sir,"  said  Friar  Giroflee,  "  I  wish  with  all  my 
soul  the  Theatins  were  every  one  of  them  a  t  the  bottom  of 
the  sea.  I  have  been  tempted  a  thousand  times  to  set  fire 
to  the  convent  and  go  and  turn  Turk.  My  parents  obliged 
me  at  the  age  of  fifteen  to  put  on  this  detestable  habit,  only 
to  increase  the  fortune  of  an  elder  brother  of  mine,  whom 
God  confound !  Jealousy,  discord,  and  fury  reside  in  our 
convent.  It  is  true  I  have  preached  often  paltry  sermons 
by  which  I  have  got  a  little  money,  part  of  which  the  prior 
robs  me  of,  and  the  remainder  helps  to  buy  my  joys ;  but 
at  night  when  I  go  hence  to  my  convent,  I  am  ready  to  dash 
my  brains  against  the  walls  of  the  dormitory  ;  and  this  is  the 
case  with  all  the  rest  of  our  fraternity." 

Martin,  turning  towards  Candide  with  his  usual  indiffer- 
ence, said,  "Well,  what  think  you  now?  Have  I  won 
the  wager  entirely  ?  "  Candide  gave  two  thousand  piastres 
to  Pacquette  and  a  thousand  to  Friar  Girofle'e,  saying,  "  I 
will  answer  that  this  will  make  them  happy."  "  I  am  not 
of  your  opinion,"  said  Martin ;  "  perhaps  this  money  will 
only  make  them  wretched."  "  Be  that  as  it  may,"  said 
Candide,  "  one  thing  comforts  me ;  I  see  that  one  often 
meets  with  those  whom  we  expected  never  to  see  again  ;  so 
that  perhaps,  as  I  have  found  my  red  sheep  and  Pacquette, 
I  may  be  lucky  enough  to  find  Miss  Cunegund  also."  "  I 
wish,"  said  Martin,  "  she  one  day  may  make  you  happy  ; 


C AND  IDE.  97 

but  I  doubt  it  much."  "  You  are  very  hard  of  belief,"  said 
Candide.  "  It  is  because,"  said  Martin,  "  I  have  seen  the 
world." 

"  Observe  those  gondoliers,"  said  Candide  ;  "  are  they  not 
perpetually  singing  ?  "  "  You  do  not  see  them,"  answered 
Martin,  "  at  home  with  their  wives  and  brats.  The  dog  has 
his  chagrin,  gondoliers  theirs.  Nevertheless,  in  the  main 
I  look  upon  the  gondolier's  life  as  preferable  to  that  of  the 
dog ;  but  the  difference  is  so  trifling  that  it  is  not  worth 
the  trouble  of  examining  into." 

I  have  heard  great  talk,"  said  Candide,  "  of  the  Senator 
Pococurante,  who  lives  in  that  fine  house  at  the  Brenta, 
where  they  say  he  entertains  foreigners  in  the  most  polite 
manner.  They  pretend  this  man  is  a  perfect  stranger  to 
uneasiness."  "  I  should  be  glad  to  see  so  extraordinary  a 
being,"  said  Martin.  Candide  thereupon  sent  a  messenger 
to  Signer  Pococurante,  desiring  permission  to  wait  on  him 
the  next  day. 

CHAPTER  XXV. 

Candide  and  Martin  pay  a  visit  to  Signor  Pococurante, 
a  noble  Venetian. 

CANDIDE  and  his  friend  Martin  went  into  a  gondola  on  the 
Brenta,  and  arrived  at  the  palace  of  the  noble  Pococurante" : 
the  gardens  were  laid  out  in  elegant  taste,  and  adorned 
with  fine  marble  statues  ;  his  palace  was  built  after  the  most 
approved  rules  of  architecture.  The  master  of  the  house, 
who  was  a  man  of  sixty,  and  very  rich,  received  our  two 
travellers  with  great  politeness,  but  without  much  ceremony, 
which  somewhat  disconcerted  Candide,  but  was  not  at  all 
displeasing  to  Martin. 

As  soon  as  they  were  seated,  two  very  pretty  girls,  neatly 
dressed,  brought  in  chocolate,  which  was  extremely  well 
frothed.  Candide  could  not  help  making  encomiums  upon 

D 


98  CANDIDE. 

their  beauty  and  graceful  carriage.  "  The  creatures  are  well 
enough,"  said  the  senator.  "  I  make  them  my  companions, 
for  I  am  heartily  tired  of  the  ladies  of  the  town,  their 
coquetry,  their  jealousy,  their  quarrels,  their  humours,  their 
meannesses,  their  pride,  and  their  folly.  I  am  weary  of 
making  sonnets,  or  of  paying  for  sonnets  to  be  made  on 
them ;  but  after  all,  these  two  girls  begin  to  grow  very 
indifferent  to  me." 

After  having  refreshed  himself,  Candide  walked  into  a  large 
gallery,  where  he  was  struck  with  the  sight  of  a  fine  collec- 
tion of  paintings.  "  Pray,"  said  Candide,  "  by  what  master 
are  the  two  first  of  these  ?  "  "  They  are  Raphael's,"  answered 
the  senator.  "  I  gave  a  great  deal  of  money  for  them  seven 
years  ago,  purely  out  of  curiosity,  as  they  were  said  to  be 
the  finest  pieces  in  Italy  ;  but  I  cannot  say  they  please  me  : 
the  colouring  is  dark  and  heavy ;  the  figures  do  not  swell 
nor  come  out  enough ;  and  the  drapery  is  very  bad.  In  short, 
notwithstanding  the  encomiums  lavished  upon  them,  they 
are  not,  in  my  opinion,  a  true  representation  of  nature.  I 
approve  of  no  paintings  but  where  I  think  I  behold  Nature 
herself ;  and  there  are  very  few,  if  any,  of  that  kind  to  be 
met  with.  I  have  what  is  called  a  fine  collection,  but  I 
take  no  manner  of  delight  in  them." 

While  dinner  was  getting  ready  Pococurante  ordered  a 
concert  Candide  praised  the  music  to  the  skies.  "  This 
noise,"  said  the  noble  Venetian,  "  may  amuse  one  for  a  little 
time,  but  if  it  was  to  last  above  half-an-hour,  it  would  grow 
tiresome  to  everybody,  though  perhaps  no  one  would  care 
to  own  it.  Music  is  become  the  art  of  executing  what  is 
difficult ;  now,  whatever  is  difficult  cannot  be  long  pleasing. 

"  I  believe  I  might  take  more  pleasure  in  an  opera,  if  they 
had  not  made  such  a  monster  of  that  species  of  dramatic 
entertainment  as  perfectly  shocks  me ;  and  I  am  amazed  how 
people  can  bear  to  see  wretched  tragedies  set  to  music ;  where 
the  scenes  are  contrived  for  no  other  purpose  than  to  lug  in, 


C AND  IDE. 


99 


as  it  were  by  the  ears,  three  or  four  ridiculous  songs,  to  give 
a  favourite  actress  an  opportunity  of  exhibiting  her  pipe. 
Let  who  will  or  can  die  away  in  raptures  at  the  trills  of  a 
eunuch  quavering  the  majestic  part  of  Caesar  or  Cato,  and 
strutting  in  a  foolish  manner  upon  the  stage.  For  my  part, 
I  have  long  ago  renounced  these  paltry  entertainments, 
which  constitute  the  glory  of  modern  Italy,  and  are  so  dearly 
purchased  by  crowned  heads."  Candide  opposed  these 
sentiments ;  but  he  did  it  in  a  discreet  manner.  As  for 
Martin,  he  was  entirely  of  the  old  senator's  opinion. 

Dinner  being  served  up,  they  sat  down  to  table,  and  after  a 
very  hearty  repast,  returned  to  the  library.  Candide  observing 
Homer  richly  bound,  commended  the  noble  Venetian's 
taste.  "  This,"  said  he,  "  is  a  book  that  was  once  the  delight 
of  the  great  Pangloss,  the  best  philosopher  in  Germany." 
"  Homer  is  no  favourite  of  mine,"  answered  Pococurante" 
very  coolly.  "  I  was  made  to  believe  once  that  I  took  a 
pleasure  in  reading  him  ;  but  his  continual  repetitions  of 
battles  must  have  all  such  a  resemblance  with  each  other  ; 
his  gods  that  are  for  ever  in  a  hurry  and  bustle,  without  ever 
doing  anything ;  his  Helen,  that  is  the  cause  of  the  war,  and 
yet  hardly  acts  in  the  whole  performance ;  his  Troy,  that 
holds  out  so  long  without  being  taken ;  in  short,  all  these 
things  together  make  the  poem  very  insipid  to  me.  I  have 
asked  some  learned  men  whether  they  are  not  in  reality  as 
much  tired  as  myself  with  reading  this  poet.  Those  who 
spoke  ingenuously  assured  me  that  he  had  made  them  fall 
asleep,  and  yet  that  they  could  not  well  avoid  giving  him  a 
place  in  their  libraries  ;  but  that  it  was  merely  as  they  would 
do  an  antique,  or  those  rusty  medals  which  are  kept  only  for 
curiosity,  and  are  of  no  manner  of  use  in  commerce." 

<!  But  your  excellency  does  not  surely  form  the  same 
opinion  of  Virgil  ?  "  said  Candide.  "  Why,  I  grant,"  replied 
Pococurante,  "  that  the  second,  third,  fourth,  and  sixth  books 
of  his  ^Eneid  are  excellent ;  but  as  for  his  pious  ^Eneas,  his 

D  2 


TOO  CANDIDE. 

strong  Cloanthus,  his  friendly  Achates,  his  boy  Ascanius, 
his  silly  king  Latinus,  his  ill-bred  Amata,  his  insipid  Lavinia, 
and  some  other  characters  much  in  the  same  strain,  I  think 
there  cannot  in  nature  be  anything  more  flat  and  disagree- 
able. I  must  confess  I  prefer  Tasso  far  beyond  him ;  nay, 
even  that  sleepy  tale-teller  Ariosto." 

"  May  I  take  the  liberty  to  ask  if  you  do  not  receive  great 
pleasure  from  reading  Horace  ?  "  said  Candide.  "  There  are 
maxims  in  this  writer,"  replied  Pococurante,  "  from  whence 
a  man  of  the  world  may  reap  some  benefit ;  and  the  short 
measure  of  the  verse  makes  them  more  easily  to  be  retained 
in  the  memory.  But  I  see  nothing  extraordinary  in  his 
journey  to  Brundusium,  and  his  account  of  his  bad  dinner  ; 
nor  in  his  dirty  low  quarrel  between  one  Rupilius,  whose 
words,  as  he  expresses  it,  were  full  of  poisonous  filth ;  and 
another,  whose  language  was  dipped  in  vinegar.  His  indeli- 
cate verses  against  old  women  and  witches  have  frequently 
given  me  great  offence  ;  nor  can  I  discover  the  great  merit 
of  his  telling  his  friend  Maecenas  that,  if  he  will  but  rank  him 
in  the  class  of  lyric  poets,  his  lofty  head  shall  touch  the  stars. 
Ignorant  readers  are  apt  to  advance  everything  by  the  lump 
in  a  writer  of  reputation.  For  my  part,  I  read  only  to  please 
myself.  I  like  nothing  but  what  makes  for  my  purpose." 
Candide,  who  had  been  brought  up  with  a  notion  of  never 
making  use  of  his  own  judgment,  was  astonished  at  what  he 
heard  ;  but  Martin  found  there  was  a  good  deal  of  reason  in 
the  senator's  remarks. 

"  Oh,  here  is  a  Tully  ! "  said  Candide  ;  "  this  great  man,  I 
fancy,  you  are  never  tired  of  reading."  "  Indeed,  I  never 
read  him  at  all,"  replied  Pococurante.  "  What  a  deuce  is  it 
to  me  whether  he  pleads  for  Rabirius  or  Cluentius  ?  I  try 
causes  enough  myself.  I  had  once  some  liking  to  his 
philosophical  works ;  but  when  I  found  he  doubted  of 
everything,  I  thought  I  knew  as  much  as  himself,  and  had 
no  need  of  a  guide  to  learn  ignorance." 


C AND  IDE.  I0i 

"  Ha ! "  cried  Martin,  "  here  are  fourscore  volumes  of  the 
Memoirs  of  the  Academy  of  Sciences  ;  perhaps  there  may 
be  something  curious  and  valuable  in  this  collection." 
"Yes,"  answered  Pococurante" ;  "so  there  might,  if  any 
one  of  these  compilers  of  this  rubbish  had  only  invented  the 
art  of  pin-making.  But  all  these  volumes  are  filled  with 
mere  chimerical  systems,  without  one  single  article  con- 
ducive to  real  utility." 

"  I  see  a  prodigious  number  of  plays,"  said  Candide,  "  in 
Italian,  Spanish,  and  French."  "  Yes,"  replied  the  Vene- 
tian ;  "  there  are  I  think  three  thousand,  and  not  three  dozen 
of  them  good  for  anything.  As  to  those  huge  volumes  of 
divinity,  and  those  enormous  collections  of  sermons,  they 
are  not  altogether  worth  one  single  page  of  Seneca  ;  and  I 
fancy  you  will  readily  believe  that  neither  myself  nor  any  one 
else  ever  looks  into  them." 

Martin,  perceiving  some  shelves  filled  with  English  books, 
said  to  the  senator :  "  I  fancy  that  a  republican  must  be 
highly  delighted  with  those  books,  which  are  most  of  them 
written  with  a  noble  spirit  of  freedom."  "  It  is  noble  to 
write  as  we  think,"  said  Pococurante  ;  "it  is  the  privilege  of 
humanity.  Throughout  Italy  we  write  only  what  we  do  not 
think  ;  and  the  present  inhabitants  of  the  country  of  the 
Caesars  and  Antoninuses  dare  not  acquire  a  single  idea 
without  the  permission  of  a  Father  Dominican.  I  should 
be  enamoured  of  the  spirit  of  the  English  nation  did  it  not 
utterly  frustrate  the  good  effects  it  would  produce  by  passion 
and  the  spirit  of  party." 

Candide,  seeing  a  Milton,  asked  the  senator  if  he  did 
not  think  that  author  a  great  man.  "  Who  ?  "  said  Poco- 
curante sharply.  "  That  barbarian,  who  writes  a  tedious 
commentary,  in  ten  books  of  rambling  verse,  on  the  first 
chapter  of  Genesis  !  That  slovenly  imitator  of  the  Greeks, 
who  disfigures  the  creation  by  making  the  Messiah  take  a 
pair  of  compasses  from  Heaven's  armoury  to  plan  the 


102  CANDIDE. 

world ;  whereas  Moses  represented  the  Deity  as  producing 
the  whole  universe  by  his  fiat !  Can  I  think  you  have  any 
esteem  for  a  writer  who  has  spoiled  Tasso's  hell  and  the 
devil ;  who  transforms  Lucifer,  sometimes  into  a  toad,  and 
at  others  into  a  pigmy ;  who  makes  him  say  the  same  thing 
over  again  a  hundred  times  ;  who  metamorphoses  him  into 
a  school-divine  ;  and  who,  by  an  absurdly  serious  imitation 
of  Ariosto's  comic  invention  of  fire-arms,  represents  the 
devils  and  angels  cannonading  each  other  in  heaven !  Neither 
I,  nor  any  other  Italian,  can  possibly  take  pleasure  in  such 
melancholy  reveries.  But  the  marriage  of  Sin  and  Death, 
and  snakes  issuing  from  the  womb  of  the  former,  are  enough 
to  make  any  person  sick  that  is  not  lost  to  all  sense  of 
delicacy.  This  obscene,  whimsical,  and  disagreeable  poem 
met  with  the  neglect  that  it  deserved  at  its  first  publication ; 
and  I  only  treat  the  author  now  as  he  was  treated  in  his  own 
country  by  his  contemporaries." 

Candide  was  sensibly  grieved  at  this  speech,  as  he  had  a 
great  respect  for  Homer  and  was  very  fond  of  Milton. 
"  Alas  !  "  said  he  softly  to  Martin,  "  I  am  afraid  this  man 
holds  our  German  poets  in  great  contempt."  "  There  would 
be  no  such  great  harm  in  that,"  said  Martin.  "  Oh,  what 
a  surprising  man!"  said  Candide  to  himself;  "what  a 
prodigious  genius  is  this  Pococurante  !  Nothing  can  please 
him." 

After  finishing  their  survey  of  the  library  they  went  down 
into  the  garden,  when  Candide  commended  the  several 
beauties  that  offered  themselves  to  his  view.  "  I  know 
nothing  upon  earth  laid  out  in  such  bad  taste,"  said  Poco- 
curante, "  everything  about  it  is  childish  and  trifling  ;  but  I 
shall  have  another  laid  out  to-morrow  upon  a  nobler  plan." 

As  soon  as  our  two  travellers  had  taken  leave  of  his 
excellency,  "  Well,"  said  Candide  to  Martin,  "  I  hope  you 
will  own  that  this  man  is  the  happiest  of  all  mortals,  for  he 
is  above  everything  he  possesses."  "  But  do  not  you  see," 


CANDIDE.  103 

answered  Martin,  "  that  he  likewise  dislikes  everything  he 
possesses  ?  It  was  an  observation  of  Plato  long  since, 
that  those  are  not  the  best  stomachs  that  reject,  without 
distinction,  all  sorts  of  aliments.5'  "  True,"  said  Candide, 
"  but  still  there  must  certainly  be  a  pleasure  in  criticising 
everything,  and  in  perceiving  faults  where  others  think 
they  see  beauties."  "  That  is,"  replied  Martin,  "  there  is 
a  pleasure  in  having  no  pleasure."  "  Well,  well,"  said 
Candide,  "  I  find  that  I  shall  be  the  only  happy  man  at 
last,  when  I  am  blessed  with  the  sight  of  my  dear 
Cunegund."  "  It  is  good  to  hope,"  said  Martin. 

In  the  meanwhile,  days  and  weeks  passed  away,  and  no 
news  of  Cacambo.  Candide  was  so  overwhelmed  with  grief 
that  he  did  not  reflect  on  the  behaviour  of  Pacquette  and 
Friar  Giroflee,  who  never  staid  to  return  him  thanks  for  the 
presents  he  had  so  generously  made  them. 


CHAPTER  XXVI. 

Candide  and  Martin  sup  with  six  Sharpers  ;  and  who  they  were. 

ONE  evening  that  Candide,  with  his  attendant  Martin,  were 
going  to  sit  down  to  supper  with  some  foreigners  who 
lodged  at  the  same  inn  where  they  had  taken  up  their 
quarters,  a  man,  with  a  face  the  colour  of  soot,  came  behind 
him,  and  taking  him  by  the  arm,  said,  "  Hold  yourself  in 
readiness  to  go  along  with  us  ;  be  sure  you  do  not  fail." 
Upon  this,  turning  about  to  see  from  whom  the  above  came, 
he  beheld  Cacambo.  Nothing  but  the  sight  of  Miss  Cune- 
gund could  have  given  greater  joy  and  surprise.  He 
was  almost  beside  himself.  After  embracing  this  dear 
friend,  "  Cunegund  !  "  said  he,  "  Cunegund  has  come  with 
you,  doubtless  !  Where,  where  is  she  ?  Carry  me  to  her 
this  instant,  that  I  may  die  with  joy  in  her  presence." 


104  CANDIDE. 

"  Cunegund  is  not  here,"  answered  Cacambo,  "  she  is  at 
Constantinople."  "  Good  heavens,  at  Constantinople  !  But 
no  matter  if  she  were  in  China,  I  would  fly  thither.  Quick, 
quick,  dear  Cacambo,  let  us  be  gone."  "  Soft  and  fair," 
said  Cacambo,  "  stay  till  you  have  supped.  I  cannot  at 
present  stay  to  say  anything  more  to  you.  I  am  a  slave, 
and  my  master  waits  for  me  :  I  must  go  and  attend  him  at 
table.  But  mum  !  say  not  a  word  ;  only  get  your  supper, 
and  hold  yourself  in  readiness." 

Candide,  divided  between  joy  and  grief,  charmed  to  have 
thus  met  with  his  faithful  agent  again,  and  surprised  to  hear 
he  was  a  slave,  his  heart  palpitating,  his  senses  confused, 
but  full  of  the  hopes  of  recovering  his  dear  Cunegund,  sat 
down  to  table  with  Martin,  who  beheld  all  these  scenes  with 
great  unconcern,  and  with  six  strangers,  who  were  come  to 
spend  the  Carnival  at  Venice. 

Cacambo  waited  at  table  upon  one  of  those  strangers. 
When  supper  was  nearly  over  he  drew  near  to  his  master, 
and  whispered  him  in  the  ear,  "  Sire,  your  majesty  may  go 
when  you  please ;  the  ship  is  ready ; "  and  so  raying  he  left 
the  room.  The  guests,  surprised  at  what  they  had  heard, 
looked  at  each  other  without  speaking  a  word,  when  another 
servant  drawing  near  to  his  master,  in  like  mp.nner  said, 
"Sire,  your  majesty's  post-chaise  is  at  Padua,  and  the  bark 
is  ready."  The  master  made  him  a  sign,  and  he  instantly 
withdrew.  The  company  all  stared  at  each  other  again,  and 
the  general  astonishment  was  increased.  A  third  servant 
then  approached  another  of  the  strangers,  and  said,  "  Sire, 
if  your  majesty  will  be  advised  by  me,  you  will  not  make 
any  longer  stay  in  this  place  ;  I  will  go  and  get  everything 
ready,"  and  instantly  disappeared. 

Candide  and  Martin  then  took  it  for  granted  that  this 
was  some  of  the  diversions  of  the  Carnival,  and  that  these 
were  characters  in  masquerade.  Then  a  fourth  domestic 
said  to  the  fourth  stranger,  "  Your  majesty  may  set  off  when 


C AND  IDE.  105 

you  please ; "  saying  this,  he  went  away  like  the  rest  A 
fifth  valet  said  the  same  to  a  fifth  master.  But  the  sixth 
domestic  spoke  in  a  different  style  to  the  person  on  whom 
he  waited,  and  who  sat  near  to  Candide.  "  Troth,  sir," 
said  he,  "  they  will  trust  your  majesty  no  longer,  nor  myself 
neither,  and  we  may  both  of  us  chance  to  be  sent  to  gaol  this 
very  night ;  and  therefore  I  shall  e'en  take  care  of  myself, 
and  so  adieu."  The  servants  being  all  gone,  the  six 
strangers,  with  Candide  and  Martin,  remained  in  a  profound 
silence.  At  length  Candide  broke  it  by  saying,  "  Gentle- 
men, this  is  a  very  singular  joke,  upon  my  word  ;  why,  how 
came  you  all  to  be  kings  ?  For  my  part  I  own  frankly  that 
neither  my  friend  Martin  here  nor  myself  have  any  claim 
to  royalty. 

Cacambo's  master  then  began,  with  great  gravity,  to  de- 
liver himself  thus  in  Italian  :  "  I  am  not  joking  in  the  least. 
My  name  is  Achmet  III.  I  was  grand  seignor  for  many 
years ;  I  dethroned  my  brother,  my  nephew  dethroned  me, 
my  viziers  lost  their  heads,  and  I  am  condemned  to 
end  my  days  in  the  old  seraglio.  My  nephew,  the  Grand 
Sultan  Mahomet,  gives  me  permission  to  travel  sometimes 
for  my  health,  and  I  am  come  to  spend  the  Carnival  at 
Venice." 

A  young  man  who  sat  by  Achmet  spoke  next,  and  said : 
"  My  name  is  Ivan.  I  was  once  Emperor  of  all  the  Russias, 
but  was  dethroned  in  my  cradle.  My  parents  were  con- 
fined, and  I  was  brought  up  in  a  prison ;  yet  I  am  some- 
times allowed  to  travel,  though  always  with  persons  to  keep 
a  guard  over  me,  and  I  am  come  to  spend  the  Carnival  at 
Venice." 

The  third  said :  "I  am  Charles- Edward,  King  of  England ; 
my  father  has  renounced  his  right  to  the  throne  in  my  favour. 
I  have  fought  in  defence  of  my  rights,  and  near  a  thousand 
of  my  friends  have  had  their  hearts  taken  out  of  their 
bodies  alive,  and  thrown  into  their  faces.  I  have  myself 


io6  CANDIDE. 

been  confined  in  a  prison.  I  am  going  to  Rome  to  visit 
the  king  my  father,  who  was  dethroned  as  well  as  myself; 
and  my  grandfather  and  I  are  come  to  spend  the  Carnival 
at  Venice." 

The  fourth  spoke  thus  :  "  I  am  the  King  of  Poland ;  the 
fortune  of  war  has  stripped  me  of  my  hereditary  dominions. 
My  father  experienced  th«  same  vicissitudes  of  fate.  I 
resign  myself  to  the  will  of  Providence,  in  the  same  manner 
as  Sultan  Achmet,  the  Emperor  Ivan,  and  King  Charles 
Edward,  whom  God  long  preserve ;  and  I  am  come  to  spend 
the  Carnival  at  Venice." 

The  fifth  said  :  "  I  am  King  of  Poland  also.  I  have  twice 
lost  my  kingdom ;  but  Providence  has  given  me  other 
dominions,  where  I  have  done  more  good  than  all  the 
Sarmatian  kings  put  together  were  ever  able  to  do  on  the 
banks  of  the  Vistula.  I  resign  myself  likewise  to  Providence ; 
and  am  come  to  spend  the  Carnival  at  Venice." 

It  now  came  to  the  sixth  monarch's  turn  to  speak. 
"  Gentlemen,"  said  he,  "  I  am  not  so  great  a  prince  as  the  rest 
of  you,  it  is  true,  but  I  am,  however,  a  crowned  head.  I  am 
Theodore,  elected  king  of  Corsica.  I  have  had  the  title  of 
majesty,  and  am  now  hardly  treated  with  common  civility. 
I  have  coined  money,  and  am  not  now  worth  a  single  ducat. 
I  have  had  two  secretaries,  and  am  now  without  a  valet.  I 
was  once  seated  on  a  throne,  and  since  that  have  lain  upon 
a  truss  of  straw  in  a  common  gaol  in  London,  and  I  very 
much  fear  I  shall  meet  with  the  same  fate  here  in  Venice, 
where  I  come,  like  your  majesties,  to  divert  myself  at  the 
Carnival." 

The  other  five  kings  listened  to  this  speech  with  great 
attention ;  it  excited  their  compassion ;  each  of  them  made 
the  unhappy  Theodore  a  present  of  twenty  sequins,  and 
Candide  gave  him  a  diamond  worth  just  an  hundred 
times  that  sum.  "  Who  can  this  private  person  be  ?  "  said 
the  five  princes  to  one  another,  "who  is  able  to  give, 


CANDIDE.  107 

and    has   actually  given,  an   hundred    times   as  much  as 
any  of  us  ?  " 

Just  as  they  rose  from  table,  in  came  four  serene  high- 
nesses, who  had  also  been  stripped  of  their  territories  by 
the  fortune  of  war,  and  were  come  to  spend  the  remainder 
of  the  Carnival  at  Venice.  Candide  took  110  manner  of 
notice  of  them  ;  for  his  thoughts  were  wholly  employed  on 
his  voyage  to  Constantinople,  whither  he  intended  to  go  in 
search  of  his  lovely  Miss  Cunegund. 


CHAPTER  XXVII. 

Candide  s  Voyage  to  Constantinople. 

THE  trusty  Cacambo  had  already  engaged  the  captain  of  the 
Turkish  ship,  that  was  to  carry  Sultan  Achmet  back  to  Con- 
stantinople, to  take  Candide  and  Martin  on  board.  Accord- 
ingly they  both  embarked,,  after  paying  their  obeisance  to 
his  miserable  highness.  As  they  were  going  on  board 
Candide  said  to  Martin  :  "  You  see  we  supped  in  company 
with  six  dethroned  kings,  and  to  one  of  them  I  gave  charity. 
Perhaps  there  may  be  a  great  many  other  princes  still  more 
unfortunate.  For  my  part,  I  have  lost  only  a  hundred  sheep, 
and  am  now  going  to  fly  to  the  arms  of  my  charming  Miss 
Cunegund.  My  dear  Martin,  I  must  insist  on  it  that  Pan- 
gloss  was  in  the  right.  All  is  for  the  best."  "  I  wish  it  may 
be  so,"  said  Martin.  "  But  this  was  an  odd  adventure  we 
met  with  at  Venice.  1  do  not  think  there  ever  was  an 
instance  before  of  six  dethroned  monarchs  supping  together 
at  a  public  inn."  "  This  is  not  more  extraordinary,"  said 
Martin,  "  than  most  of  what  has  happened  to  us.  It  is  a 
very  common  thing  for  kings  to  be  dethroned  ;  and  as  for 
our  having  the  honour  to  sup  with  six  of  them,  it  is  a  mere 
accident  not  deserving  our  attention." 
As  soon  as  Candide  set  his  foot  on  board  the  vessel  he 


io8  C AND  WE. 

flew  to  his  old  friend  and  valet,  Cacambo  ;  and  throwing  his 
arms  about  his  neck,  embraced  him  with  transports  of  joy. 
"Well,"  said  he,  "what  news  of  Miss  Cunegund  ?  Does  she 
still  continue  the  paragon  of  beauty?  Does  she  love  me 
still  ?  How  does  she  do  ?  You  have  doubtless  purchased 
a  superb  palace  for  her  at  Constantinople  ?  " 

"  My  dear  master,"  replied  Cacambo,  "  Miss  Cunegund 
washes  dishes  on  the  banks  of  the  Propontis,  in  the  house 
of  a  prince  who  has  very  few  to  wash.  She  is  at  present  a 
slave  in  the  family  of  an  ancient  sovereign  named  Ragotsky, 
whom  the  Grand  Turk  allows  three  crowns  a  day  to  maintain 
him  in  his  exile ;  but  the  most  melancholy  circumstance  of 
all  is,  that  she  is  turned  horribly  ugly."  "Ugly  or  hand- 
some," said  Candide,  "I  am  a  man  of  honour;  and,  as 
such,  am  obliged  to  love  her  still.  But  how  could  she  pos- 
sibly have  been  reduced  to  so  abject  a  condition  when  I 
sent  five  or  six  millions  to  her  by  you  ?  "  "  Lord  bless  me," 
said  Cacambo,  "  was  not  I  obliged  to  give  two  millions  to 
Seignor  Don  Fernando  d'Ibaraa  y  Fagueora  y  Mascarenes 
y  Lampourdos  y  Souza,  the  Governor  of  Buenos  Ayres,  for 
liberty  to  take  Miss  Cunegund  away  with  me  ?  And  then 
did  not  a  brave  fellow  of  a  pirate  very  gallantly  strip  us  of 
all  the  rest?  And  then  did  not  this  same  pirate  carry  us 
with  him  to  Cape  Matapan,  to  Milo,  to  Nicaria,  to  Samos, 
to  Petra,  to  the  Dardanelles,  to  Marmora,  to  Scutari  ?  Miss 
Cunegund  and  the  old  woman  are  now  servants  to  the  prince 
I  have  told  you  of,  and  I  myself  am  slave  to  the  dethroned 
Sultan."  "What  a  chain  of  shocking  accidents  !  "  exclaimed 
Candide.  "  But  after  all,,  I  have  still  some  diamonds  left, 
with  which  I  can  easily  procure  Miss  Cunegund's  liberty.  It 
is  a  pity,  though,  she  is  grown  so  very  ugly." 

Then  turning  to  Martin,  "  What  think  you,  friend  ?"  said 
he ;  "  whose  condition  is  most  to  be  pitied,  the  Emperor 
Achmet's,  the  Emperor  Ivan's,  King  Charles  Edward's,  or 
mine?"  "Faith.  I  cannot  resolve  your  question,"  said 


CANDIDE.  109 

Martin,  "  unless  I  had  been  in  the  breasts  of  you  all." 
"  Ah  !"  cried  Candide,  "  were  Pangloss  here  now,  he  would 
have  known,  and  satisfied  me  at  once."  "  I  know  not,"  said 
Martin,  "  in  what  balance  your  Pangloss  could  have  weighed 
the  misfortunes  of  mankind,  and  have  set  a  just  estimation 
on  their  sufferings.  All  that  I  pretend  to  know  of  the 
matter  is,  that  there  are  millions  of  men  on  the  earth,  whose 
conditions  are  an  hundred  times  more  pitiable  than  those  of 
King  Charles  Edward,  the  Emperor  Ivan,  or  Sultan  Achmet" 
"  Why,  that  may  be,"  answered  Candide. 

In  a  few  days  they  reached  the  Bosphorus,  and  the  first 
thing  Candide  did  was  to  pay  a  very  high  ransom  for 
Cacambo ;  then,  without  losing  time,  he  and  his  companions 
went  on  board  a  galley  in  order  to  search  for  his  Cunegund 
on  the  banks  of  the  Propontis,  notwithstanding  she  was 
grown  so  ugly. 

There  were  two  slaves  among  the  crew  of  the  galley,  who 
rowed  very  ill,  and  to  whose  bare  backs  the  master  of  the 
vessel  frequently  applied  a  bull's  pizzle.  Candide,  from 
natural  sympathy,  looked  at  these  two  slaves  more  atten- 
tively than  at  any  of  the  rest,  and  drew  near  them  with  an 
eye  of  pity.  Their  features,  though  greatly  disfigured, 
appeared  to  him  to  bear  a  strong  resemblance  with  those  of 
Pangloss  and  the  unhappy  Baron  Jesuit,  Miss  Cunegund's 
brother.  This  idea  affected  him  with  grief  and  compassion. 
He  examined  them  more  attentively  than  before.  "In  troth," 
said  he,  turning  to  Martin,  "  if  I  had  not  seen  my  Master 
Pangloss  fairly  hanged,  and  had  not  myself  been  unluckly 
enough  to  run  the  Baron  through  the  body,  I  should  abso- 
lutely think  those  two  rowers  were  the  men." 

No  sooner  had  Candide  uttered  the  names  of  the  Baron 
and  Pangloss  than  the  two  slaves  gave  a  great  cry,  ceased 
rowing,  and  let  fall  their  oars  out  of  their  hands.  The 
master  of  the  vessel  seeing  this,  ran  up  to  them,  and  re- 
doubled the  discipline  of  the.  bull's  pizzle.  "  Hold,  hold," 


no  CANDIDE. 

cried  Candide,  "  I  will  give  you  what  money  you  shall  ask 
for  these  two  persons."  "  Good  heavens  !  it  is  Candide/' 
said  one  of  the  men.  "  Candide  !  "  cried  the  other.  "  Do 
I  dream  ?  "  said  Candide,  "  or  am  I  awake  ?  Am  I  actually 
on  board  this  galley  ?  Is  this  my  Lord  Baron,  whom  I  killed  ? 
and  that  my  Master  Pangloss,  whom  I  saw  hanged  before 
my  face  ?  " 

"  It  is  I  !  it  is  I !  "  cried  they  both  together.  "  What,  is 
this  your  great  philosopher?  "  said  Martin.  "  My  dear  sir," 
said  Candide  to  the  master  of  the  galley,  "  how  much  do 
you  ask  for  the  ransom  of  the  Baron  of  Thunder-ten- 
tronckh,  who  is  one  of  the  first  barons  of  the  empire,  and 
of  Mr.  Pangloss,  the  most  profound  metaphysician  in 
Germany  ?  "  "  Why  then,  Christian  cur,"  replied  the  Turkish 
captain,  "  since  these  two  dogs  of  Christian  slaves  are  barons 
and  metaphysicians,  who  no  doubt  are  of  high  rank  in  their 
own  country,  thou  shalt  give  me  fifty  thousand  sequins." 

"You  shall  have  them,  sir;  carry  me  back  as  quick  as 
thought  to  Constantinople,  and  you  shall  receive  the  money 
immediately.  No !  carry  me  me  first  to  Miss  Cunegund." 
The  captain,  upon  Candide's  first  proposal,  had  already 
tacked  about,  and  he  made  the  crew  ply  their  oars  so  effec- 
tually that  the  vessel  flew  through  the  water  quicker  than 
a  bird  cleaves  the  air. 

Candide  bestowed  a  thousand  embraces  on  the  Baron  and 
Pangloss.  "  And  so  then,  my  dear  Baron,  I  did  not  kill  you  ? 
And  you,  my  dear  Pangloss,  are  come  to  life  again  after 
your  hanging?  But  how  came  you  slaves  on  board  a 
Turkish  galley  ?  "  "  And  is  it  true  that  my  dear  sister  is 
in  this  country?"  said  the  Baron.  "Yes,"  said  Cacambo. 
"  And  do  I  once  again  behold  my  dear  Candide  ? "  said 
Pangloss.  Candide  presented  Martin  and  Cacambo  to 
them.  They  embraced  each  other,  and  all  spoke  together. 
The  galley  flew  like  lightning,  and  now  they  were  got  back  to 
port.  Candide  instantly  sent  for  a  Jew,  to  whom  he  sold  for 


CANDIDE.  1 1 ! 

fifty  thousand  sequins  a  diamond  richly  worth  one  hundred 
thousand,  though  the  fellow  swore  to  him  all  the  time  by 
Father  Abraham  that  he  gave  him  the  most  he  could  possibly 
afford.  He  no  sooner  got  the  money  into  his  hands  than 
he  paid  it  down  for  the  ransom  of  the  Baron  and  Pangloss. 
The  latter  flung  himself  at  the  feet  of  his  deliverer,  and 
bathed  him  with  his  tears.  The  former  thanked  him  with  a 
gracious  nod,  and  promised  to  return  him  the  money  the 
first  opportunity.  "  But  is  it  possible,"  said  he,  {( that  my 
sister  should  be  in  Turkey  ?  "  "  Nothing  is  more  possible," 
answered  Cacambo,  "  for  she  scours  the  dishes  in  the  house 
of  a  Transylvanian  prince."  Candide  sent  directly  for  two 
Jews,  and  sold  more  diamonds  to  them.  And  then  he  set 
out  with  his  companions  in  another  galley,  to  deliver  Miss 
Cunegund  from  slavery. 


CHAPTER  XXVIII. 

What  befell  Candide,  Cunegund,  Pangloss,  Martin,  etc. 

"  PARDON,"  said  Candide  to  the  Baron ;  "  once  more  let 
me  entreat  your  pardon,  reverend  father,  for  running  you 
through  the  body."  "  Say  no  more  about  it,"  replied  the 
Baron  ;  "  I  was  a  little  too  hasty,  I  must  own.  But  as  you 
seem  to  be  desirous  to  know  by  what  accident  I  came  to  be 
a  slave  on  board  the  galley  where  you  saw  me,  I  will  inform 
you.  After  I  had  been  cured  of  the  wound  you  gave  me  by 
the  college  apothecary,  I  was  attacked  and  carried  off  by  a 
party  of  Spanish  troops,  who  clapped  me  up  in  prison  in 
Buenos  Ayres,  at  the  very  time  my  sister  was  setting  out 
from  thence.  I  asked  leave  to  return  to  Rome,  to  the 
general  of  my  order,  who  appointed  me  chaplain  to  the 
French  ambassador  at  Constantinople.  I  had  not  been  a 
week  in  my  new  office  when  I  happened  to  meet  one  even- 
ing with  a  young  Icoglan,  extremely  handsome  and  well 


ii2  CANDIDE. 

made.  The  weather  was  very  hot ;  the  young  man  had  an 
inclination  to  bathe.  I  took  the  opportunity  to  bathe  like- 
wise. I  did  not  know  it  was  a  crime  for  a  Christian  to  be 
found  naked  in  company  with  a  young  Turk.  A  cadi 
ordered  me  to  receive  a  hundred  blows  on  the  soles  of  my 
feet,  and  sent  me  to  the  galleys.  I  do  not  believe  there 
was  ever  an  act  of  more  flagrant  injustice.  But  I  would 
fain  know  how  my  sister  came  to  be  a  scullion  to  a  Transyl- 
vanian  prince  who  had  taken  refuge  among  the  Turks." 

"  But  how  happens  it  that  I  behold  you  again,  my  dear 
Pangloss  ?  "  said  Candide.  "  It  is  true,"  answered  Pangloss, 
«'  you  saw  me  hanged,  though  I  ought  properly  to  have  been 
burnt ;  but  you  may  remember  it  that  rained  extremely  hard 
when  they  were  going  to  roast  me.  The  storm  was  so 
violent  that  they  found  it  impossible  to  light  the  fire,  so 
they  e'en  hanged  me  because  they  could  do  no  better.  A 
surgeon  purchased  my  body,  carried  it  home,  and  prepared 
to  dissect  me.  He  began  by  making  a  crucial  incision  from 
my  navel  to  the  clavicle.  It  is  impossible  for  any  one  to 
have  been  more  lamely  hanged  than  I  had  been.  The 
executioner  of  the  holy  Inquisition  was  a  sub-deacon,  and 
knew  how  to  burn  people  very  well ;  but  as  for  hanging,  he 
was  a  novice  at  it,  being  quite  out  of  the  way  of  his  practice ; 
the  cord  being  wet  and  not  slipping  properly,  the  noose  did 
not  join.  In  short,  I  still  continued  to  breathe  ;  the  crucial 
incision  made  me  scream  to  such  a  degree  that  my  surgeon 
fell  flat  upon  his  back ;  and  imagining  it  was  the  devil  he 
was  dissecting,  ran  away,  and  in  his  fright  tumbled  down- 
stairs. His  wife  hearing  the  noise,  flew  from  the  next  room, 
and  seeing  me  stretched  upon  the  table  with  my  crucial 
incis:on,  was  still  more  terrified  than  her  husband,  and  fell 
upon  him.  When  they  had  a  little  recovered  themselves,  I 
heard  her  say  to  her  husband,  '  My  dear,  how  could  you 
think  of  dissecting  an  heretic  ?  Don't  you  know  that  the 
devil  is  always  in  them  ?  I'll  run  directly  to  a  priest  to 


CANDIDE.  113 

come  and  drive  the  evil  spirit  out.'  I  trembled  from  head 
to  foot  at  hearing  her  talk  in  this  manner,  and  exerted  what 
little  strength  I  had  left  to  cry  out,  '  Have  mercy  on  me  ! ' 
At  length  the  Portuguese  barber  took  courage,  sewed  up  my 
wound,  and  his  wife  nursed  me :  and  I  was  upon  my  legs 
in  a  fortnight's  time.  The  barber  got  me  a  place  to  be 
lackey  to  a  Knight  of  Malta,  who  was  going  to  Venice ;  but 
rinding  my  master  had  no  money  to  pay  me  my  wages,  I 
entered  into  the  service  of  a  Venetian  merchant,  and  went 
with  him  to  Constantinople. 

"  One  day  I  happened  to  enter  a  mosque,  where  I  saw  no 
one  but  an  old  imam  and  a  very  pretty  young  female  devotee, 
who  was  telling  her  beads  ;  her  neck  was  quite  bare,  and  in 
her  bosom  she  had  a  beautiful  nosegay  of  tulips,  roses, 
anemones,  ranunculuses,  hyacinths,  and  auriculas ;  she  let 
fall  her  nosegay.  I  ran  immediately  to  take  it  up,  and 
presented  it  to  her  with  the  most  respectful  bow.  I  was  so 
long  in  delivering  it  that  the  imam  began  to  be  angry,  and 
perceiving  I  was  a  Christian,  he  cried  out  for  help ;  they 
carried  me  before  the  Cadi,  who  ordered  me  to  receive  one 
hundred  bastinadoes  and  sent  me  to  the  galleys.  I  was  chained 
in  the  very  galley  and  to  the  very  same  bench  with  the 
Baron.  On  board  this  galley  there  were  four  young  men 
belonging  to  Marseilles,  five  Neapolitan  priests,  and  two 
monks  of  Corfu,  who  told  us  that  the  like  adventures 
happened  every  day.  The  Baron  pretended  that  he  had 
been  worse  used  than  myself ;  and  insisted  that  there  was 
far  less  harm  in  taking  up  a  nosegay  and  putting  it  into  a 
woman's  bosom,  than  to  be  found  stark  naked  with  a  young 
Icoglan.  We  were  continually  whipped,  and  received  twenty 
lashes  a  day  with  a  bull's  pizzle,  when  the  concatenation  of 
sublunary  events  brought  you  on  board  our  galley  to  ransom 
us  from  slavery." 

"  Well,  my  dear  Pangloss,"  said  Candide  to  them,  "  when 
you  were  hanged,  dissected,  whipped,  and  tugging  at  the  oar, 


114  CANDIDE. 

did  you  continue  to  think  that  everything  in  this  world  hap- 
pens for  the  best ? "  "I  have  always  abided  by  my  first 
opinion,"  answered  Pangloss;  "for,  after  all,  I  am  a  philo- 
sopher, and  it  would  not  become  me  to  retract  my  senti- 
ments, especially  as  Leibnitz  could  not  be  in  the  wrong, 
and  that  pre-established  harmony  is  the  finest  thing  in  the 
world,  as  well  as  a  plenum  and  the  materia  subtilis" 


CHAPTER  XXIX. 

In  what  manner  Candide  found  Miss  Cunegund  and  the 
Old  Woman  again. 

WHILE  Candide,  the  Baron,  Pangloss,  Martin,  and  Cacambo 
were  relating  their  several  adventures.,  and  reasoning  on  the 
contingent  or  non-contingent  events  of  this  world,  on  causes 
and  effects,  on  moral  and  physical  evil,  on  free-will  and 
necessity,  and  on  the  consolation  that  may  be  felt  by  a 
person  when  a  slave  and  chained  to  an  oar  in  a  Turkish 
galley,  they  arrived  at  the  house  of  the  Transylvanian  prince 
on  the  coasts  of  the  Propontis.  The  first  objects  they  beheld 
there  was  Miss  Cunegund  and  the  old  woman,  who  were 
hanging  some  table-cloths  on  a  line  to  dry. 

The  Baron  turned  pale  at  the  sight.  Even  the  tender 
Candide,  that  affectionate  lover,  upon  seeing  his  fair  Cune- 
gund all  sun-burnt,  with  blear-eyes,  a  withered  neck, 
wrinkled  face  and  arms,  all  covered  with  a  red  scurf,  started 
back  with  horror ;  but  recovering  himself,  he  advanced  to- 
wards her  out  of  good  manners.  She  embraced  Candide 
and  her  brother ;  they  embraced  the  old  woman,  and  Candide 
ransomed  them  both. 

There  was  a  small  farm  in  the  neighbourhood  which  the 
old  woman  proposed  to  Candide  to  make  a  shift  with  till 
the  company  should  meet  with  a  more  favourable  destiny. 
Cunegund,  not  knowing  that  she  was  grown  ugly,  as  no  one 


CANDIDE.  115 

had  informed  her  of  it,  reminded  Candide  of  his  promise  in 
so  peremptory  a  manner  that  the  simple  lad  did  not  dare  to 
refuse  her.  He  then  acquainted  the  Baron  that  he  was  going 
to  marry  his  sister.  "  I  will  never  suffer,"  said  the  Baron, 
"  my  sister  to  be  guilty  of  an  action  so  derogatory  to  her 
birth  and  family ;  nor  will  I  bear  this  insolence  on  your 
part ;  no,  I  never  will  be  reproached  that  my  nephews  are 
not  qualified  for  the  first  ecclesiastical  dignities  in  Germany ; 
nor  shall  a  sister  of  mine  ever  be  the  wife  of  any  person 
below  the  rank  of  a  baron  of  the  empire."  Cunegund  flung 
herself  at  her  brother's  feet,  and  bedewed  them  with  her 
tears,  but  he  still  continued  inflexible.  "  Thou  foolish 
fellow,"  said  Candide,  "  have  I  not  delivered  thee  from  the 
galleys,  paid  thy  ransom  and  thy  sister's  too,  who  was  a 
scullion  and  is  very  ugly,  and  yet  condescend  to  marry  her ; 
and  shalt  thou  pretend  to  oppose  the  match?  If  I  were  to 
listen  only  to  the  dictates  of  my  anger,  I  should  kill  thee 
again."  "  Thou  mayest  kill  me  again,"  said  the  Baron,  "  but 
thou  shalt  not  marry  my  sister  while  I  am  living." 


CHAPTER  XXX. 

Conclusion. 

CANDIDE  had  in  truth  no  great  inclination  to  marry  Miss  Cune- 
gund ;  but  the  extreme  impertinence  of  the  Baron  determined 
him  to  conclude  the  match ;  and  Cunegund  pressed  him  so 
warmly  that  he  could  not  recant.  He  consulted  Pangloss, 
Martin,  and  the  faithful  Cacambo.  Pangloss  composed  a  fine 
memorial,  by  which  he  proved  that  the  Baron  had  no  right 
over  his  sister;  and  that  she  might,  according  to  all  the 
laws  of  the  empire,  marry  Candide  with  the  left  hand. 
Martin  concluded  to  throw  the  Baron  into  the  sea ;  Cacambo 
decided  that  he  must  be  delivered  to  the  Turkish  captain 
and  sent  to  the  galleys,  after  which  he  should  be  conveyed 


Ii6  C AND  IDE. 

by  the  first  ship  to  the  Father-General  at  Rome.  This 
advice  was  found  to  be  very  good  :  the  old  woman  approved 
of  it,  and  not  a  syllable  was  said  to  his  sister.  The  business 
was  executed  for  a  little  money ;  and  they  had  the  pleasure 
of  tricking  a  Jesuit  and  punishing  the  pride  of  a  German 
baron. 

It  was  altogether  natural  to  imagine  that  after  undergoing 
so  many  disasters,  Candide  married  to  his  mistress,  and 
living  with  the  philosopher  Pangloss,  the  philosopher 
Martin,  the  prudent  Cacambo,  and  the  old  woman,  having 
besides  brought  home  so  many  diamonds  from  the  country 
of  the  ancient  Incas,  would  lead  the  most  agreeable  life  in 
the  world.  But  he  had  been  so  much  choused  by  the  Jews 
that  he  had  nothing  else  left  but  his  little  farm ;  his  wife, 
every  day  growing  more  and  more  ugly,  became  headstrong 
and  insupportable;  the  old  woman  was  infirm,  and  more 
ill-natured  yet  than  Cunegimd.  Cacambo,  who  worked  in 
the  garden,  and  carried  the  produce  of  it  to  sell  at  Con- 
stantinople, was  past  his  labour,  and  cursed  his  fate. 
Pangloss  despaired  of  making  a  figure  in  any  of  the  German 
universities.  And  as  to  Martin,  he  was  firmly  persuaded 
that  a  person  is  equally  ill-situated  everywhere  ;  he  took 
things  with  patience.  Candide,  Martin,  and  Pangloss  dis- 
puted sometimes  about  metaphysics  and  morality.  Boats 
were  often  seen  passing  under  the  windows  of  the  farm 
fraught  with  effendis,  bashaws,  and  cadis,  that  were  going 
nto  banishment  to  I.emnos,  Mytilene,  and  Erzeroum  ;  and 
other  cadis,  bashaws,  and  effendis  were  seen  coming  back 
to  succeed  the  place  of  the  exiles,  and  were  driven  out  in 
their  turns.  They  saw  several  heads  very  curiously  stuck 
upon  poles,  and  carry  ingas  presents  to  the  Sublime  Porte. 
Such  sights  gave  occasion  to  frequent  dissertations;  and 
when  no  disputes  were  carried  on,  the  irksomeness  was  so 
excessive,  that  the  old  woman  ventured  one  day  to  tell  them, 
"  I  would  be  glad  to  know  which  is  worst :  to  be^avished  a 


C AND  IDE.  117 

hundred  times  by  negro  pirates,  to  have  one  buttock  cut  off, 
to  run  the  gauntlet  among  the  Bulgarians,  to  be  whipped 
and  hanged  at  an  auto-da-fe,  to  be  dissected,  to  be  chained 
to  an  oar  in  a  galley ;  and,  in  short,  to  experience  all  the 
miseries  through  which  every  one  of  us  has  passed,  or  to 
remain  here  doing  nothing  ?  "  "  This,"  said  Candide,  "  is  a 
grand  question." 

This  discourse  gave  birth  to  new  reflexions,  and  Martin 
especially  concluded  that  man  was  born  to  live  in  the  con- 
vulsions of  disquiet,  or  in  the  lethargy  of  idleness.  Though 
Candide  did  not  absolutely  agree  to  this,  yet  he  did  not 
determine  anything  on  the  head.  Pangloss  avowed  that 
he  had  undergone  dreadful  sufferings;  but  having  once 
maintained  that  everything  went  on  as  well  as  possible,  he 
still  maintained  it,  and  at  the  same  time  believed  nothing 
of  it. 

There  was  one  thing  which  more  than  ever  confirmed 
Martin  in  his  detestable  principles,  made  Candide  hesitate, 
and  embarrassed  Pangloss,  which  was  the  arrival  of  Pacquette 
and  Brother  Giroflee  one  day  at  their  farm.  This  couple 
had  been  in  the  utmost  distress ;  they  had  very  speedily 
made  away  with  their  three  thousand  piastres ;  they  had 
parted,  been  reconciled ;  quarrelled  again,  been  thrown  into 
prison ;  had  made  their  escape,  and  at  last  Brother  Giroflee 
turned  Turk.  Pacquette  still  continued  to  follow  her  trade 
wherever  she  came ;  but  she  got  little  or  nothing  by  it.  "  I 
foresaw  very  well,"  says  Martin  to  Candide,  that  your  pre- 
sents would  soon  be  squandered,  and  only  make  them  more 
miserable.  You  and  Cacambo  have  spent  millions  of 
piastres,  and  yet  you  are  not  more  happy  than  Brother 
Girofle'e  and  Pacquette."  "Ah ! ''  says  Pangloss  to  Pacquette, 
"  It  is  heaven  who  has  brought  you  here  among  us,  my  poor 
child  !  Do  you  know  that  you  have  cost  me  the  tip  of  my 
nose,  one  eye  and  one  ear?  What  a  handsome  shape  is 
here  !  and  what  is  this  world  ?  "  This  new  adventure  en- 


n8  C AND  IDE. 

gaged  them  more  deeply  than  ever  in  philosophical 
disputations. 

In  the  neighbourhood  lived  a  very  famous  dervish  who 
passed  for  the  best  philosopher  in  Turkey ;  him  they  went 
to  consult.  Pangloss,  who  was  their  spokesman,  addressed 
him  thus  :  "  Master,  we  come  to  entreat  you  to  tell  us  why 
so  strange  an  animal  as  man  has  been  formed." 

"  Why  do  you  trouble  your  head  about  it  ? "  said  the 
dervish  ;  "  is  it  any  business  of  yours  ?  "  "  But  my  reverend 
father,"  says  Candide,  "  there  is  a  horrible  deal  of  evil  on  the 
earth.  "  What  signifies  it,"  says  the  dervish,  "  whether  there 
is  evil  or  good  ?  When  his  highness  sends  a  ship  to  Egypt, 
does  he  trouble  his  head  whether  the  rats  in  the  vessel  are 
at  their  ease  or  not  ?"  "  What  must  then  be  done  ?  "  says 
Pangloss.  "  Be  silent,"  answers  the  dervish.  "  I  flattered 
myself,"  replied  Pangloss,  "  to  have  reasoned  a  little  with  you 
on  the  causes  and  effects,  on  the  best  of  possible  worlds,  the 
origin  of  evil,  the  nature  of  the  soul,  and  a  pre-established 
harmony."  At  these  words  the  dervish  shut  the  door  in 
their  faces. 

During  this  conversation  news  was  spread  abroad  that 
two  viziers  of  the  bench  and  the  mufti  had  been  just  strangled 
at  Constantinople,  and  several  of  their  friends  impaled. 
This  catastrophe  made  a  great  noise  for  some  hours.  Pan- 
gloss,  Candide,  and  Martin,  as  they  were  returning  to  the 
little  farm,  met  with  a  good-looking  old  man,  who  was  taking 
the  air  at  his  door  under  an  alcove  formed  of  the  boughs  of 
orange-trees.  Pangloss,  who  was  as  inquisitive  as  he  was 
disputative,  asked  him  what  was  the  name  of  the  mufti  who 
was  lately  strangled.  "  I  cannot  tell,"  answered  the  good 
old  man  ;  "  I  never  knew  the  name  of  any  mufti  or  vizier 
breathing.  I  am  entirely  ignorant  of  the  event  you  speak 
of;  I  presume,  that  in  general  such  as  are  concerned  in 
public  affairs  sometimes  come  to  a  miserable  end,  and  that 
they  deserve  it;  but  I  never  inquire  what  is  doing  at  Con- 


CANDIDE,  n9 

stantinople.  I  am  contented  with  sending  thither  the  pro- 
duce of  my  garden,  which  I  cultivate  with  my  own  hands." 
After  saying  these  words,  he  invited  the  strangers  to  come 
into  his  house.  His  two  daughters  and  two  sons  presented 
them  with  diverse  sorts  of  sherbet  of  their  own  making ; 
besides  caymac  heightened  with  the  peels  of  candied 
citrons,  oranges,  lemons,  pine-apples,  pistachio-nuts,  and 
Mocha  coffee  unadulterated  with  the  bad  coffee  of  Batavia 
or  the  American  islands.  After  which  the  two  daughters  of 
this  good  Mussulman  perfumed  the  beards  of  Candide,  Pan- 
gloss,  and  Martin. 

"  You  must  certainly  have  a  vast  estate,"  said  Candide  to 
the  Turk,  who  replied,  "  I  have  no  more  than  twenty  acres 
of  ground,  the  whole  of  which  I  cultivate  myself  with  the  help 
of  my  children,  and  our  labour  keeps  off  from  us  three  great 
evils — idleness,  vice,  and  want." 

Candide  as  he  was  returning  home  made  profound 
reflections  on  the  Turk's  discourse.  "This  good  old  man," 
said  Martin,  "  appears  to  me  to  have  chosen  for  himself 
a  lot  much  preferable  to  that  of  the  six  kings  with  whom 
we  had  the  honour  to  sup."  "  Human  grandeur,"  said 
Pangloss,  "  is  very  dangerous,  if  we  believe  the  testimonies 
of  almost  all  philosophers ;  for  we  find  Eglon,  king  of 
Moab,  was  assassinated  by  Aod  ;  Absalom  was  hung  by  the 
hair  of  his  head,  and  run  through  with  three  darts ;  King 
Nadab,  son  of  Jeroboam,  was  slain  by  Baaza ;  King  Ela  by 
Zimri;  Ahaziah  by  Jehu ;  Athalia  by  Jehoiada;  the  kings  Jehoi- 
akim,  Jeconiah,  and  Zedekiah  were  led  into  captivity.  I  need 
not  tell  you  what  was  the  fate  of  Croesus,  Astyages,  Darius, 
Dionysius  of  Syracuse,  Pyrrhus,  Perseus,  Hannibal,  Jugurtha, 
Ariovistus,  Caesar,  Pompey,  Nero,  Otho,  Vitellius,  Domitian, 
Richard  II.  of  England,  Edward  II.,  Henry  VI.,  Richard 
III.,  Mary  Stuart,  Charles  I,  the  three  Henrys  of  France, 
and  the  Emperor  Henry  IV."  "  Neither  need  you  tell  me," 
said  Candide,  "  that  we  must  take  care  of  our  garden."  "  You 


120  C AND  IDE. 

are  in  the  right,"  said  Pangloss ;  "  for  when  man  was  put 
into  the  garden  of  Eden,  it  was  with  an  intent  to  dress  it ; 
and  this  proves  that  man  was  not  born  to  be  idle."  "  Work, 
then,  without  disputing,"  said  Martin.  "  It  is  the  only  way 
to  render  life  supportable." 

The  little  society,  one  and  all,  entered  into  this  laudable 
design,  and  set  themselves  to  exert  their  different  talents. 
The  little  piece  of  ground  yielded  them  a  plentiful  crop. 
Cunegund  indeed  was  very  ugly,  but  she  became  an  excel- 
lent hand  at  pastry-work,  Pacquette  embroidered,  the  old 
woman  had  the  care  of  the  linen.  There  was  none,  down  to 
Brother  Giroflee,  but  did  some  service.  He  was  a  very  good 
carpenter,  and  became  an  honest  man.  Pangloss  used  now 
and  then  to  say  to  Candide  :  "  There  is  a  concatenation  of 
all  events  in  the  best  of  possible  worlds ;  for,  in  short,  had 
you  not  been  kicked  out  of  a  fine  castle  for  the  love  of  Miss 
Cunegund,  had  you  not  been  put  into  the  Inquisition,  had  you 
not  travelled  over  America  on  foot,  had  you  not  run  the  Baron 
through  the  body,  and  had  you  not  lost  all  your  sheep  which 
you  brought  from  the  good  country  of  El  Dorado,  you  would 
not  have  been  here  to  eat  preserved  citrons  and  pistachio- 
nuts."  "Excellently  observed,"  answered  Candide;  "but 
let  us  take  care  of  our  garden." 


PART    II. 
CHAPTER    I. 

How  Candide  quitted  his  Companions,  and  what  happened  to  him. 

WE  soon  become  tired  of  everything  in  life :  riches  fatigue 
the  possessor ;  ambition,  when  satisfied,  leaves  only  remorse 
behind  it ;  the  joys  of  love  are  but  transient  joys ;  and 
Candide,  made  to  experience  all  the  vicissitudes  of  fortune, 
was  soon  disgusted  with  cultivating  his  garden.  "  Mr.  Pan- 
gloss,"  said  he,  "  if  we  are  in  the  best  of  possible  worlds, 
you  will  own,  to  me  at  least,  that  this  is  not  enjoying  that 
portion  of  possible  happiness  ;  but  living  obscure  in  a  little 
corner  of  the  Propontis,  having  no  other  resource  than  that 
of  my  own  manual  labour,  which  may  one  day  fail  me  ;  no 
other  pleasures  than  what  Mrs.  Cunegund  gives  me,  who  is 
very  ugly,  and,  which  is  worse,  is  my  wife  ;  no  other  com- 
pany than  yours,  which  is  sometimes  irksome  to  me  ;  or  that 
of  Martin,  which  makes  me  melancholy;  or  that  of  Giroflee, 
who  is  but  very  lately  become  an  honest  man  ;  or  that  of 
Pacquette,  the  danger  of  whose  correspondence  you  have  so 
fully  experienced  ;  or  that  of  the  hag  who  has  but  one  hip, 
and  is  constantly  repeating  old  wives'  tales." 

To  this  Pangloss  made  the  following  reply  :  "  Philosophy 
teaches  us  that  monads,  divisible  in  infinitum,  arrange  them- 
selves with  wonderful  sagacity  in  order  to  compose  the 
different  bodies  which  we  observe  in  nature.  The  heavenly 
bodies  are  what  they  ought  to  be ;  they  are  placed  where 
they  should  be ;  they  describe  the  circles  which  they  ought 


122  CANDIDE. 

to  do ;  man  follows  the  bent  he  ought  to  follow  ;  he  is  what 
he  ought  to  be ;  he  does  what  he  ought  to  do.  You  bemoan 
yourself,  O  Candide  !•  because  the  monad  of  your  soul  is  dis- 
gusted ;  but  disgust  is  a  modification  of  the  soul ;  and  this 
does  not  hinder  that  everything  is  for  the  best,  both  for  you 
and  others.  When  you  beheld  me  covered  with  sores,  I  did 
not  maintain  my  opinion  the  less  for  that ;  for  if  Miss  Pac- 
quette  had  not  made  me  taste  the  pleasures  of  love  and  its 
poison,  I  should  not  have  met  with  you  in  Holland  ;  I 
should  not  have  given  the  Anabaptist  James  an  opportunity 
of  performing  a  meritorious  act ;  I  should  not  have  been 
hanged  in  Lisbon  for  the  edification  of  my  neighbour ;  I 
should  not  have  been  here  to  assist  you  with  my  advice,  and 
make  you  live  and  die  in  Leibnitz's  opinion.  Yes,  my  dear 
Candide,  everything  is  linked  in  a  chain,  everything  is  neces- 
sary in  the  best  of  possible  worlds.  There  is  a  necessity 
that  the  burgher  of  Montauban  should  instruct  kings  ;  that 
the  worm  of  Quimper-Corentin  should  carp,  carp,  carp ; 
that  the  declaimer  against  philosophers  should  occasion  his 
own  crucifixion  in  St.  Denis  Street ;  that  a  rascally  recollet 
and  the  Archdeacon  of  St.  Malo  should  diffuse  their  gall 
and  calumny  through  their  Christian  journals ;  that  philo- 
sophy should  be  accused  at  the  tribunal  of  Melpomene ; 
and  that  philosophers  should  continue  to  enlighten  human 
nature,  notwithstanding  the  croakings  of  ridiculous  animals 
that  flounder  in  the  marshes  of  learning  ;  and  should  you  be 
once  more  driven  by  a  hearty  kicking  from  the  finest  -of  all 
castles,  to  learn  again  your  exercise  among  the  Bulgarians ; 
should  you  again  suffer  the  dirty  effects  of  a  Dutchwoman's 
zeal ;  be  half-drowned  again  before  Lisbon  ;  to  be  unmerci- 
fully whipped  again  by  order  of  the  most  holy  Inquisition ; 
should  you  run  the  same  risks  again  among  Los  Padres,  the 
Oreillons,  and  the  French ;  should  you,  in  short,  suffer  every 
possible  calamity,  and  never  understand  Leibnitz  better  than 
I  myself  do,  you  will  still  maintain  that  all  is  well;  that  all 


CANDTDE,  123 

is  for  the  best ;  that  a  plenum,  the  materia  subtilis,  a  pre- 
established  harmony,  and  monads,  are  the  finest  things  in 
the  world  ;  and  that  Leibnitz  is  a  great  man,  even  to  those 
who  do  not  comprehend  him." 

To  this  fine  speech  Candide,  the  mildest  being  in  nature 
— though  he  had  killed  three  men,  two  of  whom  were 
priests — answered  not  a  word  ;  but,  weary  of  the  doctor  and 
his  society,  next  morning  at  break  of  day,  taking  a  white 
staff  in  his  hand,  he  marched  off,  without  knowing  whither 
he  was  going,  but  in  quest  of  a  place  where  one  does  not 
become  disgusted,  and  where  men  are  not  men,  as  in  the 
good  country  of  El  Dorado. 

Candide,  so  much  the  less  unhappy  as  he  had  no  longer 
a  love  for  Miss  Cunegund,  living  upon  the  bounty  of  different 
people,  who  are  not  Christians  but  yet  give  alms,  arrived, 
after  a  very  long  and  very  tiresome  journey,  at  Tauris,  upon 
the  frontiers  of  Persia,  a  city  noted  for  the  cruelties  which  the 
Turks  and  Persians  have  by  turns  exercised  therein. 

Half-dead  with  fatigue,  having  hardly  more  clothes  than 
what  were  necessary  to  cover  that  part  which  constitutes 
the  man,  and  which  men  call  shameful,  Candide  could  not 
well  relish  Pangloss's  opinion,  when  a  Persian  accosted 
him  in  the  most  polite  manner,  beseeching  him  to  ennoble 
his  house  with  his  presence.  "  You  make  a  jest  of  me," 
says  Candide  to  him.  "  I  am  a  poor  devil  who  have  left  a 
miserable  dwelling  I  had  in  Propontis,  because  I  married 
Miss  Cunegund,  because  she  is  grown  very  ugly,  and  because 
I  was  disgusted.  I  am  not  indeed  made  to  ennoble  any- 
body's house  ;  I  am  not  noble  myself,  thank  God.  If  I  had 
the  honour  of  being  so,  Baron  Thunder-ten-tronckh  should 
have  paid  very  dearly  for  the  kicks  behind  with  which 
he  favoured  me,  or  I  should  have  died  of  shame  for  it, 
which  would  have  been  pretty  philosophical.  Besides,  I 
have  been  whipped  very  ignominiously  by  the  executioners 
of  the  most  holy  Inquisition,  and  by  two  thousand  heroes  at 


124  CANDTDE. 

threepence-halfpenny  a  day.  Give  me  what  you  please; 
but  do  not  insult  my  distress  with  taunts  which  would  de- 
prive you  of  the  whole  value  of  your  beneficence."  "  My 
lord,"  replied  the  Persian,  "you  may  be  a  beggar,  and  this 
appears  pretty  plainly ;  but  my  religion  obliges  me  to  use 
hospitality.  It  is  sufficient  that  you  are  a  man,  and  under 
misfortunes,  that  the  apple  of  my  eye  should  be  the  path  for 
your  feet.  Vouchsafe  to  ennoble  my  house  with  your  radiant 
presence."  "  I  will,  since  you  desire  it,"  answered  Candide. 
"  Come  then,  enter,"  says  the  Persian.  They  went  in 
accordingly,  and  Candide  could  not  forbear  admiring  the 
respectful  treatment  shown  him  by  his  host.  The  slaves 
prevented  his  desires ;  the  whole  house  seemed  to  be 
busied  in  nothing  but  contributing  to  his  satisfaction. 
"  Should  this  last,"  said  Candide  to  himself,  "  all  does  not 
go  so  badly  in  this  country."  Three  days  were  past,  during 
which  time  the  kind  proceedings  of  the  Persian  were  all  of 
a  piece  ;  and  Candide  already  cried  out,  "  Master  Pangloss, 
I  always  imagined  you  were  in  the  right,  for  you  are  a  great 
philosopher." 

CHAPTER  II. 

What  befell  Candide  in  this  House;  and  how  he  got  out  of  it. 

CANDIDE,  being  well-fed,  well-clothed,  and  free  from  chagrin, 
soon  became  again  as  ruddy,  as  fresh,  and  as  gay  as  he 
had  been  in  Westphalia.  His  host,  Ismael  Raab,  was 
pleased  to  see  this  change.  He  was  a  man  six  feet  high, 
adorned  with  two  small  eyes  extremely  red,  and  a  large 
nose  full  of  pimples,  which  sufficiently  declared  his  in- 
fraction of  Mahomet's  law.  His  whiskers  were  the 
most  famous  in  the  country;  and  mothers  wished  their 
sons  nothing  so  much  as  a  like  pair.  Raab  had 
wives,  because  he  was  rich.  But  he  thought  in  a 
manner  that  is  but  too  common  in  the  East  and  in 


CANDIDE.  125 

some  of  our  colleges  in  Europe.  "  Your  excellence 
is  brighter  than  the  stars,"  says  one  day  the  cunning 
Persian  to  the  brisk  Candide,  half  smiling  and  half  sup- 
pressing his  words ;  "  you  must  have  captivated  a  great 
many  hearts;  you  are  formed  to  give  and  receive  happiness." 
"  Alas  !  "  answered  our  hero,  "  I  was  happy  only  by  halves, 
behind  a  screen,  where  I  was  but  so-so  at  my  ease.  Made- 
moiselle Cunegund  was  handsome  then "  "  Mademoi- 
selle Cunegund !  poor  innocent  thing.  Follow  me,  my  lord," 
says  the  Persian.  And  Candide  followed  accordingly.  They 
came  to  a  very  agreeable  retreat,  where  silence  and  pleasure 
reigned.  There  Ismael  Raab  tenderly  embraced  Candide, 
and  in  a  few  words  made  a  declaration  of  love  like  that 
which  the  beautiful  Alexis  expresses  with  so  much  pleasure 
ir  Virgil's  Eclogues.  Candide  could  not  recover  from 
his  astonishment.  "No,"  cried  he,  "I  can  never  suffer 
such  infamy !  What  cause  and  what  horrible  effect !  I 
had  rather  die."  "  So  you  shall,"  says  Ismael,  enraged ; 
"  how,  thou  Christian  dog,  because  I  would  politely  give  you 
pleasure — resolve  directly  to  satisfy  me,  or  to  suffer  the  most 
cruel  death."  Candide  did  not  long  hesitate.  The  cogent 
reason  of  the  Persian  made  him  tremble,  for  he  feared 
death  like  a  philosopher. 

We  accustom  ourselves  to  everything  in  time.  Candide, 
well-fed,  well  taken  care  of,  but  closely  watched,  was  not 
absolutely  disgusted  with  his  condition.  Good  cheer,  and 
the  different  diversions  performed  by  Ismael's  slaves  gave 
some  respite  to  his  chagrin.  He  was  unhappy  only  when 
he  thought ;  and  thus  it  is  with  the  greatest  part  of  man- 
kind. 

At  that  time  one  of  the  most  staunch  supporters  of  the 
monkish  crew  in  Persia,  the  most  learned  of  the  Mahometan 
doctors,  who  understood  Arabic  perfectly,  and  even  Greek, 
as  spoken  at  this  day  in  the  country  of  Demosthenes  and 
Sophocles,  the  Reverend  Ed-Ivan-baal-Denk,  returned  from 


I26  CANDIDE. 

Constantinople,  where  he  had  conversed  with  the  Reverend 
Mamoud-Abram  on  a  very  delicate  point  of  doctrine ; 
namely,  whether  the  prophet  had  plucked  from  the  angel 
Gabriel's  wing  the  pen  which  he  used  for  the  writing  of  the 
Alcoran ;  or  if  Gabriel  had  made  him  a  present  of  it. 
They  had  disputed  for  three  days  and  three  nights  with  a 
warmth  worthy  of  the  noblest  stages  of  controversy ;  and 
the  doctor  returned  home  persuaded,  like  all  the  disciples 
of  Ali,  that  Mahomet  had  plucked  the  quill ;  while  Mamoud- 
Abram  remained  convinced,  like  the  rest  of  Omar's  followers, 
that  the  prophet  was  incapable  of  committing  any  such  rude- 
ness, and  that  the  angel  had  very  politely  made  him  a  present 
of  this  quill  for  his  pen. 

It  is  said  that  there  was  at  Constantinople  a  certain  free- 
thinker who  insinuated  that  it  was  necessary  to  examine  first 
whether  the  Alcoran  was  really  written  with  a  pen  taken  from 
the  wing  of  the  angel  Gabriel ;  but  he  was  stoned. 

Candide's  arrival  had  made  a  noise  in  Tauris  :  many 
who  had  heard  him  speak  of  contingent  and  non-contingent 
effects,  imagined  he  was  a  philosoper.  The  Reverend  Ed- 
Ivan-Baal-Denk  was  told  of  him.  He  had  the  curiosity 
to  come  and  see  him  ;  and  Raab,  who  could  hardly  refuse 
a  person  of  such  consequence,  sent  for  Candide  to  make 
his  appearance.  He  seemed  to  be  very  well  pleased  with 
the  manner  in  which  Candide  spoke  of  bad  physics,  bad 
morals  ;  of  agent  and  actuated.  "  I  understand  that  you  are 
a  philosopher,  and  that's  all.  But  it  is  enough,  Candide," 
says  the  venerable  recluse.  "  It  is  not  right  that  so  great  a 
man  as  you  are  should  be  treated  with  such  indignity,  as  I 
am  told,  in  the  world.  Your  are  a  stranger ;  Ismael  Raab 
has  no  right  over  you.  I  propose  to  conduct  you  to  Court ; 
there  you  shall  meet  with  a  favourable  reception ;  the  Sophi 
loves  the  sciences.  Ismael,  you  must  put  this  young 
philosopher  into  my  hands,  or  dread  incurring  the  dis- 
pleasure of  the  prince,  and  drawing  upon  yourself  the 


CANDIDE. 


127 


vengeance  of  Heaven,  but  especially  of  the  monks."  These 
last  words  frightened  the  otherwise  undaunted  Persian, 
and  he  consented  to  everything.  Candide,  blessing  Heaven 
and  the  monks,  went  the  same  day  out  of  Tauris  with  the 
Mahometan  doctor.  They  took  the  road  to  Ispahan,  where 
they  arrived  loaded  with  the  blessings  and  favours  of  the 
people. 

CHAPTER  III. 

Candidas  reception  at  Court,  and  what  followed. 

THE  reverend  Ed-Ivan-Baal-Denk  made  no  delay  in  pre- 
senting Candide  to  the  king.  His  majesty  took  a  particular 
pleasure  in  hearing  him.  He  made  him  dispute  with  several 
learned  men  of  his  Court,  and  those  looked  upon  him  as  a 
fool,  an  ignoramus,  and  idiot,  which  very  much  contri- 
buted to  persuade  his  majesty  that  he  was  a  great  man. 
"  Because,"  said  he  to  them,  "  you  do  not  comprehend  Can- 
dide's  reasoning,  you  abuse  him ;  but  I,  who  also  compre- 
hend nothing  at  all  of  them,  assure  you  that  he  is  a  great 
philosopher,  and  I  swear  to  it  by  my  whisker."  Upon  these 
words  the  literati  were  struck  dumb. 

Candide  had  apartments  assigned  him  in  the  palace.  He 
had  slaves  to  wait  on  him ;  he  was  dressed  in  magnificent 
clothes,  and  the  Sophi  commanded  that,  whatever  he  should 
say,  no  one  should  dare  to  assert  that  he  was  wrong.  His 
majesty  did  not  stop  here.  The  venerable  monk  was  con- 
tinually soliciting  him  in  favour  of  his  guest,  and  his  majesty 
at  length  resolved  to  rank  him  among  the  number  of  his 
most  intimate  favourites. 

"  God  be  praised,  and  our  holy  prophet,"  says  the  imam, 
addressing  himself  to  Candide  ;  "  I  am  come  to  tell  you  a 
very  agreeable  piece  of  news  :  that  you  are  happy,  my  dear 
Candide  ;  that  you  are  going  to  raise  the  envy  of  the  world ; 
you  shall  swim  in  opulence ;  you  may  aspire  to  the  most 


I28  CANDIDE. 

splendid  posts  in  the  empire.  But  do  not  forget  me,  my 
friend.  Think  that  it  is  I  who  have  procured  you  the 
favour  you  are  just  upon  the  point  of  enjoying :  let  gaiety 
reign  over  the  horizon  of  your  countenance.  The  king 
grants  you  a  favour  which  has  been  sought  by  many,  and 
you  will  soon  exhibit  a  sight  which  the  Court  has  not  enjoyed 
these  two  years  past."  "And  what  are  these  favours," 
demanded  Candide,  "with  which  the  prince  intends  to 
honour  me?"  "  This  very  day,"  answered  the  monk,  quite 
overjoyed,  "  this  very  day  you  are  to  receive  fifty  strokes 
'  with  a  bull's  pizzle  on  the  soles  of  your  feet,  in  the  presence 
of  his  majesty.  The  eunuchs  named  for  perfuming  you 
for  the  occasion  are  to  be  here  directly  ;  prepare  yourself  to 
go  cheerfully  through  this  little  trial,  and  thereby  render 
yourself  worthy  of  the  King  of  Kings. '  "  Let  the  King  of 
Kings,"  cried  Candide  in  a  rage,  "  keep  his  favours  to 
himself,  if  I  must  receive  fifty  blows  with  a  bull's  pizzle 
in  order  to  merit  them."  "  It  is  thus,"  replied  the  doctor 
coldly,  "  that  he  deals  with  those  on  whom  he  means  to 
pour  down  his  benefits.  I  love  you  too  much  to  regard  the 
little  pet  which  you  show  on  the  occasion,  and  I  will  make 
you  happy  in  spite  of  yourself." 

He  had  not  done  speaking  when  the  eunuchs  arrived, 
preceded  by  the  executor  of  his  majesty's  private  pleasures, 
who  was  one  of  the  greatest  and  most  robust  lords  of  the 
Court.  Candide  in  vain  remonstrated  against  their  pro- 
ceedings. They  perfumed  his  legs  and  feet  according  to 
custom.  Four  eunuchs  carried  him  to  the  place  appointed 
for  the  ceremony  through  the  midst  of  a  double  file  of 
soldiers,  while  the  trumpets  sounded,  the  cannon  fired,  and 
the  bells  of  all  the  mosques  of  Ispahan  jingled;  the  Sophi  was 
ready  there,  accompanied  with  his  principal  officers  and  most 
distinguished  personages  of  his  Court.  In  an  instant  they 
stretched  out  Candide  upon  a  little  form  finely  gilt,  and  the 
executor  of  the  private  pleasures  put  himself  in  a  posture  for 


C AND  IDE.  129 

entering  upon  his  office.  "  Oh  !  Master  Pangloss,  Master 
Pangloss  !  were  you  but  here,"  said  Candide,  weeping  and 
roaring  out  with  all  his  force  :  a  circumstance  which  would 
have  been  thought  very  indecent  if  the  monk  had  not  given 
the  people  to  understand  that  his  guest  had  put  himself 
into  such  violent  agitations  only  the  better  to  divert  his 
majesty.  This  great  king,  it  is  true,  laughed  like  a  fool.  He 
even  took  such  delight  in  the  affair,  that  after  the  fifty  blows 
had  been  given,  he  ordered  fifty  more  to  be  added.  But 
his  first  minister  having  represented  to  him,  with  a  firmness  not 
very  common,  that  such  an  unheard-of  favour  with  regard  to 
a  stranger  might  alienate  the  hearts  of  his  subjects,  he  revoked 
that  order,  and  Candide  was  carried  back  to  his  apartments. 
They  put  him  to  bed,  after  having  bathed  his  feet  with 
vinegar.  The  grandees  came  round  him  in  order  to  con- 
gratulate him  on  his  good  fortune.  The  Sophi  then  came 
to  assist  him  in  person,  and  not  only  gave  him  his  hand  to 
kiss,  according  to  the  custom,  but  likewise  honoured  him 
with  a  great  blow  of  his  fist  on  his  mouth.  From  whence 
the  politicians  conjectured  that  Candide  would  arrive  "t 
extraordinary  preferment,  and,  what  is  very  uncommon, 
though  politicians,  they  were  not  deceived. 

CHAPTER  IV. 

Fresh  Favours  conferred  on  Candide ;  his  great  Advancement. 

As  soon  as  our  hero  was  cured,  he  was  introduced  to  the 
king,  to  return  him  his  thanks.  The  monarch  received  him 
very  graciously.  He  gave  him  two  or  three  hearty  boxes  on 
the  ear  during  their  conversation,  and  conducted  him  back 
as  far  as  the  guard-room  with  several  sound  kicks  on  the 
posteriors,  at  which  the  courtiers  were  ready  to  burst  for 
envy.  Since  his  majesty  had  been  in  a  drubbing  humour, 
no  person  had  ever  received  such  signal  marks  of  his  majesty's 
favour  in  this  way  as  Candide. 

E 


130 


C AND  IDE. 


Three  days  after  this  interview,  our  philosopher,  who  was 
enraged  at  the  favours  he  had  received,  and  thought  that 
everything  went  very  bad,  was  nominated  Governor  of 
Chusistan,  with  an  absolute  power.  He  was  decorated  with 
a  fur-cap,  which  is  a  grand  mark  of  distinction  in  Persia.  He 
took  his  leave  of  the  Sophi,  and  departed  for  Sus,  the  capital 
of  his  province.  From  the  moment  that  Candide  made  his 
appearance  at  Court,  the  grandees  had  conspired  his  destruc- 
tion. The  excessive  favours  which  the  Sophi  had  heaped  on 
him,  served  but  to  increase  the  storm  ready  to  burst  upon 
his  head.  He,  however,  applauded  himself  on  his  good 
fortune,  and  especially  his  removal  from  Court ;  he  enjoyed 
in  prospect  the  pleasures  of  supreme  rank,  and  he  said  from 
the  bottom  of  his  heart — 

"  How  blest  the  subject  from  his  lord  removed?" 

He  had  not  gone  quite  twenty  miles  from  Ispahan,  before 
five  hundred  horsemen,  armed  cap-a-pie,  came  up  with  him 
and  his  attendants,  and  discharged  a  volley  of  fire-arms  upon 
them.  Candide  imagined  at  first  that  this  was  intended  to 
do  him  an  honour ;  but  the  ball  which  broke  his  leg  soon 
gave  him  to  know  what  was  going  on.  His  people  laid 
down  their  arms,  and  Candide,  more  dead  than  alive,  was 
carried  to  a  castle  remote  from  any  other  dwelling.  His 
baggage,  camels,  slaves,  white  and  black  eunuchs,  with 
thirty-six  women  which  the  Sophi  had  given  him,  all  became 
the  prey  of  the  conqueror.  Our  hero's  leg  was  cut  off  for 
fear  of  a  mortification,  and  care  was  taken  of  his  life  that  a 
more  cruel  death  might  be  inflicted  on  him. 

"  O  Pangloss  !  Pangloss !  what  would  now  become  of  your 
optimism,  if  you  saw  me  short  of  one  leg  in  the  hands  of 
my  cruellest  enemies ;  just  as  I  was  entering  upon  the  path 
of  happiness,  and  was  governor  or  king,  as  one  may  say,  of 
one  of  the  most  considerable  provinces  of  the  empire  of 
ancient  Media;  when  I  had  camels,  slaves,  black  and 
white  eunuchs,  and  thirty-six  women  for  my  harem,  and 


CANDIDE.  131 

of  which  I  had  only  heard."  Thus  Candide  spoke  as  soon 
as  he  was  able  to  speak. 

But  while  he  was  thus  bemoaning  himself  everything  was 
going  for  the  best  for  him.  The  Ministry,  informed  of  the 
outrages  committed  against  him,  had  despatched  a  body  of 
well-disciplined  troops  in  pursuit  of  the  mutineers,  and  the 
monk  Ed-Ivan-Baal-Denk  took  care  to  publish  by  means  of 
others  of  his  fraternity,  that  Candide  being  the  work  of  the 
monks,  wras  consequently  the  work  of  God.  Such  as  had 
any  knowledge  of  this  atrocious  attempt  were  so  much 
the  more  ready  to  discover  it,  as  the  ministers  of  religion 
gave  assurance  on  the  part  of  Mahomet,  that  every  one 
who  had  eaten  pork,  drunk  wine,  omitted  bathing  for 
any  number  of  days  together,  or  had  otherwise  acted 
against  the  express  prohibitions  of  the  Alcoran,  should 
be,  ipso  facto,  absolved,  upon  declaring  what  they  knew 
concerning  the  conspiracy.  They  soon  discovered  the 
place  of  Candide's  confinement,  which  they  broke  open  ; 
and  as  it  was  a  religious  affair,  the  party  worsted  were  ex- 
terminated to  a  man,  agreeably  to  custom  in  that  case. 
Candide,  marching  over  a  heap  of  dead  bodies,  made  his 
escape,  triumphed  over  the  greatest  peril  he  had  hitherto 
encountered,  and  with  his  attendants  resumed  the  road  to 
his  government.  He  was  received  there  as  a  favourite  who 
had  been  honoured  with  fifty  blows  of  a  bull's-pizzle  on  the 
soles  of  his  feet  in  the  presence  of  the  King  of  Kings. 

CHAPTER   V. 

How  Candide  becomes  a  very  Great  Man,  and y 'd  is  not  contented. 

THE  good  of  philosophy  is  its  inspiring  us  with  a  love  for  our 
fellow-creatures.  Pascal  is  almost  the  only  philosopher 
who  seems  desirous  to  make  us  hate  our  neighbours. 
Luckily  Candide  had  not  read  Pascal,  and  he  loved  the 
poor  human  race  very  cordially.  This  was  soon  perceived 

E  2 


132  CANDIDE. 

by  the  upright  part  of  the  people.  They  had  always  kept 
at  a  distance  from  the  pretended  legates  of  heaven,  but  made 
no  scruple  of  visiting  Candide  and  assisting  him  with  their 
counsels.  He  made  several  wise  regulations  for  the  en- 
couragement of  agriculture,  population,  commerce,  and  the 
arts.  He  rewarded  those  who  had  made  any  useful  experi- 
ments ;  and  even  encouraged  such  as  had  produced  some 
essays  on  literature.  "  When  the  people  in  my  province 
are  in  general  content,"  said  he,  with  a  charming  candour, 
"  possibly  I  shall  be  so  myself.''  Candide  was  a  stranger  to 
mankind;  he  saw  himself  torn  to  pieces  in  seditious  libels,  and 
calumniated  in  a  work  entitled  "  T-he  Friend  to  Mankind." 
He  found  that,  while  he  was  labouring  to  make  people 
happy,  he  had  omy  made  them  ungrateful.  "  Ah,"  cried 
Candide,  "  how  hard  it  is  to  govern  these  beings  without 
feathers,  which  vegetate  on  the  earth !  Why  am  I  not  still 
in  Propontis,  in  the  company  of  Master  Pangloss,  Miss 
Cunegund,  the  daughter  of  Pope  Urban  X.  with  only  one 
buttock,  brother  Giroflee,  and  the  most  luscious  Pacquette  ?  " 

CHAPTER  VI. 

The  Pleasures  of  Candide. 

CANDIDE,  in  the  bitterness  of  his  grief,  wrote  a  very  pathetic 
letter  to  the  Rev.  Ed-Ivan-Baal-Denk.  He  painted  to  him 
in  such  lively  colours  the  present  state  of  his  soul,  that 
Ed-Ivan,  greatly  affected  with  it,  obtained  permission  of  the 
Sophi  that  Candide  should  resign  his  employments.  His 
majesty,  in  recompense  of  his  services,  granted  him  a  very 
considerable  pension.  Eased  from  the  weight  of  grandeur, 
our  philosopher  immediately  sought  after  Pangloss's  opti- 
mism in  the  pleasures  of  a  private  life.  He  till  then  had 
lived  for  the  benefit  of  others,  and  seemed  to  have  forgotten 
that  he  had  a  seraglio. 
He  now  called  it  to  remembrance  with  that  emotion 


CANDIDE.  133 

which  the  very  name  inspires.  "  Let  everything  be  got 
ready,"  says  he  to  his  first  eunuch,  "  for  my  visiting  my 
women."  "  My  lord,"  answered  the  shrill-piped  slave, 
"  it  is  now  that  your  excellency  deserves  the  title  of  wise. 
The  men  for  whom  you  have  done  so  much  were  not  worthy 

of  employing  your  thoughts  ;  but  the  women "  "  That 

may  be,"  said  Candide  modestly. 

At  the  bottom  of  a  garden,  where  art  had  assisted  nature 
to  unfold  her  beauties,  stood  a  small  house,  of  simple  and 
elegant  structure,  and  by  that  means  alone  very  different 
from  those  which  are  to  be  seen  in  the  suburbs  of  the  finest 
city  in  Europe.  Candide  could  not  approach  it  without 
blushing;  the  air  round  this  charming  retreat  diffused  a 
delicious  perfume;  the  flowers,  amorously  intermingled, 
seemed  here  to  be  guided  by  the  instinct  of  pleasure,  and 
preserved  for  a  long  time  their  various  beauties.  Here  the 
rose  never  lost  its  lovely  hue ;  the  view  of  a  tock,  from 
which  the  waters  precipitated  themselves  with  a  murmuring 
and  confused  noise,  invited  the  soul  to  that  soft  melancholy 
which  is  ever  the  forerunner  of  pleasure.  Candide  enters 
trembling  into  a  saloon,  where  taste  and  magnificence  are 
united ;  his  senses  are  drawn  by  a  secret  charm ;  he  casts 
his  eyes  on  young  Telemachus,  who  breathes  on  the 
canvas  in  the  midst  of  the  nymphs  of  Calypso's  court.  He 
next  tunis  them  to  Diana,  who  flies  into  the  arms  of  the 
tender  Endymion ;  his  agitation  increases  at  the  sight  of 
a  Venus,  faithfully  copied  from  that  of  Medicis ;  his  ears 
on  a  sudden  are  struck  with  a  divine  harmony ;  a  company 
of  young  Circassian  females  appear  covered  with  their  veils  ; 
they  form  round  him  a  soit  of  dance,  agreeably  designed, 
and  more  just  than  those  trifling  jigs  that  are  performed  on 
as  trifling  stages  after  the  representation  of  the  death  of 
Caesar  and  Pompey. 

At  a  signal  given  they  throw  off  their  veils,  and  discover 
faces  full  of  expression  that  lend  new  life  to  the  diversion. 


134  CAND1DE. 

These  beauties  studied  the  most  attractive  attitude  without 
appearing  to  intend  it :  one  expressed  in  her  looks  a  passion 
without  bounds ;  another  a  soft  languor,  which  waits  for 
pleasures  without  seeking  them.  This  fair  stoops  and  raises 
herself  precipitately,  to  give  leave  to  a  cursory  view  of  those 
enchanting  charms  which  the  fair  sex  display  in  such  full 
scope  at  Paris  ;  and  that  other  throws  aside  a  part  of  her 
cymar  to  show  a  leg  which  alone  is  capable  of  inspiring  a 
mortal  of  any  delicacy.  The  dance  ceases,  and  they  remain 
in  profound  silence. 

This  pause  recalls  Candide  to  himself.  Enthusiasm  takes 
possession  of  his  breast.  He  darts  the  most  ardent  looks  on 
all  around  him,  and  is  met  by  eyes  that  swim  in  liquid  fire. 
His  eye  rests  upon  forms  whiter  than  alabaster,  whose  pal- 
pitating motion  repels  the  touch  ;  admires  their  proportion  ; 
perceives  lips  like  those  rosebuds  which  only  wait  the 
genial  rays  of  the  sun  to  unfold  them ;  he  kisses  them  with 
rapture. 

Our  philosopher  next  admires,  for  a  while,  a  majestic  figure 
of  a  fine  and  delicate  shape.  His  attention  becomes  fixed  upon 
one,  and  he  at  length  throws  the  handkerchief  to  a  young  per- 
son whose  eyes  he  had  observed  to  be  always  fixed  upon  him. 

"  O  master  !  my  dear  master ! "  cried  Candide,  almost 
beside  himself,  "everything  here  is  as  well  as  in  El 
Dorado.  I  am  as  happy  as  it  is  possible  to  be.  Leibnitz  is 
in  the  right,  and  you  are  a  great  philosopher.  For  instance, 
I  engage  that  you,  my  lovely  girl,  have  always  had  a  bias 
towards  optimism,  because  you  have  always  been  happy." 
"  Alas  !  no,"  answered  she,  "  I  do  not  know  what  optimism 
is  ;  but  I  swear  to  you  that  your  slave  has  not  known  happi- 
ness till  to-day.  If  my  lord  is  pleased  to  give  me  leave,  I 
will  convince  him  of  it  by  a  succinct  recital  of  my  adven- 
tures." "I  am  very  willing,"  said  Candide;  "I  am  in  a 
pretty  calm  situation  for  hearing  an  historical  detail."  Upon 
which  the  fair  slave  began  as  follows. 


CANDIDE. 


135 


CHAPTER    VII. 

The  History  of  Zirza. 

MY  father  was  a  Christian,  and  so  likewise  am  I,  as  far  as  I 
have  been  told.  He  had  a  little  hermitage  near  Cotatis, 
where,  by  his  fervent  devotion,  and  practising  austerities 
shocking  to  human  nature,  he  acquired  the  veneration 
of  the  faithful.  Crowds  came  to  pay  him  their  homage, 
and  took  a  particular  satisfaction  in  bathing  his  posteriors, 
which  he  lashed  every  day  with  several  smart  strokes  of 
discipline  :  doubtless  it  was  to  one  of  the  most  devout  of 
these  visitants  that  I  owe  my  being.  I  was  brought  up  in 
a  cave,  in  the  neighbourhood  of  my  father's  little  cell.  I 
was  twelve  years  of  age,  and  had  not  yet  left  this  kind  of 
grave,  when  the  earth  shook  with  a  dreadful  noise ;  the  arch 
of  the  vault  fell  in,  and  I  was  drawn  out  from  under  the 
rubbish  half- dead,  when  light  struck  my  eyes  for  the  first 
time.  My  father  took  me  into  his  hermitage  as  a  pre- 
destinated child.  The  whole  of  this  adventure  appeared 
strange  to  the  people ;  my  father  cried  it  up  as  a  miracle, 
and  so  did  they. 

I  was  called  Zirza,  which  in  Persian  signifies  child  of 
providence.  Notice  was  soon  taken  of  my  poor  charms  : 
the  women  already  came  but  seldom  to  the  hermitage,  and 
the  men  much  oftener.  One  of  them  tells  me  that  he  loved 
me.  "Villain,"  says  my  father  to  him,  "hast  thou  substance 
sufficient  to  love  her?  This  is  a  deposit  which  God  has 
entrusted  to  me :  he  has  made  his  appearance  to  me  this 
night  under  the  shape  of  a  venerable  hermit,  and  forbade  me 
to  give  up  the  possession  thereof  out  of  my  hands  for  less 
than  a  thousand  sequins.  Get  thee  gone,  poor  -devil,  lest 
thine  impure  breath  should  blast  her  charms."  "  I  have," 
answered  he,  "  only  a  heart  to  offer  her.  But  say,  barbarian, 
dost  thou  not  blush  to  make  sport  of  the  Deity  for  the 


136        ,  CANDIDE. 

gratifying  thine  avarice  ?  With  what  front,  vile  wretch, 
darest  thou  pretend  that  God  has  spoken  to  thee  ?  This  is 
throwing  the  greatest  contempt  upon  the  Author  of  beings, 
to  represent  Him  conversing  with  such  men  as  thou  art." 
"  O  blasphemy  ! "  cried  my  father  in  a  rage,  "  God  himself 
has  commanded  me  to  stone  blasphemers."  As  he  spoke 
these  words,  he  fell  upon  my  lover,  and  with  repeated  blows 
laid  him  dead  on  the  ground,  and  his  blood  flew  in  my  face. 
Though  I  had  not  yet  known  what  love  is,  this  man  had 
given  me  concern,  and  his  death  threw  me  into  an  affliction, 
so  much  the  greater,  as  it  rendered  the  sight  of  my  father 
insupportable  to  me.  I  took  a  resolution  to  leave  him  :  he 
perceived  it.  "  Ungrateful,"  says  he  to  me,  "  it  is  to  me  thou 
owest  thy  being.  Thou  art  my  daughter,  and  thou  hatest 
me .  but  I  am  going  to  deserve  thy  hatred  by  the  most 
rigorous  treatment."  He  kept  his  word  but  too  well  with  me, 
cruel  man  !  During  five  years,  which  I  spent  in  tears  and 
groans,  neither  my  youth,  nor  my  clouded  beauty,  could  in 
the  least  abate  his  wrath.  Sometimes  he  stuck  a  thousand 
pins  into  all  the  parts  of  my  body ;  at  other  times,  with 
his  discipline,  he  made  the  blood  trickle  down  my  side." 
"This,"  says  Candide,  "gave  you  less  pain  than  the  pins." 
"  True,  my  lord,"  answers  Zirza.  "  At  last,"  continued  she, 
"  I  fled  from  my  father's  habitation  ;  and  not  daring  to  trust 
myself  to  anybody,  I  flung  myself  into  the  thickest  part  of 
the  woods,  where  I  was  three  days  without  food,  and  should 
have  died,  were  it  not  for  a  tiger  which  I  had  the  happiness 
to  please,  and  was  willing  to  share  with  me  the  prey  he 
caught.  But  I  had  many  horrors  to  encounter  from  this 
formidable  beast ;  and  the  brute  was  very  near  destroying 
me.  Bad  food  gave  me  the  scurvy.  Scarcely  was  I  cured, 
before  1  followed  a  merchant  of  slaves,  who  was  going  to 
Teflis ;  the  plague  was  there  then,  and  I  took  it.  These 
various  misfortunes  did  not  absolutely  affect  my  features, 
nor  hinder  the  Sophi's  messenger  from  buying  me  for  you. 


C AND  IDE.  137 

I  have  languished  in  tears  these  three  months  that  I  have 
been  among  the  number  of  your  women.  My  companions 
and  I  imagined  ourselves  to  be  the  objects  of  your  con- 
tempt. In  short,  I  am  not  yet  eighteen  years  of  age  ;  and 
of  these  I  have  spent  twelve  in  a  frightful  cavern  ;  under- 
gone an  earthquake  ;  been  covered  with  the  blood  of  the 
first  lovely  man  I  had  hitherto  seen;  endured  for  the 
space  of  four  years  the  most  cruel  tortures,  and  have  had 
the  scurvy  and  the  plague.  Consumed  with  desires, 
amidst  a  crew  of  black  and  white  monsters,  still  preserv- 
ing that  which  I  have  saved  from  the  fury  of  an  awkward 
tiger,  and  cursing  my  fate,  I  have  passed  three  months  in 
this  seraglio,  where  I  should  have  died  of  the  jaundice  had 
not  your  excellency  honoured  me  at  last  with  your  atten- 
tion." "  O  heavens  ! "  cried  Candide,  "  is  it  possible  that 
you  have  experienced  such  sensible  misfortunes  at  so  tender 
an  age  ?  What  would  Pangloss  say  could  he  hear  you  ? 
But  your  misfortunes  are  at  an  end,  as  well  as  mine.  Every- 
thing does  not  go  badly  now  ;  is  not  this  true  ? "  Upon 
that  Candide  caressed  the  unfortunate  one,  and  was  more 
than  ever  confirmed  in  the  belief  of  Pangloss's  system. 

CHAPTER  VIII. 

Candidas  disgusts. — An  unexpected  Meeting. 

OUR  philosopher  dried  up  as  he  grew  happy.  Then  Zirza's 
eyes  lost  all  their  vivacity  in  those  of  Candide ;  her 
complexion,  its  lustre ;  and  her  lips  that  pure  vermillion 
which  had  enchanted  him  at  first  sight.  He  now  perceived 
that  she  walked  badly  and  had  an  offensive  smell ;  he  saw, 
with  the  greatest  disgust,  a  spot  upon  the  face  which  he 
had  never  observed  before  to  be  tainted  with  any  blemish. 
The  vehement  ardour  of  Zirza  became  burdensome  to  him  : 
he  could  see,  with  great  coolness,  the  faults  of  his  other 
women,  which  had  escaped  him  in  his  first  transports  of 


138  C AND  IDE. 

admiration ;  he  saw  nothing  in  them  but  a  barefaced  im- 
pudence :  he  was  ashamed  to  have  walked  in  the  steps  of 
the  wisest  of  men  \  and  he  found  women  more  bitter  than  death. 
Candide,  always  cherishing  these  Christian  sentiments, 
spent  his  leisure  time  in  walking  over  the  streets  of  Sus  ; 
when  one  day  a  cavalier,  in  a  superb  dress,  came  up  to  him 
suddenly,  and  called  him  by  his  name.  "  Is  it  possible," 

cried  Candide,  /'my   lord,  that  you  are ?     It  is  not 

possible ;   otherwise   you   are    so   very   like   the    Abbe    of 

Perigord ."     I  am  the  very  man,"  answered  the  Abbe. 

Upon  this  Candide  started  back,  and  with  his  usual 
ingenuousness  said,  "  Are  you  happy,  Mr.  Abbe  ?  "  "A 
fine  question  !  "  replied  the  Abbe,  "  The  little  deceit  which  I 
have  put  upon  you  has  contributed  not  a  little  to  gain  mt 
credit.  The  police  had  employed  me  for  some  time,  but 
having  fallen  out  with  them,  I  quitted  the  ecclesiastical 
habit,  which  was  no  longer  of  any  service  to  me.  I  went 
over  into  England,  where  persons  of  my  profession  are 
better  paid.  I  said  all  I  knew,  and  all  I  did  not  know, 
about  the  strength  and  weakness  of  the  country  I  had  lately 
left.  I  especially  gave  bold  assurances  that  the  French 
were  the  dregs  of  the  world,  and  that  good  sense  dwelt  no- 
where but  in  London.  In  short,  I  made  a  splendid  fortune, 
and  have  just  concluded  a  treaty  at  the  Court  of  Persia, 
which  tends  to  exterminate  all  the  Europeans  who  come 
for  cotton  and  silk  into  the  Sophi's  dominions,  to  the 
detriment  of  the  English."  "  The  object  of  your  mission  is 
very  commendable,"  says  our  philosopher  ;  "  but,  Mr.  Abbe, 
you  are  a  cheat.  I  like  not  cheats,  and  I  have  some  credit 
at  Court.  Tremble  now,  your  happiness  has  arrived  at  its 
utmost  limits  :  you  are  just  upon  the  point  of  suffering  the 
fate  you  deserve."  "My  Lord  Candide,"  cried  the  Abbe, 
throwing  himself  on  his  kness,  "  have  pity  on  me  :  I  feel 
myself  drawn  to  evil  by  an  irresistible  force,  as  you  find 
yourself  necessitated  to  the  practice  of  virtue.  This  fatal 


CANDIDE.  139 

propensity  I  have  perceived  from  the  moment  I  became 
acquainted  with  Mr.  Wasp,  and  worked  at  the  Feuilles" 
"  What  do  you  call  Fenilles  ?  "  says  Candide.  "  Feuilles" 
answered  the  Abbe,  "  are  sheets  of  seventy-two  pages  in 
print,  in  which  the  public  are  entertained  in  the  strain  of 
calumny,  satire,  and  dulness.  An  honest  man  who  can 
read  and  write,  and  not  being  able  to  continue  among  the 
Jesuits  so  long  as  he  chose,  has  set  himself  to  compose 
this  pretty  little  work,  that  he  may  have  wherewithal  to  give 
his  wife  some  lace,  and  bring  up  his  children  in  the  fear  of 
God ;  and  there  are  certain  honest  people  who,  for  a  few 
pence  and  some  bottles  of  bad  wine,  assist  the  man  in 
carrying  on  his  scheme.  This  Mr.  Wasp  is,  besides,  a 
member  of  a  curious  club,  who  divert  themselves  with 
making  poor  ignorant  people  drunk,  and  setting  them  to 
blaspheme  ;  or  in  bullying  a  poor  simple  devil,  and  breaking 
his  furniture,  and  afterwards  challenging  him.  Such  little 
pretty  amusements  these  gentry  call  mystifications,  and 
richly  deserve  the  attention  of  the  police.  In  fine,  this  very 
honest  man,  Mr.  Wasp,  who  boasts  he  never  was  in  the 
galleys,  is  troubled  with  a  lethargy,  which  renders  him 
insensible  to  the  clearest  truths,  and  out  of  which  he  can 
be  drawn  only  by  certain  violent  means,  which  he  sustains 
with  a  resignation  and  courage  above  conception.  I  have 
worked  for  some  time  under  this  celebrated  genius ;  I  am 
become  an  eminent  writer  in  my  turn,  and  I  had  but  just 
quitted  Mr.  Wasp  to  do  a  little  for  myself,  when  I  had  the 
honour  of  paying  you  a  visit  at  Paris."  "  Though  you  are 
a  very  great  cheat,  Mr.  Abbe,  yet  your  sincerity  in  this 
point  makes  some  impression  upon  me.  Go  to  Court ;  ask 
for  the  Rev.  Ed-Ivan-Baal-Denk ;  I  shall  write  to  him  in 
your  behalf,  but  upon  express  condition  that  you  promise 
me  to  become  an  honest  man  ;  and  that  you  will  not  be  the 
occasion  of  some  thousands  having  their  throats  cut  for  the 
sake  of  a  little  silk  and  cotton."  The  Abbe  promised  all 
that  Candide  required,  and  they  parted  very  good  friends. 


I4o  CANDIDE. 

CHAPTER    IX. 

Candidas  Disgraces,  Travels,  and  Adventures. 

No  sooner  had  the  Abbe"  gotten  access  to  Court  than  he 
employed  all  his  skill  in  order  to  ingratiate  himself  with 
the  minister  and  ruin  his  benefactor.  He  spread  a  report  that 
Candide  was  a  traitor,  and  that  he  had  spoken  disrespect- 
fully of  the  hallowed  whiskers  of  the  king  of  kings.  All 
the  courtiers  condemned  him  to  be  burnt  in  a  slow  fire ; 
but  the  Sophi,  more  favourable,  only  sentenced  him  to 
perpetual  banishment,  after  having  previously  kissed  the 
sole  of  his  accuser's  foot,  according  to  the  usage  among  the 
Persians.  The  Abbe  went  in  person  to  put  the  sentence  in 
execution  ;  he  found  our  philosopher  in  pretty  good  health, 
and  disposed  to  become  again  happy.  "  My  friend,"  says  the 
English  ambassador  to  him,  "  I  come  with  regret  to  let  you 
know  that  you  must  quit  this  kingdom  with  all  expedition, 
and  kiss  my  feet  with  a  true  repentance  for  your  horrid 
crimes."  "  Kiss  your  feet,  Mr.  Abbe  !  Certainly  you  are 
not  in  earnest,  and  I  do  not  understand  joking."  Upon 
which  some  mutes,  who  had  attended  the  Abbe,  entered  and 
took  off  his  shoes,  letting  poor  Candide  know  by  signs  that 
he  must  submit  to  this  piece  of  humiliation,  or  else  expect 
to  be  impaled.  Candide,  by  virtue  of  his  free  will,  kissed 
the  Abbe's  feet.  They  put  him  on  a  sorry  linen  robe,  and 
the  executioner  drove  him  out  of  the  town,  crying  all  the 
time,  "  Behold  a  traitor  who  has  spoken  irreverently  of  the 
Sophi's  whiskers  !  Irreverently  of  the  imperial  whiskers  ! " 

What  did  the  officious  monk  while  his  friend  whom  he 
protected  was  treated  thus  ]  I  know  nothing  of  that.  It  is 
probable  that  he  was  tired  of  protecting  Candide.  Who  can 
depend  on  the  favour  of  kings,  and  especially  that  of  monks  ? 

In  the  meantime  our  hero  went  melancholy  on.  "I 
never  spoke,"  said  he  to  himself,  "  about  the  King  of  Persia's, 
whiskers.  I  am  cast  in  an  instant  from  the  pinnacle  of 


C AND  IDE,  141 

happiness  into  the  abyss  of  misery,  because  a  wretch  who 
has  violated  all  laws  accuses  me  of  a  pretended  crime  which 
I  have  never  committed ;  and  this  wretch,  this  monster,  this 
persecutor  of  virtue — he  is  happy." 

Candide,  after  travelling  for  some  days,  found  himself 
upon  the  frontiers  of  Turkey.  He  directed  his  course 
towards  the  Propontis,  with  a  design  to  settle  there  again, 
and  pass  the  rest  of  his  days  in  the  cultivation  of  his  garden. 
He  saw  as  he  entered  a  little  village  a  great  multitude  of 
people  tumultuously  assembled ;  he  inquired  into  the 
cause  of  it.  "This,"  says  an  old  man  to  him,  "  is  an  accident 
pretty  singular.  It  is  some  time  ago  since  the  wealthy 
Mahomet  demanded  in  marriage  the  daughter  of  the 
janissary  Zamoud  :  he  found  her  not  to  be  honest,  and 
in  pursuance  of  a  principle  quite  natural,  and  authorized  by 
the  laws,  he  sent  her  home  to  her  father,  after  having 
branded  her  in  the  face.  Zamoud,  exasperated  at  the 
disgrace  brought  on  his  family,  in  the  first  transports  of  a 
fury  that  is  very  natural,  with  one  stroke  of  his  scimitar 
clove  the  disfigured  visage  of  his  daughter.  His  eldest  son, 
who  loved  his  sister  passionately — and  this  is  very  frequent 
in  nature — flew  upon  his  father,  and  plunged,  quite  naturally 
too,  a  very  sharp  poignard  to  his  heart.  Afterwards,  like  a 
lion  who  grows  more  enraged  at  seeing  his  own  blood  flow, 
the  furious  Zamoud  ran  to  Mahomet's  house,  and  after 
striking  to  the  ground  some  slaves  who  opposed  his  passage, 
murdered  Mahomet,  his  wives,  and  two  children  then  in  the 
cradle,  all  of  which  was  very  natural,  considering  the  violent 
situation  he  then  was  in.  At  last,  to  crown  all,  he  killed 
himself  with  the  same  poignard,  reeking  with  the  blood  of 
his  father  and  his  enemies,  which  is  also  very  natural." 
"  What  a  scene  of  horrors  !  "  cried  Candide.  "  What  would 
you  have  said,  Master  Pangloss,  had  you  found  such  barbari- 
ties in  nature  ?  Would  not  you  acknowledge  that  nature 
is  corrupted,  that  all  is  not."  "  No,"  says  the  old  man, 


142 


CANDIDE. 


"  for  the  pre-established  harmony."  "  O  heavens  !  do  ye 
not  deceive  me?  Is  this  Pangloss,"  says  Candide,  "  whom 
I  again  see?  "  "  The  very  same,"  answered  the  old  man  ; 
"  I  knew  you,  but  I  was  willing  to  find  out  your  sentiments 
before  I  would  discover  myself.  Come,  let  us  discourse  a 
little  on  contingent  effects,  and  see  if  you  have  made  any 
progress  in  the  art  of  wisdom."  "  Alas  !  "  says  Candide, 
"  you  choose  your  time  improperly ;  rather  let  me  know  what 
is  become  of  Miss  Cunegund ;  tell  me  where  are  Brother 
Giroflee,  Pacquette,  and  Pope  Urban's  daughter."  "  I  know 
nothing  of  them,"  says  Pangloss ;  "it  is  now  two  years  since 
I  left  our  habitation  in  order  to  find  you  out.  I  have 
travelled  over  almost  all  Turkey ;  I  was  upon  the  point  of 
setting  out  for  the  Court  of  Persia,  where  I  heard  you  made 
a  great  figure ;  and  I  only  tarried  in  this  little  village  among 
these  good  people,  till  I  had  gathered  strength  for  con- 
tinuing my  journey."  "  What  is  this,  I  see  ?  "  answered 
Candide,  quite  surprised.  "  You  want  an  arm,  my  dear 
doctor."  "  That  is  nothing,"  says  the  one-handed  and  one- 
eyed  doctor;  "nothing  is  more  common  in  the  best  of 
worlds  than  to  see  persons  who  want  one  eye  and  one  arm. 
This  accident  befell  me  in  a  journey  from  Mecca.  Our 
caravan  was  attacked  by  a  troop  of  Arabs ;  our  guard 
attempted  to  make  resistance,  and,  according  to  the  rules 
of  war,  the  Arabs,  who  found  themselves  to  be  the  strongest 
side,  massacred  us  all  without  mercy.  There  perished  about 
five  hundred  persons  in  this  attack,  among  whom  was  about 
a  dozen  of  women.  For  my  part  1  had  only  my  skull  split 
and  an  arm  cut  off;  I  did  not  die  for  all  this,  and  I  still 
found  that  everything  went  for  the  best.  But  as  for  your- 
self, my  dear  Candide,  whence  is  it  that  you  have  a  wooden 
leg?"  Upon  this  Candide  began  and  gave  an  account  of 
his  adventures.  Our  philosophers  turned  together  towards 
the  Propontis,  and  enlivened  their  journey  by  discoursing 
on  physical  and  moral  evil,  free-will  and  predestination, 
monads  and  pre-established  harmony. 


CANDIDE.  I43 

CHAPTER  X. 

Candide  and  Pangloss  arrive  in  the  Propontis ;  what  they 
saw  there,  and  what  became  of  them. 

"  O  CANDIDE  !"  said  Pangloss,  "  why  were  you  tired  of  culti- 
vating your  garden  ?  Why  did  we  not  still  continue  to  eat 
citrons  and  pistachio-nuts  ?  Why  were  you  weary  of  your 
happiness  ?  Because  everything  is  necessary  in  the  best  of 
worlds,  there  was  a  necessity  that  you  should  undergo  the 
bastinado  in  the  presence  of  the  King  of  Persia ;  have  your 
leg  cut  off  in  order  to  make  Chusistan  happy  ;  to  experience 
the  ingratitude  of  men ;  and  draw  down  upon  the  heads  of 
some  atrocious  villains  the  punishment  which  they  had 
deserved."  With  such  talk  as  this  they  arrived  at  their  old 
habitation.  The  first  objects  that  presented  themselves 
were  Martin  and  Pacquette  in  the  habit  of  slaves.  "  Whence," 
said  Candide  to  them,  "  is  this  metamorphosis  ?  "  after  em- 
bracing them  tenderly.  "  Alas  !  "  answered  they,  sobbing, 
"  you  have  no  more  a  habitation  ;  another  has  undertaken 
the  labour  of  cultivating  your  garden ;  he  eats  your  pre- 
served citrons  and  pistachios,  and  we  are  treated  like 
negroes."  "  Who,"  says  Candide,  "  is  this  other  ?  "  "  The 
High  Admiral,"  answered  they  j  "  a  mortal  the  least  humane 
of  all  mortals.  The  Sultan,  willing  to  recompense  his 
services  without  putting  himself  to  any  expense,  has  con- 
fiscated all  your  goods,  under  pretext  that  you  had  gone  over 
to  his  enemies,  and  condemned  us  to  slavery.  Be  advised 
by  me,  Candide,"  added  Martin,  "  and  continue  your 
journey.  I  always  told  you  everything  is  for  the  worst ;  the 
sum  of  evil  exceeds  by  much  that  of  good.  Begone,  and 
I  do  not  despair  but  you  may  become  a  Manicheean,  if  you 
are  not  so  already."  Pangloss  would  have  begun  an  argu- 
ment in  form,  but  Candide  interrupted  him  to  ask  about  Miss 
Cunegund,  the  old  woman,  Brother  Giroflee,  and  Cacambo. 
"  Cacambo,"  answered  Martin,  •'*  is  here ;  he  is  at  present 


144  CANDIDE. 

employed  about  emptying  a  house  of  office.  The  old  woman 
is  dead,  from  a  kick  given  her  by  a  eunuch  in  the  breast. 
Brother  Giroflee  has  entered  among  the  janissaries.  Miss 
Cunegund  has  recovered  her  plumpness  and  former  beauty ; 
she  is  in  our  master's  seraglio."  "  What  a  chain  of  mis- 
fortunes," says  Candide.  "  Was  there  a  necessity  for  Miss 
Cunegund  to  become  handsome  only  to  make  me  miser- 
able ?  "  "  It  matters  little,"  says  Pangloss,  "  whether  Miss 
Cunegund  be  beautiful  or  ugly  in  your  house  or  that  of 
another  ;  that  is  nothing  to  the  general  system ;  for  my 
part,  I  wish  her  a  numerous  progeny.  Philosophers  do  not 
perplex  themselves  by  whom  women  have  children,  provided 
they  have.  them.  Population."  "  Alas  !  "  says  Martin, 
philosophers  ought  much  rather  to  employ  themselves  in 
rendering  a  few  individuals  happy,  than  in  engaging  them 
to  multiply  the  number  of  sufferers."  While  they  were  thus 
arguing  a  great  noise  was  heard  on  a  sudden  ;  it  was  the 
Admiral  diverting  himself  by  causing  a  dozen  slaves  to  be 
whipped.  Pangloss  and  Candide,  both  frightened,  with  tears 
in  their  eyes,  parted  from  their  friends,  and  in  all  haste  took 
the  road  towards  Constantinople. 

There  they  found  all  the  people  in  a  great  stir.  A  fire 
had  broken  out  in  the  suburb  of  Pera  ;  five  or  six  hundred 
houses  were  already  consumed,  and  two  or  three  thousand 
persons  perished  in  the  flames.  "  What  a  horrible  disaster !  " 
cried  Candide.  "  All  is  well,"  says  Pangloss.  "  These 
little  accidents  happen  every  year.  It  is  entirely  natural 
for  the  fire  to  catch  houses  built  of  wood,  and  for  those  who 
are  in  them  to  be  burnt.  Besides,  this  procures  some  re- 
sources to  honest  people  who  languish  in  misery."  "  What 
is  this  I  hear  ? "  says  an  officer  of  the  Sublime  Porte. 
"  How,  wretch,  darest  thou  say  that  all  is  well  when  half 
Constantinople  is  in  flames  !  Dog,  be  cursed  of  our  Pro- 
phet !  Receive  the  punishment  due  to  thy  impudence ! " 
And  as  he  uttered  these  words  he  took  Pangloss  by  the 


CANDIDE.  145 

middle  and  flung  him  headlong  into  the  flames.  Candida, 
half-dead  with  fright,  crept  on  all-fours  as  well  as  he  could 
to  a  neighbouring  quarter,  where  all  was  more  quiet ;  and  we 
shall  see  what  became  of  him  in  the  next  chapter. 


CHAPTER  XI. 

Candide  continues  his  Travels,  and  in  ivhat  quality. 

"  I  HAVE  nothing  left,"  said  our  philosopher,  "  but  to 
make  myself  either  a  slave  or  a  Turk.  Happiness  has  for- 
saken me  for  ever.  A  turban  would  corrupt  all  my  pleasures. 
I  shall  be  incapable  of  tasting  tranquillity  of  soul  in  a  religion 
full  of  imposture,  into  which  I  enter  merely  from  a  motive  of 
vile  interest.  No,  I  shall  never  be  content  if  I  cease  to  be 
an  honest  man.  Let  me  make  myself,  then,  a  slave." 
Candide  had  no  sooner  taken  this  •  resolution  than  he  set 
about  putting  it  into  execution.  He  chose  an  Armenian 
merchant  for  his  master,  who  was  a  man  of  a  very  good 
character,  and  passed  for  virtuous  as  much  as  an  Armenian 
can  be.  He  gave  Candide  two  hundred  sequins  as  the  price 
of  his  liberty.  The  Armenian  was  upon  the  point  of  depart- 
ing for  Norway.  He  took  Candide  with  him,  in  hopes 
that  a  philosopher  would  be  of  use  to  him  in  his  traffic. 
They  embarked,  and  the  wind  was  so  favourable  for  them 
that  they  were  not  above  half  the  usual  time  in  their  passage. 
They  even  had  no  occasion  for  buying  a  wind  from  the  Lap- 
land witches,  and  contented  themselves  with  giving  them 
some  stock-fish,  that  they  might  not  disturb  their  good  for- 
tune with  their  enchantments,  which  sometimes  happens,  if 
we  may  believe  Moreri's  Dictionary  on  this  head. 

The  Armenian  no  sooner  landed  than  he  provided  a  stock 
of  whale-blubber,  and  ordered  our  philosopher  to  go  over  all 
the  country  to  buy  him  some  dried  salt  fish.  He  acquitted 
himself  of  his  commission  in  the  best  manner  he  could,  re- 
turned with  several  reindeer  loaded  with  this  merchandize, 


146  C 'AND IDE. 

and  made  profound  reflections  on  the  astonishing  difference 
which  is  to  be  found  between  the  Laplanders  and  other 
men.  A  very  diminutive  female  Laplander,  whose  head 
was  a  little  bigger  than  her  body,  her  eyes  red  and  full*  of 
fire,  a  flat  nose,  and  mouth  as  wide  as  possible,  wished  him 
a  good  day  with  an  infinite  grace.  "  My  little  lord,"  says 
this  being  (a  foot  and  ten  inches  high)  to  him,  "  I  think 
you  very  handsome ;  do  me  the  favour  to  love  me  a  little." 
So  saying,  she  flew  to  him,  and  caught  him  round  the  neck. 
Candide  pushed  her  away  with  horror.  She  cries  out,  when 
in  comes  her  husband  with  several  other  Laplanders.  "  What 
is  the  meaning  of  all  this  uproar?"  say  they.  "It  is," 

answers  the  little  thing,  "  that  this  stranger Alas  !  I  am 

choked  with  grief;  he  despises  me."  "  So  then,"  says  the 
Lapland  husband,  "thou  unpolite,  dishonest,  brutal,  in- 
famous, cowardly  rascal,  thou  bringest  disgrace  upon  my 
house  ;  thou  dost  me  the  most  sensible  injury  ;  thou  refusest 
to  admire  my  wife."  "  Lo  !  here's  the  good  of  our  neigh- 
bour," cried  our  hero ;  "  what  would  you  have  said,  then,  if 
I  had  taken  your  place  ?"  "I  would  have  wished  thee  all 
sort  of  prosperity,"  says  the  Laplander  to  him  in  wrath,  "  but 
thou  only  deservest  my  indignation."  At  uttering  this,  he 
discharged  on  Candide's  back  a  volley  of  blows  with  a 
cudgel.  The  reindeer  were  seized  by  the  relations  of  the 
offended  husband;  and  Candide,  for  fear  of  worse,  was 
forced  to  betake  himself  to  flight,  and  renounce  for  ever  his 
good  master ;  for  how  dared  he  present  himself  before  him 
without  money,  whale-blubber,  or  reindeer? 

CHAPTER  XII. 

Candide  still  continues  his  Travels. — New  Adventures. 
CANDIDE  travelled  a  long  time  without  knowing  whither  he 
was  going ;  at  length  he  resolved  to  go  to  Denmark,  where 
he  had  heard  that  everything  went  pretty  well.     He  had  a 


C AND  IDE. 


147 


few  pieces  of  money  about  him,  which  the  Armenian  had 
made  him  a  present  of;  and  this  sum,  though  inconsiderable, 
he  hoped  would  carry  him  to  the  end  of  his  journey.  Hope 
rendered  his  misery  supportable  to  him,  and  he  still  passed 
some  happy  moments.  He  found  himself  one  day  in  an 
inn  with  three  travellers,  who  talked  to  him  with  great 
warmth  about  a  plenum  and  the  materia  subtilis.  "  Mighty 
well,"  says  Candide  to  himself ;  "  these  are  philosophers. 
Gentlemen,"  says  he  to  them,  "  a  plenum  is  incontestable ; 
there  is  no  vacuum  in  nature,  and  the  materia  subtilis  is  a 
well-imagined  hypothesis."  "You  are  then  a  Cartesian?" 
say  the  three  travellers.  "  Yes,"  answers  Candide,  "  and 
a  Leibnitzian,  which  is  more."  "  So  much  the  worse  for 
you,"  replied  the  philosophers.  "  Descartes  and  Leibnitz 
had  not  common  sense.  We  are  Newtonians,  and  we  glory 
in  it ;  if  we  dispute,  it  is  only  the  better  to  confirm  ourselves 
in  our  opinions,  and  we  all  think  the  same.  We  search  for 
truth  in  Newton's  track,  because  we  are  persuaded  that  Newton 
is  a  great  man."  "And  Descartes  too,  and  Leibnitz  and  Pan- 
gloss  likewise,"  says  Candide.  "  These  great  men  are  worth  a 
thousand  of  yours."  "  You  are  a  fool,  friend,"  answered 
the  philosophers.  "Do  you  know  the  laws  of  refraction, 
attraction,  and  motion?  Have  you  read  the  truths  which 
Dr.  Clarke  has  published,  in  answer  to  the  reveries  of  your 
Leibnitz  ?  Do  you  know  what  centrifugal  and  centripetal 
force  is  ?  and  that  colours  depend  on  their  density  ?  Have 
you  any  notion  of  the  theory  of  light  and  gravitation  ?  Do 
you  know  the  period  of  twenty-five  thousand  nine  hundred 
and  twenty  years,  which  unluckily  do  not  agree  with  chro- 
nology ?  No ;  undoubtedly  you  have  but  false  ideas  of  all 
these  things.  Peace,  then,  thou  contemptible  monad,  and 
beware  how  you  insult  giants  by  comparing  them  to 
pigmies."  "Gentlemen,"  answered  Candide,  "were  Pan- 
gloss  here,  he  would  tell  you  very  fine  things,  for  he  is  a 
great  philosopher.  He  has  a  sovereign  contempt  for  your 


148  CANDIDE. 

Newton  ;  and,  as  I  am  his  disciple,  I  likewise  make  no 
great  account  of  him."  The  philosophers,  enraged  beyond 
measure,  fell  upon  poor  Candide,  and  drubbed  him  most 
philosophically. 

Their  wrath  subsiding,  they  asked  our  hero's  pardon  for 
their  too  great  warmth.  Upon  this,  one  of  them  began  a 
very  fine  harangue  on  milduess  and  moderation. 

While  they  were  talking,  they  saw  a  grand  burial  pass  by. 
Our  philosophers  from  thence  took  occasion  to  descant  on 
the  foolish  vanity  of  man.  "  Would  it  not  be  more  reason- 
able," says  one  of  them,  "  that  the  relations  and  friends  of 
the  deceased  should,  without  pomp  and  noise,  carry  the  bier 
themselves  ?  Would  not  this  funereal  act,  by  presenting  to 
them  the  idea  of  death,  produce  an  effect  the  most  salutary, 
the  most  philosophical  ?  This  reflection  which  would  offer 
itself,  namely,  the  body  I  carry  is  that  of  my  friend,  my  rela- 
tion ;  he  is  no  more ;  and,  like  him,  I  must  cease  to  be  in  this 
world.  Would  not  this,  I  say,  be  a  means  of  lessening  the 
number  of  crimes  in  this  vile  world,  and  of  bringing  back 
to  virtue  beings  who  believe  the  immortality  of  the  soul  ? 
Men  are  too  much  inclined  to  remove  from  them  the 
thoughts  of  death  for  fear  of  presenting  too  strong  images 
of  it.  Whence  is  it  that  people  keep  at  a  distance  from  such 
a  spectacle  as  a  mother  and  a  wife  in  tears  ?  The  plaintive 
accents  of  nature,  the  piercing  cries  of  despair,  would  do 
much  greater  honour  to  the  ashes  of  the  dead  than  all  these 
individuals  clad  in  black  from  head  to  foot,  together  with 
useless  female  mourners,  and  that  crowd  of  ministers  who 
sing  in  a  gay  air  funeral  orations  which  the  deceased  do  not 
hear." 

"  This  is  extremely  well  spoken,"  says  Candide,  "  and  did 
you  always  speak  thus  well,  without  thinking  proper  to 
thrash  people,  you  would  be  a  great  philosopher." 

Our  travellers  parted  with  expressions  of  mutual  confi- 
dence and  friendship.  Candide  still  continued  travelling 


CANDIDE. 


149 


towards  Denmark.  He  plunged  into  the  woods,  where, 
musing  deeply  on  all  the  misfortunes  which  had  happened 
to  him  in  the  best  of  worlds,  he  turned  aside  from  the  road 
and  lost  himself.  The  day  began  to  draw  towards  the 
evening,  when  he  perceived  his  mistake.  He  was  seized 
with  dismay,  and  raising  in  a  melancholy  manner  his  eyes  to 
heaven,  and  leaning  against  the  trunk  of  a  tree,  our  hero 
spoke  in  the  following  terms  : — "  I  have  gone  over  half  the 
world,  seen  fraud  and  calumny  triumphant,  have  only  sought 
to  do  service  to  mankind,  and  I  have  been  persecuted.  A 
great  king  honours  me  with  his  favour  and  fifty  blows  of  a 
bull's  pizzle.  I  arrive  with  a  wooden  leg  in  a  very  fine 
province  ;  there  I  taste  pleasures  after  having  drank  deep  of 
mortifications.  An  abbe  comes ;  I  protect  him  ;  he  insinuates 
himself  at  Court  through  my  means,  and  I  am  obliged  to  kiss 
his  feet.  I  meet  with  my  poor  Pangloss  only  to  see  him 
burnt.  I  find  myself  in  company  with  philosophers,  the 
mildest  and  most  sociable  of  all  the  species  of  animals  that 
are  spread  over  the  face  of  the  earth,  and  they  give  me  an 
unmerciful  drubbing.  All  must  necessarily  be  for  the  best, 
since  Pangloss  has  said  it ;  but  nevertheless  I  am  the  most 
wretched  of  all  possible  beings."  Here  Candide  stopped 
short  to  listen  to  the  cries  of  distress,  which  seemed  to  come 
from  a  place  near  him.  He  stepped  forward  out  of  curiosity, 
when  he  beheld  a  young  woman,  who  was  tearing  her  hair 
with  all  the  signs  of  the  greatest  despair.  "  Whoever  you 
are,"  says  she  to  him,  "  if  you  have  a  heart,  follow  me."  He 
went  with  her,  but  they  had  not  gone  many  paces  before 
Candide  perceived  a  man  and  a  woman  stretched  out  on 
the  grass.  Their  faces  declared  the  nobleness  of  their  souls 
and  origin.  Their  features,  though  distorted  by  pain,  had 
something  so  interesting  that  Candide  could  not  forbear 
bemoaning  them,  and  informing  himself  with  a  lively  eager- 
ness about  the  cause  which  reduced  them  to  so  miserable  a 
situation.  "  It  is  my  father  and  mother  whom  you  see," 


150  C AND  IDE, 

says  the  young  woman.  "  Yes,  these  are  the  authors  of  my 
wretched  being,"  continued  she,  throwing  herself  into  their 
arms.  "  They  fled  to  avoid  the  rigour  of  an  unjust  sentence. 
I  accompanied  them  in  their  flight,  happy  to  share  in  their 
misfortune,  from  a  thought  that  in  the  deserts  where  we  were 
going  to  hide  ourselves  my  feeble  hands  might  procure  them 
a  necessary  subsistence.  We  have  stopped  here  to  take  some 
rest.  I  discovered  that  tree  which  you  see,  whose  fruit  has 
deceived  me.  Alas  !  sir,  I  am  a  wretch  to  be  detested  by 
the  world  and  myself.  Arm  your  hand  to  avenge  offended 
virtue,  and  to  punish  the  parricide.  I  took  this  fruit ;  I 
presented  it  to  my  father  and  mother ;  they  ate  of  it  with 
pleasure  ;  I  rejoiced  to  have  found  the  means  of  quenching 
the  thirst  with  which  they  were  tormented.  Unhappy  wretch ! 
it  was  death  I  presented  to  them.  This  fruit  is  poison." 

This  tale  made  Candide  shudder ;  his  hair  stood  on  end, 
and  a  cold  sweat  ran  over  all  his  body.  He  was  eager, 
as  much  as  his  present  condition  could  permit,  to  give 
some  relief  to  this  unfortunate  family ;  but  the  poison  had 
already  made  too  much  progress,  and  the  most  efficacious 
remedies  would  not  have  been  able  to  stop  its  fatal  effect. 

"  Dear  child,  our  only  hope !  "  cried  the  two  unhappy 
parents  ;  "  God  pardon  thee  as  we  pardon  thee;  it  was  the 
excess  of  thy  tenderness  which  has  robbed  us  of  our  lives. 
Generous  stranger,  vouchsafe  to  take  care  of  her;  her  heart 
is  noble  and  formed  to  virtue  ;  she  is  a  deposit  which  we 
leave  in  your  hands,  that  is  infinitely  more  precious  to  us 
than  our  past  fortune.  Dear  Zenoida,  receive  our  last 
embraces :  mingle  thy  tears  with  ours.  Heavens !  how 
happy  are  these  moments  to  us  !  Thou  hast  opened  to  us 
the  dreary  cave  in  which  we  languished  for  forty  years  past. 
Tender  Zenoida,  we  bless  thee  ;  mayest  thou  never  forget 
the  lessons  which  our  prudence  hath  dictated  to  thee  ;  and 
may  they  preserve  thee  from  the  abyss  which  we  see  ready 
to  swallow  thee." 


CANDIDE.  I5I 

They  expired  as  they  pronounced  these  words.  Candide 
had  great  difficulty  in  bringing  Zenoida  to  herself.  The 
moon  enlightened  the  affecting  scene  :  the  day  appeared, 
and  Zenoida,  plunged  in  sad  affliction,  had  not  as  yet  re- 
covered the  use  of  her  senses.  As  soon  as  she  opened  her 
eyes,  she  entreated  Candide  to  dig  a  hole  in  the  ground  in 
order  to  inter  the  bodies ;  she  assisted  in  the  work  with  an 
astonishing  courage.  This  duty  fulfilled,  she  gave  free 
scope  to  her  tears.  Our  philosopher  drew  her  from  this 
fatal  place  :  they  travelled  a  long  time  without  observing 
any  certain  route.  At  length  they  perceived  a  little 
cottage.  Two  persons  in  the  decline  of  life  dwelt  in  this 
desert,  who  were  always  ready  to  give  every  assistance 
in  their  power  to  fellow-creatures  in  distress.  These  old 
people  were  such  as  Philemon  and  Baucis  are  described 
to  us.  For  fifty  years  they  had  tasted  the  soft  endearments 
of  marriage,  without  ever  experiencing  its  bitterness  ;  an 
unimpaired  health,  the  fruit  of  temperance  and  tranquillity 
of  mind,  mild  and  simple  manners ;  a  fund  of  inexhaustible 
candour  in  their  character  •  all  the  virtues  which  man  owes 
to  himself,  formed  the  glorious  and  only  fortune  which 
heaven  had  granted  them.  They  were  held  in  veneration 
in  the  neighbouring  villages,  the  inhabitants  of  which,  full 
of  happy  rusticity,  might  have  passed  for  honest  people, 
had  they  been  Catholics.  They  looked  upon  it  as  a 
duty  not  to  suffer  Agaton  and  Suname  (for  so  the  old 
couple  were  called)  to  want  for  anything.  Their  charity 
extended  to  the  new-comers.  l(  Alas  !  "  said  Candide,  "  it 
is  a  great  loss,  my  dear  Pangloss,  that  you  were  burnt.  You 
were  master  of  sound  reason ;  but  yet  in  all  the  parts  of 
Europe  and  Asia,  which  I  have  travelled  over  in  your 
company,  everything  is  not  for  the  best :  it  is  only  in 
El  Dorado,  whither  no  one  can  go,  and  in  a  little  cottage 
situated  in  the  coldest,  most  barren,  and  frightful  region  in 
the  world.  What  pleasure  should  I  have  to  hear  you 


152  CANDIDE. 

harangue  about  the  pre-established  harmony  and  monads  !  " 
I  should  be  very  willing  to  pass  my  days  among  these 
honest  Lutherans  ;  but  I  must  renounce  going  to  mass,  and 
resolve  to  be  torn  to  pieces  in  the  Journal  chretien. 

Candide  was  very  inquisitive  to  learn  the  adventures  of 
Zenoida,  but  complaisance  withheld  him  from  speaking  to 
her  about  it.  She  perceived  the  respectful  constraint  he 
put  upon  himself,  and  satisfied  his  impatience  in  the  follow- 
ing terms. 

CHAPTER  XIII. 

The  history  of  Zenoida.     How  Candide  fell  in  love  with 
her,  and  what  followed. 

"  I  AM  come  of  one  of  the  most  ancient  families  in  Denmark. 
One  of  my  ancestors  perished  at  that  horrid  feast  which  the 
wicked  Christiern  prepared  for  the  destruction  of  so  many 
senators.  The  riches  and  dignity  with  which  our  family  has 
been  distinguished  have  hitherto  served  only  to  make  them 
more  eminently  unfortunate,  My  father  had  the  presumption 
to  displease  a  great  man  in  power  by  boldly  telling  him  the 
truth.  He  was  presently  accused  by  suborned  witnesses  of 
a  number  of  crimes  which  had  no  foundation.  His  judges 
were  deceived.  Alas  !  where  is  that  judge  who  can  always 
discover  those  snares  which  envy  and  treachery  lay  for  un- 
guarded innocence  ?  My  father  was  sentenced  to  be  be- 
headed. He  had  no  way  left  to  avoid  his  fate  but  by  flight. 
Accordingly,  he  withdrew  to  the  house  of  an  old  friend, 
whom  he  thought  deserving  of  that  truly  noble  appellation. 
We  remained  some  time  concealed  in  a  castle  belonging  to 
him  on  the  seaside,  and  we  might  have  continued  there  to 
this  day  had  not  the  base  wretch  with  whom  we  had  taken 
refuge  attempted  to  repay  himself  for  the  service  he  did  us 
in  a  manner  that  gave  us  all  reason  to  detest  him.  This 
infamous  monster  had  conceived  a  most  unnatural  passion 
towards  my  mother  and  myself  at  the  same  time.  He 


CANDID  E.  153 

attempted  our  ruin  by  methods  most  umvorthy  of  a  man  of 
honour ;  and  we  were  obliged  to  expose  ourselves  to  the 
most  dreadful  dangers  to  avoid  the  effects  of  his  brutal 
passion.  In  a  word,  we  took  to  flight  a  second  time,  and 
you  know  the  rest." 

In  finishing  this  short  narrative,  Zenoida  burst  into  tears 
afresh.  Candide  wiped  them  from  her  eyes,  and  said  to  her,  by 
way  of  consolation,  "  Madam,  everything  is  for  the  best.  If 
your  father  had  not  died  by  poison  he  would  infallibly  have 
been  discovered,  and  then  his  head  would  have  been  cut  off. 
The  good  lady  your  mother  would,  in  all  probability,  have 
died  of  grief,  and  we  should  not  have  been  in  this  poor  hut, 
where  everything  is  as  well  as  in  the  finest  of  possible  castles." 
"  Alas,  sir,"  replied  Zenoida,  "  my  father  never  told  me  that 
everything  was  for  the  best,  but  he  has  often  said,  '  We  are 
all  children  of  the  same  Divine  Father,  who  loves  us,  but 
who  has  not  exempted  us  from  the  most  callous  sorrows, 
the  most  grievous  maladies,  and  an  innumerable  tribe  of 
miseries  that  afflict  the  human  race.  Poison  grows  by  the 
side  of  the  salutiferous  quinquina  in  America.  The  happiest 
of  all  mortals  has  some  time  or  other  shed  tears.  What  we 
call  life  is  a  compound  of  pleasure  and  pain.  It  is  the  pass- 
ing away  of  a  certain  stated  portion  of  time  that  always 
appears  too  long  in  the  sight  of  the  wise  man,  and  which 
every  one  ought  to  employ  in  doing  good  to  the  community 
in  which  he  is  placed ;  in  the  enjoyment  of  the  works  of 
Providence,  without  idly  seeking  after  hidden  causes  ;  in 
squaring  his  conduct  by  the  rules  of  conscience  ;  and,  above 
all,  in  showing  a  due  respect  to  religion.  Happy  is  he  who 
can  follow  this  unerringly  !  ' 

"These  things  my  ever-respected  father  has  frequently 
inculcated  to  me.  '  Ill-betide  those  wretched  scribblers,' 
he  would  say,  '  who  attempt  to  pry  into  the  hidden  ways  of 
Providence.'  From  the  principle,  that  God  will  be  honoured 
from  thousands  of  atoms,  mankind  have  blended  the  most 


154 


CANDIDE. 


absurd  chimeras  with  respectable  truths.  The  Turkish 
dervish,  the  Persian  brahmin,  the  Chinese  bonza,  and  the 
Indian  talapoin,  all  worship  the  Deity  in  a  different  manner ; 
but  they  enjoy  a  tranquillity  of  soul  amidst  the  darkness  in 
which  they  are  plunged ;  and  he  who  would  endeavour  to 
enlighten  them  does  them  but  ill  service.  It  is  not  loving 
mankind  to  tear  the  bandage  of  prejudice  from  their  eyes." 

"  Why,  you  talk  like  a  philosopher,"  said  Candide :  "  may 
I  ask  you,  my  pretty  young  lady,  of  what  religion  you  are  ?  " 
"  I  was  brought  up  in  the  Lutheran  profession,"  answered 
Zenoida.  "  Every  word  you  have  spoken,"  said  Candide, 
"  has  been  like  a  ray  of  light  that  has  penetrated  to  my  heart, 

and  I  find  a  sort  of  esteem  and  admiration  for  you,  that 

But  how,  in  the  name  of  wonder,  came  so  bright  an  under- 
standing to  be  lodged  in  so  beautiful  a  form  ?  Upon  my 
word,  Miss,  I  esteem  and  admire  you,  as  I  said  before,  so 

much  that "  Candide  stammered  out  a  few  words  more, 

when  Zenoida,  perceiving  his  confusion,  quitted  him,  and 
from  that  moment  carefully  avoided  all  occasions  of  being 
alone  with  him  :  and  Candide,  on  his  part,  sought  every 
opportunity  of  being  alone  with  her,  or  else  being  by  him- 
self. He  was  buried  in  a  melancholy  that  to  him  had 
charms,  he  was  deeply  enamoured  of  Zenoida;  but  en- 
deavoured to  conceal  his  passion  from  himself:  his  looks, 
however,  too  plainly  evinced  the  feelings  of  his  heart. 
"  Alas  ! ''  would  he  often  say  to  himself,  "  if  Master  Pangloss 
was  here  he  would  give  me  good  advice  ;  for  he  was  a 
great  philosopher." 


CANDIDE.  I55 

CHAPTER   XIV. 

Continuation  of  the  Loves  of  Candida. 

THE  only  consolation  that  Candida  felt  was  in  conversing 
with  Zenoida  in  the  presence  of  their  hosts. 

"  How  happens  it,"  said  he  to  her  one  day,  "  that  the 
monarch  to  whom  you  have  access  has  suffered  such  injus- 
tice to  be  done  to  your  family  ?  Assuredly  you  have  suffi- 
cient reason  to  hate  him  ?  " 

"  How ! "  said  Zenoida,  "  who  can  hate  the  king  ?  who 
can  do  otherwise  than  love  that  person  to  whose  hand  is 
consigned  the  keen-edged  sword  of  the  laws  ?  Kings  are 
the  living  images  of  the  Deity,  and  we  ought  never  to 
arraign  their  conduct ;  obedience  and  respect  is  the  duty  of 
a  subject." 

"I  admire  you  more  and  more, "said  Candide;  "indeed, 
madam,  I  do.  Pray  do  you  know  the  great  Leibnitz,  and 
the  great  Pangloss,  who  was  burnt,  after  having  escaped  a 
hanging  bout  ?  Are  you  acquainted  with  the  monads,  the 
materia  subtilis,  and  the  vortices  ?  " 

"No,  sir,"  replied  Zenoida;  "  I  never  heard  my  father 
mention  any  of  these ;  he  only  gave  me  a  slight  tincture 
of  experimental  philosophy,  and  taught  me  to  hold  in 
contempt  all  those  kinds  of  philosophy  that  do  not 
directly  tend  to  make  mankind  happy ;  that  give  him  false 
notions  of  his  duty  to  himself  and  his  neighbour ;  that 
do  not  teach  him  to  regulate  his  conduct,  and  fill  his 
mind  only  with  uncouth  terms  or  ill-founded  conjectures  ; 
that  do  not  give  him  a  clearer  idea  of  the  Author  of  Nature 
than  what  he  may  acquire  from  his  works,  and  the  wonders 
that  are  every  day  passing  before  our  sight." 

"  Once  again,  Miss,  you  enchant  me ;  you  ravish  me  ;  you 
are  an  angel  that  heaven  has  sent  to  remove  from  before  my 


156  C AND  WE. 

eyes  the  mist  of  Master  Pangloss's  sophistical  arguments. 
Poor  wretch  that  I  was !  After  having  been  so  heartily 
kicked,  flogged,  and  bastinadoed ;  after  having  been  in  an 
earthquake ;  having  seen  Doctor  Pangloss  once  hanged,  and 
very  lately  burnt ;  after  having  been  ravished  by  a  villainous 
Persian,  who  put  me  to  the  most  excruciating  torture  ;  after 
having  been  robbed  by  a  decree  of  the  divan,  and  soundly 
drubbed  by  the  philosophers  ;  after  all  these  things,  I  say,  to 
think  that  everything  was  for  the  best !  But  now,  thank 
heaven,  I  am  disabused.  But,  truly  speaking,  nature  never 
appeared  half  so  charming  to  me  as  since  I  have  been 
blessed  with  the  sight  of  you.  The  melody  of  the  rural 
choristers  charms  my  ears  with  a  harmony  to  which  they 
were  till  now  utter  strangers  ;  I  breathe  a  new  soul,  and  the 
glow  of  sentiment  that  enchants  me  seems  imprinted  on 
every  object ;  I  do  not  feel  that  effeminate  languor  which  I 
did  in  the  gardens  of  Sus;  the  sensation  with  which  you 
inspire  me  is  wholly  different." 

"  Let  us  stop  here,"  said  Zenoida ;  "  you  seem  to  be 
running  to  lengths  that  may  perhaps  offend  my  delicacy, 
which  you  ought  to  respect." 

"  I  will  be  silent  then,"  said  Candide  ;  "  but  my  passion 
will  only  burn  with  the  more  force."  On  saying  these 
words  he  looked  stedfastly  at  Zenoida ;  he  perceived  her  to 
blush,  and,  as  a  man  who  was  taught  by  experience,  con- 
ceived the  most  flattering  hopes  from  those  appearances. 

The  beautiful  Dane  continued  a  long  time  to  shun  the 
pursuits  of  Candide.  One  day,  as  he  was  walking  hastily 
to  and  fro  in  the  garden,  he  cried  out  in  an  amorous 
ecstasy,  "  Ah  !  why  have  I  not  now  my  El  Dorado  sheep  ? 
Why  have  I  it  not  in  my  power  to  purchase  a  small  kingdom  ? 
Ah  !  were  I  but  a  king " 

"  What  should  I  be  to  you  ?  "  said  a  voice  which  pierced 
the  heart  of  our  philosopher. 


C AND  IDE.  157 

u  Is  it  you,  lovely  Zenoida  ?  "  cried  he,  falling  on  his 
knees.  "  I  thought  myself  alone.  The  few  words  I  heard  you 
just  now  utter  seem  to  promise  me  the  felicity  to  which  my 
soul  aspires.  I  shall,  in  all  probability,  nev.er  be  a  king,  nor 

ever  possessed  of  a  fortune  ;  but  if  you  love  me Do 

not  turn  from  me  those  lovely  eyes,  but  suffer  me  to  read 
in  them  a  declaration  which  is  alone  capable  of  confirming 
my  happiness.  Beauteous  Zenoida,  I  adore  you ;  let  your 
heart  be  open  to  compassion.  What  do  I  see  ?  You  weep  ! 
Ah  !  my  happiness  is  too  great." 

"Yes,  you  are  happy,"  said  Zenoida;  "nothing  can 
oblige  me  to  disguise  my  tenderness  for  a  person  I  think 
deserving  of  it.  Hitherto  you  have  been  attached  to  my 
destiny  only  by  the  bands  of  humanity  ;  it  is  now  time  to 
strengthen  those  by  ties  more  sacred.  I  have  consulted 
my  heart,  reflect  maturely  in  your  turn ;  but  remember, 
that  if  you  marry  me,  you  become  obliged  to  be  my  pro- 
tector :  to  share  with  me  those  misfortunes  that  fate  may 
yet  have  in  store  for  me,  and  to  soothe  my  sorrows." 

"  Marry  you  ! "  said  Candide  :  "  those  words  have  shown 
me  all  the  folly  of  my  conduct.  Alas  !  dear  idol  of  my  soul, 
I  am  not  deserving  of  the  goodness  you  show  towards  me. 
Cunegund  is  still  living." 

"  Cunegund  !    Who  is  that  ?  " 

"  She  is  my  wife,"  answered  Candide  with  his  usual  frank- 
ness. 

But  I  will  forbear  to  relate  the  whole  of  the  interesting  con- 
versation, and  content  myself  with  saying  that  the  eloquence 
of  Candide,  heightened  by  the  warmth  of  amorous  expres- 
sion, had  all  the  effect  that  may  be  imagined  on  a  young 
sensible  female  philosopher. 

The  lovers,  who  till  then  had  passed  their  days  in  tedious 
melancholy,  now  counted  every  hour  by  a  fresh  succession 
of  amorous  joys.  Pleasure  flowed  through  their  veins  in  an 


158  CANDIDE. 

uninterrupted  current.  The  gloomy  woods,  the  barren 
mountains,  surrounded  by  horrid  precipices  ;  the  icy  plains 
and  dreary  fields,  covered  with  snow  on  all  sides,  were  so 
many  continual  mementos  to  them  of  the  necessity  of 
loving.  They  determined  never  to  quit  that  dreadful 
solitude,  but  fate  was  not  yet  weary  of  persecuting  them, 
as  we  shall  see  in  the  ensuing  chapter. 


CHAPTER  XV. 

The  Arrival  of  Wolhall, — A  Joiirney  to  Copenhagen. 

CANDIDE  and  Zenoida  amused  themselves  with  discoursing 
on  the  words  of  the  Deity,  the  worship  which  mankind 
ought  to  pay  Him,  the  mutual  duties  they  owe  to  each  other, 
especially  that  of  charity,  the  most  useful  of  all  virtues. 
They  did  not  confine  themselves  to  frivolous  declamations. 
Candide  taught  the  young  men  the  respect  due  to  the  sacred 
curb  of  the  laws ;  Zenoida  instructed  the  young  women  in 
the  duties  they  owed  their  parents;  both  joined  their  endea- 
vours to  sow  the  hopeful  seeds  of  religion  in  their  young 
hearts.  One  day,  as  they  were  busied  in  those  pious  offices, 
Sunama  came  to  tell  Zenoida  that  an  old  gentleman  with 
several  servants  was  just  alighted  at  their  house ;  and  that, 
by  the  description  he  had  given  her  of  a  person  of  whom  he 
was  in  search,  she  was  certain  it  could  be  no  other  than 
Zenoida  herself.  This  stranger  had  followed  Sunama  close 
at  her  heels,  and  entered,  before  she  had  done  speaking, 
into  the  room  where  were  Candide  and  Zenoida. 

At  sight  of  him  Zenoida  instantly  fainted  away;  but 
Wolhall,  not  in  the  least  affected  with  the  situation  he  saw 
her  in,  took  hold  of  her  hand,  and  pulling  her  to  him  with 
violence,  brought  her  to  her  senses;  which  she  had  no 
sooner  recovered  than  she  burst  into  a  flood  of  tears. 


CANDIDE.  159 

"  So,  niece,"  said  he,  with  a  sarcastic  smile,  "  I  find  you 
in  very  good  company.  I  do  not  wonder  you  prefer  this 
habitation  to  the  capital,  to  my  house,  and  the  company 
of  your  family."  "  Yes,  sir,"  replied  Zenoida,  "  I  do  prefer  • 
this  place,  where  dwell  simplicity  and  truth,  to  the  mansions 
of  treason  and  imposture.  I  can  never  behold  but  with 
horror  that  place  where  first  began  my  misfortunes  ;  where  I 
have  had  so  many  proofs  of  your  black  actions,  and  where 
I  have  no  other  relations  but  yourself."  "  Come,  madam," 
said  Wolhall,  "  follow  me,  if  you  please  ;-for  you  must  along, 
even  if  you  should  faint  again."  Saying  this,  he  dragged 
her  to  the  door  of  the  house,  and  made  her  get  into  a  post- 
chaise  which  was  waiting  for  him.  She  had  only  time  to  tell 
Candide  to  follow,  and  to  bestow  her  blessing  on  her  hosts, 
with  promises  of  rewarding  them  amply  for  their  generous 
cares. 

A  domestic  of  Wolhall  was  moved  with  pity  at  the  grief 
in  which  he  saw  Candide  plunged ;  he  imagined  that  he  felt 
no  other  concern  for  the  fair  Dane  than  what  unfortunate 
virtue  inspires.  He  proposed  to  him  taking  a  journey  to 
Copenhagen,  and  he  facilitated  the  means  for  his  doing 
it.  He  did  more ;  he  insinuated  to  him  that  he  might  be 
admitted  as  one  of  Wolhall's  domestics,  if  he  had  no  other 
resources  than  going  to  service.  Candide  liked  his  pro- 
posal ;  and  no  sooner  arrived  than  his  future  fellow- servant 
presented  him  as  one  of  his  relations,  for  whom  he  would 
be  answerable.  "  Rascal,"  says  Wolhall  to  him,  "  I  consent 
to  grant  you  the  honour  of  approaching  a  person  of  such 
rank  as  I  am  ;  never  forget  the  profound  respect  which  you 
owe  to  my  commands ;  prevent  them  if  you  have  sufficient 
sagacity  for  it ;  think  that  a  man  like  me  degrades  himself 
in  speaking  to  a  wretch  such  as  you."  Our  philosopher 
answered  with  great  humility  to  this  impertinent  discourse, 
and  from  that  day  he  was  clad  in  his  master's  livery. 

It  is  easy  to  imagine  the  joy  and  surprise  that  Zenoida  felt 


i6o  CANDIDE. 

when  she  recollected  her  lover  among  her  uncle's  servants. 
She  threw  several  opportunities  in  the  way  of  Candide,  who 
knew  how  to  profit  by  them.  They  swore  eternal  constancy. 
Zenoida  had  some  unhappy  moments ;  she  sometimes 
reproached  herself  on  account  of  her  love  for  Candide  ;  she 
vexed  him  sometimes  by  a  few  caprices ;  but  Candide  idolized 
her ;  he  knew  that  perfection  is  not  the  portion  of  man,  and 
still  less  so  of  woman.  Zenoida  resumed  her  good  humour. 
The  kind  of  constraint  under  which  they  lay  rendered  their 
pleasures  more  lively.  They  were  still  happy. 


CHAPTER  XVI. 

How  Candide  found  his  Wife  again,  and  lost  his  Mistress. 

OUR  hero  had  only  to  bear  with  the  haughty  humours  of  his 
master,  and  that  was  purchasing  his  mistress's  favours  at  no 
dear  rate.  Happy  love  is  not  so  easily  concealed  as  many 
imagine.  Our  lovers  betrayed  themselves.  Their  connection 
was  no  longer  a  mystery  but  to  the  short-sighted  eyes  of 
Wolhall.  All  the  domestics  knew  it.  Candide  received 
congratulations  on  that  head  which  made  him  tremble.  He 
expected  the  storm  ready  to  burst  upon  his  head,  and  did 
not  doubt  but  a  person  who  had  been  dear  to  him  was  upon 
the  point  of  accelerating  his  misfortune.  He  had  for  some 
days  before  perceived  a  face  resembling  Miss  Cunegund ; 
he  again  saw  the  same  face  in  Wolhall's  courtyard.  The 
object  which  struck  him  was  very  poorly  clothed,  and  there 
was  no  likelihood  that  a  favourite  of  a  great  Mahometan 
should  be  found  in  the  courtyard  of  a  house  at  Copenhagen. 
This  disagreeable  object,  however,  looked  at  Candide  very 
attentively.  When  coming  up  to  him,  and  seizing  him  by 
the  hair,  she  gave  him  the  smartest  blow  on  the  face  with  her 
open  hand  that  he  had  received  for  some  time.  "  I  am  not 
deceived,"  cried  our  philosopher.  "  Oh,  heavens  !  who  would 


CANDID  E.  161 

have  thought  it  ?  What  do  you  do  here  after  having  suffered 
yourself  to  be  adopted  by  a  follower  of  Mahomet.  Go,  per- 
fidious spouse,  I  know  you  not."  "  Thou  shalt  know  me," 
replied  Cunegund,  "  by  ray  outrageous  fury.  I  know  the  life 
thou  leadest,  thy  love  for  thy  master's  niece,  and  thy  con- 
tempt for  me.  Alas  !  it  is  now  three  months  since  I  quitted 
the  seraglio,  because  I  was  there  good  for  nothing  further. 
A  merchant  has  bought  me  to  mend  his  linen ;  he  takes  me 
along  with  him  when  he  makes  a  voyage  to  this  country ; 
Martin,  Cacambo,  and  Pacquette,  whom  he  has  also  bought, 
are  with  me  ;  Doctor  Pangloss,  through  the  greatest  chance 
in  the  world,  was  in  the  same  vessel  as  a  passenger ;  we  were 
shipwrecked  some  miles  from  hence  ;  I  escaped  the  danger 
with  the  faithful  Cacambo,  who,  I  swear  to  thee,  has  a  skin 
as  firm  as  thy  own.  I  behold  thee  again,  and  find  thee 
false.  Tremble,  then,  and  fear  everything  from  a  provoked 
wife." 

Candide  was  quite  stupefied  at  this  affecting  scene  ;  he  had 
suffered  Cunegund  to  depart  without  thinking  of  the  proper 
measures  which  are  always  to  be  kept  with  those  who  know 
our  secrets,  when  Cacambo  presented  himself  to  his  sight. 
They  embraced  each  other  with  tenderness.  Candide 
informed  him  of  the  conversation  he  had  just  had ;  he  was 
very  much  afflicted  for  the  loss  of  the  great  Pangloss,  who, 
after  having  been  hanged  and  burnt,  was  at  last  unhapoily 
drowned.  They  spoke  with  that  free  effusion  of  heart  which 
friendship  inspires.  A  little  billet  thrown  in  at  the  window 
by  Zenoida  put  an  end  to  the  conversation.  Candide 
opened  it,  and  found  in  it  these  words  : — 

"  Fly,  my  dear  lover  !  All  is  discovered.  An  innocent  in- 
clination, which  Nature  authorizes,  and  which  hurts  no  one,  is 
a  crime  in  the  eyes  of  credulous  and  cruel  men.  Wolhall  has 
just  left  my  chamber,  and  has  treated  me  with  the  utmost, 
inhumanity.  He  is  gone  to  obtain  an  order  for  thee  to  be. 
clapped  into  a  dungeon,  there  to  perish,  Fly,  my  ever  dear 


1 62  C AND  IDE. 

lover  !  Preserve  a  life  which  them  canst  not  pass  any  longer 
near  me.  Those  happy  moments  are  no  more  in  which  we 
gave  proofs  of  our  reciprocal  tenderness.  Ah  !  sad  Zenoida, 
how  hast  thou  offended  Heaven  to  merit  so  rigorous  a 
fate?  But  I  wander  from  the  purpose.  Remember  always 
thy  precious,  dear  Zenoida,  and  thou,  my  dear  lover,  shalt 
live  eternally  within  my  heart.  Thou  hast  never  thoroughly 
understood  how  much  I  loved  thee.  Canst  thou  receive 
upon  my  lips  my  last  adieu  ?  I  find  myself  ready  to  join 
my  unhappy  father  in  the  grave.  The  light  is  hateful  to 
me;  it  serves  only  to  reveal  crimes." 

Cacambo,  always  wise  and  prudent,  drew  Candide,  who 
no  longer  was  himself,  along  with  him.  They  made  the  best 
of  their  way  out  of  the  city.  Candide  opened  not  his  mouth, 
and  they  were  already  a  good  way  from  Copenhagen  before 
he  was  roused  out  of  that  lethargy  in  which  he  was  buried. 
At  last  he  looked  at  his  faithful  Cacambo,  and  spoke  in  these 
terms. 

CHAPTER  XVII. 

How  Candide  had  a  mind  to  kill  himself,  and  did  not  do  it. 
What  happened  to  him  at  an  inn. 

"  DEAR  CACAMBO — formerly  my  valet,  now  my  equal  and 
always  my  friend — thou  hast  borne  a  share  in  my  misfor- 
tunes ;  thou  hast  given  me  salutary  advice ;  and  thou  hast 

been  witness  to  my  love  for  Miss  Cunegund "      "Alas, 

my  old  master,"  says  Cacambo,  "  it  is  she  who  has  served 
you  this  scurvy  trick ;  it  is  she  who,  after  having  learned 
from  your  fellow-servants  that  your  love  for  Zenoida  was  as 
great  as  hers  for  you,  revealed  the  whole  to  the  barbarous 
Wolhall."  "  If  this  is  so,"  says  Candide,  "  I  have  nothing 
further  to  do  but  die."  Our  philosopher  pulled  out  of  his 
pocket  a  little  knife,  and  began  whetting  it  with  a  coolness 
worthy  of  an  ancient  Roman  or  an  Englishman.  "  What 


CANDID  E.  163 

do  you  mean  to  do  ?  "  says  Cacambo  "  To  cut  my  throat," 
answers  Candide.  "  A  most  noble  thought ! "  replied 
Cacambo.  "  But  the  philosopher  ought  not  to  take  any  re- 
solution but  upon  reflection.  You  will  always  have  it  in  your 
power  to  kill  yourself  if  your  mind  does  not  alter.  Be  ad- 
vised by  me,  my  dear  master.  Defer  your  resolution  till 
to-morrow.  The  longer  you  delay  it  the  more  courageous 
will  the  action  be."  "  I  perceive  the  strength  of  thy  reason- 
ing," says  Candide.  "  Besides,  if  I  should  cut  my  throat 
immediately,  the  Gazetteer  of  Trevoux  would  insult  rny 
memory.  I  am  determined,  therefore,  that  I  will  not  kill 
myself  till  two  or  three  days  hence."  As  they  talked  thus  they 
arrived  at  Elsinore,  a  pretty  considerable  town,  not  far  from 
Copenhagen.  There  they  lay  that  night,  and  Cacambo 
hugged  himself  for  the  good  effect  which  sleep  had  produced 
on  Candide.  They  left  the  town  at  daybreak.  Candide, 
still  the  philosopher  (for  the  prejudices  of  childhood  are 
never  effaced),  entertained  his  friend  Cacambo  on  the  sub- 
ject of  physical  good  and  evil,  the  discourses  of  the  sage 
Zenoida,  and  the  striking  truths  which  he  had  learned  from 
her  conversation.  "  Had  not  Pangloss  been  dead,"  said  he, 
"  I  should  combat  his  system  in  a  victorious  manner.  God 
keep  me  from  becoming  a  Manichaean  !  My  mistress  taught 
me  to  respect  the  impenetrable  veil  with  which  the  Deity 
envelopes  his  manner  of  operating  upon  us.  It  is  perhaps 
man  who  precipitates  himself  into  the  abyss  of  misfortunes 
under  which  he  groans.  Of  a  frugivorous  animal  he  has 
made  himself  a  carnivorous  one.  The  savages  which  we 
have  seen  eat  only  Jesuits,  and  do  not  live  upon  bad  terms 
among  themselves.  These  savages,  if  there  be  one  scattered 
here  and  there  in  the  woods,  only  subsisting  by  acorns  and 
herbs,  are,  without  doubt,  still  more  happy.  Society  has 
given  birth  to  the  greatest  crimes.  There  are  men  in  society 
who  are  necessitated  by  their  condition  to  wish  the  death  of 
others.  The  shipwreck  of  a  vessel,  the  burning  of  a  house, 

F  2 


i*4  CANDIDE. 

and  the  loss  of  a  battle,  cause  sadness  in  one  part  of  society 
and  give  joy  to  another.  All  is  very  bad,  my  dear  Cacambo, 
and  there  is  nothing  left  for  a  philosopher  but  to  cut  his  own 
throat  with  all  imaginable  calmness."  "  You  are  in  the 
right,"  says  Cacambo.  "  But  I  perceive  an  inn  ;  you  must 
be  very  dry.  Come,  my  old  master ;  let  us  drink  one 
draught,  and  we  will  after  that  continue  our  philosophical 
disquisitions." 

When  they  entered  the  inn  they  saw  a  company  of  country 
lads  and  lasses  dancing  in  the  midst  of  the  yard  to  the 
sound  of  some  wretched  instruments.  Gaiety  and  mirth  sat 
in  every  countenance ;  it  was  a  scene  worthy  the  pencil  of 
Watteau.  As  soon  as  Candide  appeared,  a  young  woman 
took  him  by  the  hand  and  entreated  him  to  dance.  "  My 
pretty  maid,"  answered  Candide,  "  when  a  person  has  lost 
his  mistress,  found  his  wife  again,  and  heard  that  the  great 
Pangloss  is  dead,  he  can  have  little  or  no  inclination  to  cut 
capers.  Moreover,  I  am  to  kill  myself  to-morrow  morning ; 
and  you  know  that  a  man  who  has  but  a  few  hours  to  live 
ought  not  to  lose  them  in  dancing."  Cacambo,  hearing 
Candide  talk  thus,  addressed  him  in  these  terms :  "  A  thirst 
for  glory  has  always  been  the  characteristic  of  great  philo- 
sophers. Cato  of  Utica  killed  himself  after  having  taken  a 
sound  nap;  Socrates  drank  the  hemlock  potion  after 
discoursing  familiarly  with  his  friends  ;  many  of  the  English 
have  blown  their  brains  out  with  a  pistol  after  coming  from 
an  entertainment ;  but  I  never  yet  heard  of  a  great  man  who 
cut  his  own  throat  after  a  dancing  bout.  It  is  for  you,  my 
dear  master,  that  this  honour  is  reserved.  Take  my  advice  ; 
let  us  dance  our  fill,  and  we  will  kill  ourselves  to-morrow." 
"Have  you  not  remarked,"  answered  Candide,  "this  young 
country  girl?  Is  she  not  a  very  pretty  brunette ?"  "She 
has  something  very  taking  in  her  countenance,"  says 
Cacambo.  "  She  has  squeezed  my  hand,"  replied  the 
philosopher.  "  Did  you  mind,"  says  Cacambo,  "  how  that 


CANDIDE.  165 

in  the  hurry  of  the  dance,  her  handkerchief  falling  aside, 
discovered  a  very  pretty  neck?  I  took  particular  notice 
of  it."  "Look  you,"  said  Candida,  "had  I  not  my 

heart  filled  with   Miss  Zenoida "    The  little  brunette 

interrupted  him  by  begging  him  to  take  one  dance  with  her. 
Our  hero  at  length  consented  and  danced  with  the  best 
grace  in  the  world.  The  dance  finished,  he  kissed  his 
smart  country  girl  and  retired  to  his  seat,  without  calling 
out  the  queen  of  the  ring.  Upon  this  a  murmuring  arose  ; 
every  one,  as  well  performers  as  spectators,  appeared  greatly 
incensed  at  so  flagrant  a  piece  of  disrespect.  Candide 
never  dreamed  he  had  been  guilty  of  any  fault,  and  conse- 
quently did  not  attempt  to  make  any  reparation.  A  rude 
clown  came  up  to  him  and  gave  him  a  blow  with  his  fist 
upon  the  nose.  Cacambo  returns  it  to  the  peasant  with 
a  kick.  In  an  instant  the  musical  instruments  are  all 
broken ;  the  girls  loose  their  caps  ;  Candide  and  Cacambo 
fight  like  heroes,  but  at  length  are  obliged  to  take  to  their 
heels,  after  a  very  hearty  drubbing. 

"  Everything  is  embittered  to  me,"  said  Candide,  giving 
his  arm  to  his  friend  Cacambo  ;  I  have  experienced  a 
great  many  misfortunes,  but  I  did  not  expect  to  be  thus 
bruised  to  a  mummy  for  my  dancing  with  a  country  girl 
at  her  own  request. 

CHAPTER  XVIII. 

Candide  and  Cacambo  go  into  an  Hospital,  and  whom 
they  meet  with  there. 

CACAMBO  and  his  old  master  were  quite  dispirited.  They 
began  to  fall  into  that  sort  of  malady  of  the  mind  which 
extinguishes  all  the  faculties  :  they  fell  into  a  depression  of 
spirits  and  despair,  when  they  perceived  an  hospital  which 
was  built  for  strangers.  Cacambo  proposed  going  into  it ; 
Candide  followed  him.  There  they  met  with  the  most 


1 66  CANDIDE. 

obliging   reception   and  charitable   treatment.     In  a  little 
time  they  were  cured  of  their  wounds,  but  they  caught  the 
itch.     The  cure  of  this  malady  did  not  appear  to  be  the 
work  of  a  day,  the  idea  of  which  filled  the  eyes  of  our  philo- 
sopher with  tears ;  and  he  said,  scratching  himself,  "  Thou 
wouldst  not  let  me  cut  my  throat,  my  dear  Cacambo  ;  thy 
misplaced  counsels  have  brought  me  again  into  disgrace  and 
misfortune ;  and  yet,  should  I  cut  my  throat  now,  it  will  be 
published  in  the  Journal  of  Trevoux,  and  it  will  be  said  this 
man  was  a  poltroon,  who  killed  himself  only  for  having  the 
itch.     See  what  thou  hast  exposed  me  to  by  the  mistaken 
compassion  thou  hadst  for  my  fate."     "  Our  disasters  are  not 
without  remedy,"  answered   Cacambo.      "  If  you  will  but 
please  to  listen  to  me,  let  us  settle  here  as  friars ;  I  under- 
stand a  little  surgery,  and  I  promise  you  to  alleviate  and 
render  supportable  our  wretched  condition."     "Ah!"  says 
Candide,   "may  all  asses   perish,  and  especially  asses  of 
surgeons,  who  are  so  dangerous  to  mankind.     I  will  never 
suffer  that  thou  shouldst  give  out  thyself  to  be  what  thou 
art  not.     This  is  a  treachery  the  consequences  of  which  I 
dread.     Besides,  if  thou  didst  but  conceive  how  hard  it  is, 
after  having  been  viceroy  of  a  fine  province,   after  having 
seen  one's  self  rich  enough  to  purchase  kingdoms,  and  after 
having  been  the  favourite  lover  of  Zenoida,  to  resolve  to 
serve  in  quality  of  friar  in  an  hospital."     "  I  conceive  all  that 
you  say,"  replied  Cacambo  ;  "  but  I  also  conceive  that  it  is 
very  hard  to  die   of  hunger.     Think,  moreover,  that  the 
expedient  which  I  propose  to  you  is  perhaps  the  only  one 
which  you  can  take  to  elude  the  inquiries  of  the  bloody- 
minded  Wolhall,  and  avoid  the  punishment  which  he  is  pre- 
paring for  you." 

One  of  the  friars  was  passing  along  as  they  talked  in  this 
manner  ,  they  put  some  questions  to  him,  to  which  he  gave 
satisfactory  answers.  He  assured  them  that  the  brothers 
wanted  for  nothing,  and  enjoyed  a  reasonable  liberty.  Can- 


CANDIDE.  167 

dide  thereupon  determined  to  acquiesce  with  Cacambo's 
counsels.  They  took  the  habit  together,  which  was  granted 
them  upon  the  first  application ;  and  our  two  poor  adven- 
turers now  became  underlings  to  those  whose  duty  it  was  to 
perform  the  most  servile  offices. 

One  day  as  Candide  was  serving  the  patients  with  some 
wretched  broth,  an  old  man  fixed  his  eye  earnestly  upon 
him.  The  visage  of  this  poor  wretch  was  livid,  his  lips 
were  covered  with  froth,  his  eyes  half  turned  in  his  head, 
and  the  image  of  death  strongly  imprinted  on  his  lean  and 
fallen  cheeks.  "  Poor  man,"  says  Candide  to  him,  "  I  pity 
you;  your  sufferings  must  be  horrible."  "They  are  very 
great  indeed,"  answered  the  old  man  with  a  hollow  voice 
like  a  ghost;  "I  am  told  that  I  am  hectical,  phthisicky, 
asthmatic,  and  poxed  to  the  bone.  If  that  be  the  case,  I  am 
indeed  very  ill ;  yet  all  does  not  go  so  badly,  and  this  gives 
me  comfort."  "Ah!"  says  Candide,  "none  but  Dr.  Pan- 
gloss,  in  a  case  so  deplorable,  can  maintain  the  doctrine 
of  optimism  when  all  others  besides  would  preach  up 

pessim "  "  Do  not  pronounce  that  abominable  word," 

cried  the  poor  man ;  "  I  am  the  Pangloss  you  speak  of. 
Wretch  that  I  am,  let  me  die  in  peace.  All  is  well,  all  is 
for  the  best."  The  effort  which  he  made  in  pronouncing 
these  words  cost  him  the  last  tooth,  which  he  spat  out  with 
a  great  quantity  of  corrupted  matter,  and  expired  a  very  few 
moments  after. 

Candide  lamented  him  greatly,  for  he  had  a  good  heart. 
His  obstinate  perseverance  was  a  source  of  reflection  to  our 
philosopher;  he  often  called  to  mind  all  his  adventures. 
Cunegund  remained  at  Copenhagen,  he  learned  that  she 
exercised  there  the  occupation  of  a  mender  of  old  clothes 
with  all  possible  distinction.  The  humour  of  travelling  had 
quite  left  him.  The  faithful  Cacambo  supported  him  with 
his  counsels  and  friendship.  Candide  did  not  murmur 
against  Providence :  "  I  know,"  said  he  at  times,  "  that 


1 68  CANDIDE. 

happiness  is  not  the  portion  of  man  :  happiness  dwells  only 
in  the  good  country  of  El  Dorado,  where  it  is  impossible  for 
any  one  to  go." 

CHAPTER   XIX. 

New  Discoveries. 

CANDIDE  was  not  so  unhappy,  as  he  had  a  true  friend.  He 
found  in  a  mongrel  valet  what  the  world  vainly  look  for  in  our 
quarter  of  the  globe.  Perhaps  nature,  which  gives  origin  to 
herbs  in  America  that  are  proper  for  the  maladies  of  bodies  on 
our  continent,  has  also  placed  remedies  there  for  the  maladies 
of  our  hearts  and  minds.  Possibly  there  are  men  in  the 
New  World  of  a  quite  different  conformation  from  us,  who 
are  not  slaves  to  personal  interests,  and  are  worthy  to  burn 
with  the  noble  fire  of  friendship.  How  desirable  would  it 
be,  that  instead  of  bales  of  indigo  and  cochineal  all  covered 
with  blood,  some  of  these  men  were  imported  among  us ! 
This  sort  of  traffic  would  be  of  vast  advantage  to  mankind. 
Cacambo  was  of  greater  value  to  Candide  than  a  dozen  of 
red  sheep  loaded  with  the  pebbles  of  El  Dorado.  Our 
philosopher  began  again  to  taste  the  pleasures  of  life.  It 
was  a  comfort  to  him  to  watch  for  the  conversation  of  the 
human  species,  and  not  to  be  a  useless  member  of  society. 
God  blessed  such  pure  intentions  by  giving  him,  as  well  as 
Cacambo,  the  enjoyment  of  health.  They  had  got  rid  of 
the  itch,  and  fulfilled  with  cheerfulness  the  painful  functions 
of  their  station ;  but  fortune  soon  deprived  them  of  the 
security  which  they  enjoyed.  Cunegund,  who  had  set  her 
heart  upon  tormenting  her  husband,  left  Copenhagen  to 
follow  his  footsteps.  Chance  brought  her  to  the  hospital ; 
she  was  accompanied  by  a  man  whom  Candide  knew 
to  be  Baron  Thunder-ten- tronckh.  One  may  easily 
imagine  what  must  have  been  his  surprise.  The  Baron, 
who  saw  him,  addressed  him  thus  :  "  I  did  not  tug  long 
at  the  oar  in  the  Turkish  galleys ;  the  Jesuits  heard  of 
my  misfortune,  and  redeemed  me  for  the  honour  of  theii 


C AND  IDE.  169 

society.  I  have  made  a  journey  into  Germany,  where  I 
received  some  favours  from  my  father's  heirs.  I  omitted 
nothing  to  find  my  sister ;  and  having  learned  at  Constan- 
tinople that  she  had  sailed  from  thence  in  a  vessel  which 
was  shipwrecked  on  the  coasts  of  Denmark,  I  disguised 
myself.  I  took  letters  of  recommendation  to  Danish 
merchants,  who  have  correspondence  with  the  society;  and 
in  fine,  I  found  my  sister,  who  still  loves  you,  base  and 
unworthy  as  you  are  of  her  regard ;  and  since  you  have  had 
the  impudence  to  marry  her,  I  consent  to  the  ratification 
of  the  marriage,  or  rather  a  new  celebration  of  it,  with  this 
express  proviso — that  my  sister  shall  give  you  only  her  left 
hand,  which  is  very  reasonable,  since  she  has  seventy-one 
quarters,  and  you  have  never  a  one."  "  Alas  !  "  says  Can- 

dide,  "  all  the  quarters  of  the  world  without  beauty 

Miss  Cunegund  was  very  ugly  when  I  had  the  imprudence 
to  marry  her." 

"  Ungrateful  man  !  "  says  Cunegund,  with  the  most  fright- 
ful contortions;  "be  persuaded,  and  relent  in  time.  Do 
not  provoke  the  Baron,  who  is  a  priest,  to  kill  us  both,  to 
wash  out  his  disgrace  with  our  blood." 

This  discourse  did  not  make  much  impression  upon  Can- 
dide.  He  desired  a  few  hours  to  take  his  resolution  how 
to  proceed.  The  Baron  granted  him  two  hours,  during 
which  time  he  consulted  his  friend  Cacambo.  After  having 
weighed  the  reasons  pro  and  contra,  they  determined  to 
follow  the  Jesuit  and  his  sister  into  Germany.  They  accord- 
ingly left  the  hospital,  and  set  out  together  on  their  travels, 
not  on  foot,  but  on  good  horses  hired  by  the  Baron.  They 
arrive  on  the  frontiers  of  the  kingdom.  A  huge  man,  of  a  very 
villainous  aspect,  surveys  our  hero  with  close  attention. 
"  It  is  the  very  man,"  says  he,  casting  his  eyes  at  the  same 
time  upon  a  little  bit  of  paper  he  had  in  his  hand.  "  Sir,  if 
I  am  not  too  inquisitive,  is  not  your  name  Candide?" 
"  Yes,  sir  ;  so  I  have  always  been  called."  "  Sir,  I  flatter 
myself  you  are  the  very  same.  You  have  black  eyebrows, 


170  CANDIDE. 

eyes  level  with  your  head,  ears  not  prominent,  of  a  middling 
size,  and  a  round,  flesh-coloured  visage ;  to  me  you  plainly 
appear  to  be  five  feet  five  inches  high."  "  Yes,  sir,  that  is 
my  stature.  But  what  have  you  to  do  with  my  ears  and 
stature  ?  "  "  Sir,  we  cannot  use  too  much  circumspection  in 
our  office.  Permit  me  further  to  put  one  single  question  more 
to  you :  Have  you  not  formerly  been  a  servant  to  Lord 
Wolhall?  "  "  Sir,  upon  my  word,"  answered  Candide,  quite 
disconcerted,  "  I  know  nothing  of  what  you  mean."  "  May 
be  so,  sir.  But  I  know  for  certain  that  you  are  the  perspn 
whose  description  has  been  sent  to  me.  Take  the  trouble, 
then,  to  go  walk  in  the  guard-house,  if  you  please.  Here, 
soldiers,  take  care  of  this  gentleman.  Get  the  black  hole 
ready,  and  let  the  armourer  be  sent  for  to  make  him  a  pretty 
little  set  of  fetters  of  about  thirty  or  forty  pounds  weight. 
Mr.  Candide,  you  have  a  good  horse  there.  I  am  in  want 
of  such  a  one ;  and  I  fancy  he  will  answer  my  purpose.  I 
shall  make  free  with  him." 

The  Baron  was  afraid  to  say  the  horse  was  his.  They 
carried  off  poor  Candide,  and  Miss  Cunegund  wept  for  a 
whole  quarter  of  an  hour.  The  Jesuit  seemed  perfectly  un- 
concerned at  this  accident.  "  I  should  have  been  obliged 
to  have  killed  him,  or  to  have  made  him  marry  you  over 
again,"  says  he  to  his  sister;  "and,  all  things  considered, 
what  has  just  happened  is  much  the  best  for  the  honour  of 
our  family."  Cunegund  departed  with  her  brother,  and  only 
the  faithful  Cacambo  remained,  who  would  not  forsake  his 
friend. 

CHAPTER  XX. 

Consequent  of  Candidas  Misforhme.     How  he  found  his  Mistress 
again  ;  and  the  Fortune  that  happened  to  him. 

"O  PANGLOSS,"  said  Candide,  "what  a  pity  it  is  you 
perished  so  miserably  !  You  have  been  witness  only  to  a 


CANDIDE.  i7I 

part  of  my  misfortunes  ;  and  I  hoped  to  have  prevailed  on 
you  to  forsake  the  ill-founded  opinion  which  you  maintained 
to  your  last  breath.  No  man  ever  suffered  greater  calamities 
than  I  have  done  ;  but  there  is  not  a  single  individual  who 
has  not  cursed  his  existence,  as  the  daughter  of  Pope  Urban 
warmly  expressed  herself.  What  will  become  of  me,  my  dear 
Cacambo  ?  "  "  Faith,  I  cannot  tell,"  said  Cacambo  ;  "  all 
I  know  is,  that  I  will  not  forsake  you."  "  But  Miss  Cune- 
gund  has  forsaken  me,"  says  Candide.  "  Alas  !  a  wife 
is  of  far  less  value  than  a  menial  servant  who  is  a  true 
friend." 

Candide  and  Cacambo  discoursed  thus  in  the  black-hole. 
From  thence  they  were  taken  out  to  be  carried  back  to 
Copenhagen.  It  was  there  that  our  philosopher  was  to 
know  his  doom.  He  expected  it  to  be  dreadful,  and  our 
readers  doubtless  expect  so  to  ;  but  Candide  was  mistaken, 
as  our  readers  will  be  likewise.  It  was  at  Copenhagen  that 
happiness  waited  to  crown  all  his  sufferings.  He  was  hardly 
arrived  when  he  understood  that  Wolhall  was  dead.  This 
barbarian  had  no  one  to  regret  him,  while  everybody 
interested  themselves  for  Candide.  His  irons  were  knocked 
off;  and  his  enlargement  gave  him  so  much  the  more  joy  as 
it  was  immediately  followed  by  the  sight  of  his  dear  Zenoida. 
He  flew  to  her  with  the  utmost  transport ;  they  were  a  long 
time  without  speaking  a  word;  but  their  silence  was  in- 
finitely more  expressive  than  words.  They  wept ;  they 
embraced  each  other ;  they  attempted  to  speak,  but  tears 
stopped  their  utterance.  Cacambo  was  a  pleased  spectator 
of  this  scene,  so  truly  interesting  to  a  sensible  being ;  he 
shared  in  the  happiness  of  his  friend,  and  was  almost  as 
much  affected  as  himself.  "  Dear  Cacambo !  adorable 
Zenoida  ! "  cried  Candide ;  "  you  efface  from  my  heart  the 
deep  traces  of  my  misfortunes.  Love  and  friendship  pre- 
pare for  me  future  days  of  serenity  and  uninterrupted  delight. 
Through  what  a  number  of  trials  have  I  passed  to  arrive  at 


172  CANDIDE. 

this  unexpected  happiness  !  But  they  are  all  forgot.  Dear 
Zenoida,  I  behold  you  once  more;  you  love  me  ;  everything 
is  for  the  best  in  regard  to  me ;  all  is  good  in  nature." 

By  WolhalPs  death,  Zenoida  was  left  at  her  own  disposal. 
The  Court  had  given  her  a  pension  out  of  her  father's  fortune, 
which  had  been  confiscated ;  she  shared  it  with  Candide  and 
Cacambo  ;  she  appointed  them  apartments  in  her  own  house, 
and  gave  out  that  she  had  received  several  considerable  services 
from  these  two  strangers,  which  obliged  her  to  procure  them 
all  the  comforts  and  pleasures  of  life,  and  to  repair  the  injustice 
which  fortune  had  done  them.  There  were  some  who  saw 
through  the  motive  of  her  beneficence ;  which  was  no  very 
hard  matter  to  do,  considering  the  great  talk  her  connection 
with  Candide  had  formerly  occasioned.  The  greater  part 
blamed  her,  and  her  conduct  was  only  approved  of  by  some 
few  who  knew  how  to  reflect.  Zenoida,  who  set  a  proper 
value  on  the  good  opinion  even  of  fools,  was  nevertheless 
too  happy  to  repent  the  loss  of  it.  The  news  of  the  death 
of  Miss  Cunegund,  which  was  brought  by  the  correspon- 
dents of  the  Jesuit  merchants  in  Copenhagen,  procured 
Zenoida  the  means  of  conciliating  the  minds  of  people  ;  she 
ordered  a  genealogy  to  be  drawn  up  for  Candide.  The 
author,  who  was  a  man  of  abilities  in  his  way,  derived  his 
pedigree  from  one  of  the  most  ancient  families  in  Europe  ; 
he  even  pretended  his  true  name  was  Canute,  which  was 
that  of  one  of  the  former  kings  of  Denmark  ;  which  appeared 
very  probable,  as  dide  into  ^tte  is  not  such  a  great  metamor- 
phosis :  and  Candide  by  means  of  this  little  change,  became 
a  very  great  lord.  He  married  Zenoida  in  public ;  they  lived 
with  as  much  tranquillity  as  it  is  possible  to  do.  Cacambo 
was  their  common  friend  ;  and  Candide  said  often,  "  All  is 
not  so  well  as  in  El  Dorado  ;  but  all  does  not  go  so  badly. " 


RASSELAS. 


RAS  s  E  L  A  s. 

CHAPTER  I. 

Description  of  a  Palace  in  a  Valley. 

YE  who  listen  with  credulity  to  the  whispers  of  fancy,  and 
pursue  with  eagerness  the  phantoms  of  hope ;  who  expect 
that  age  will  perform  the  promises  of  youth,  and  that 
the  deficiencies  of  the  present  day  will  be  supplied  by 
the  morrow,  attend  to  the  history  of  Rasselas,  Prince  of 
Abyssinia. 

Rasselas  was  the  fourth  son  of  the  mighty  Emperor  in 
whose  dominions  the  father  of  waters  begins  his  course — 
whose  bounty  pours  down  the  streams  of  plenty,  and  scatters 
over  the  world  the  harvests  of  Egypt. 

According  to  the  custom  which  has  descended  from  age 
to  age  among  the  mouarchs  of  the  torrid  zone,  Rasselas  was 
confined  in  a  private  palace,  with  the  other  sons  and  daugh- 
ters of  Abyssinian  royalty,  till  the  order  of  succession  should 
call  him  to  the  throne. 

The  place  which  the  wisdom  or  policy  of  antiquity  had 
destined  for  the  residence  of  the  Abyssinian  princes  was  a 
spacious  valley  in  the  kingdom  of  Amhara,  surrounded  on 
every  side  by  mountains,  of  which  the  summits  overhang 
the  middle  part.  The  only  passage  by  which  it  could  be 
entered  was  a  cavern  that  passed  under  a  reck,  of  which  it 
had  long  been  disputed  whether  it  was  the  work  of  nature 


176  RASSELAS. 

or  of  human  industry.  The  outlet  .of  the  cavern  was  con- 
cealed by  a  thick  wood,  and  the  mouth  which  opened  into 
the  valley  was  closed  with  gates  of  iron,  forged  by  the  arti- 
ficers of  ancient  days,  so  massive  that  no  man,  without  the 
help  of  engines,  could  open  or  shut  them. 

From  the  mountains  on  every  side  rivulets  descended 
that  filled  all  the  valley  with  verdure  and  fertility,  and 
formed  a  lake  in  the  middle,  inhabited  by  fish  of  every 
species,  and  frequented  by  every  fowl  whom  nature  has 
taught  to  dip  the  wing  in  water  This  lake  discharged  its 
superfluities  by  a  stream,  which  entered  a  dark  cleft  of  the 
mountain  on  the  northern  side,  and  fell  with  dreadful  noise 
from  precipice  to  precipice  till  it  was  heard  no  more. 

The  sides  of  the  mountains  were  covered  with  trees,  the 
banks  of  the  brooks  were  diversified  with  flowers  :  every 
blast  shook  spices  from  the  rocks,  and  every  month  dropped 
fruits  upon  the  ground.  All  animals  that  bite  the  grass  or 
browse  the  shrubs,  whether  wild  or  tame,  wandered  in  this 
extensive  circuit,  secured  from  beasts  of  prey  by  the  moun- 
tains which  confined  them.  On  one  part  were  flocks  and 
herds  feeding  in  the  pastures,  on  another  all  the  beasts  of 
chase  frisking  in  the  lawns,  the  sprightly  kid  was  bounding 
on  the  rocks,  the  subtle  monkey  frolicking  in  the  trees,  and 
the  solemn  elephant  reposing  in  the  shade.  All  the  diver- 
sities of  the  world  were  brought  together,  the  blessings  of 
nature  were  collected,  and  its  evils  extracted  and  excluded. 
The  valley,  wide  and  fruitful,  supplied  its  inhabitants  with 
all  the  necessaries  of  life,  and  all  delights  and  superfluities 
were  added  at  the  annual  visit  which  the  Emperor  paid  his 
children,  when  the  iron  gate  was  opened  to  the  sound  of 
music,  and  during  eight  days  every  one  that  resided  in  the 
valley  was  required  to  propose  whatever  might  contribute  to 
make  seclusion  pleasant,  to  fill  up  the  vacancies  of  attention, 
and  lessen  the  tediousness  of  time.  Every  desire  was  imme- 
diately granted.  All  the  artificers  of  pleasure  were  called  to 
gladden  the  festivity ;  the  musicians  exerted  the  power  of 


RASSELAS.  177 

harmony,  and  the  dancers  showed  their  activity  before  the 
princes,  in  hopes  that  they  should  pass  their  lives  in  blissful 
captivity,  to  which  those  only  were  admitted  whose  perform- 
ance was  thought  able  to  add  novelty  to  luxury.  Such  was 
the  appearance  of  security  and  delight  which  this  retirement 
afforded,  that  they  to  whom  it  was  new  always  desired  that 
it  might  be  perpetual ;  and  as  those  on  whom  the  iron  gate 
had  once  closed  were  never  suffered  to  return,  the  effect  of 
longer  experience  could  not  be  known.  Thus  every  year 
produced  new  scenes  of  delight,  and  new  competitors  for 
imprisonment. 

The  palace  stood  on  an  eminence,  raised  about  thirty 
paces  above  the  surface  of  the  lake.  It  was  divided  into 
many  squares  or  courts,  built  with  greater  or  less  mag- 
nificence according  to  the  rank  of  those  for  whom  they  were 
designed.  The  roofs  were  turned  into  arches  of  massive  stone, 
joined  by  a  cement  that  grew  harder  by  time,  and  the 
building  stood  from  century  to  century,  deriding  the  solstitial 
rains  and  equinoctial  hurricanes,  without  need  of  reparation. 

This  house,  which  was  so  large  as  to  be  fully  known  to 
none  but  some  ancient  officers,  who  successively  inherited 
the  secrets  of  the  place,  was  built  as  if  Suspicion  herself  had 
dictated  the  plan.  To  every  room  there  was  an  open  and 
secret  passage  ;  every  square  had  a  communication  with  the 
rest,  either  from  the  upper  stories  by  private  galleries,  or  by 
subterraneous  passages  from  the  lower  apartments.  Many 
of  the  columns  had  unsuspected  cavities,  in  which  a  long 
race  of  monarchs  had  reposited  their  treasures.  They  then 
closed  up  the  opening  with  marble,  which  was  never  to  be 
removed  but  in  the  utmost  exigences  of  the  kingdom,  and 
recorded  their  accumulations  in  a  book,  which  was  itself 
concealed  in  a  tower,  not  entered  but  by  the  emperor, 
attended  by  the  prince  who  stood  next  in  succession. 


178  RASSELAS. 

CHAPTER  II. 

The  Discontent  of  Rasselas  in  the  Happy  Valley. 

HERE  the  sons  and  daughters  of  Abyssinia  lived  only  to 
know  the  soft  vicissitudes  of  pleasure  and  repose,  attended 
by  all  that  were  skilful  to  delight,  and  gratified  with  whatever 
the  senses  can  enjoy.  They  wandered  in  gardens  of  fragrance, 
and  slept  in  the  fortresses  of  security.  Every  art  was  prac- 
tised to  make  them  pleased  with  their  own  condition.  The 
sages  who  instructed  them  told  them  of  nothing  but  the 
miseries  of  public  life,  and  described  all  beyond  the  moun- 
tains as  regions  of  calamity,  where  discord  was  always 
raging,  and  where  man  preyed  upon  man.  To  heighten 
their  opinion  of  their  own  felicity,  they  were  daily  enter- 
tained with  songs,  the  subject  of  which  was  the  Happy 
Valley.  Their  appetites  were  excited  by  frequent  enume- 
rations of  different  enjoyments,  and  revelry  and  merriment 
were  the  business  of  every  hour,  from  the  dawn  of  morning 
to  the  close  of  the  evening. 

These  methods  were  generally  successful ;  few  of  the 
princes  had  ever  wished  to  enlarge  their  bounds,  but  passed 
their  lives  in  full  conviction  that  they  had  all  within  their 
reach  that  art  or  nature  could  bestow,  and  pitied  those 
whom  nature  had  excluded  from  this  seat  of  tranquillity  as 
the  sport  of  chance  and  the  slaves  of  misery. 

Thus  they  rose  in  the  morning  and  lay  down  at  night, 
pleased  with  each  other  and  with  themselves,  all  but 
Rasselas,  who,  in  the  twenty-sixth  year  of  his  age,  began  to 
withdraw  himself  from  the  pastimes  and  assemblies,  and  to 
delight  in  solitary  walks  and  silent  meditation.  He  often 
sat  before  tables  covered  with  luxury,  and  forgot  to  taste  the 
dainties  that  were  placed  before  him ;  he  rose  abruptly  in 
the  midst  of  the  song,  and  hastily  retired  beyond  the  sound 
of  music.  His  attendants  observed  the  change,,  and  endea- 


R ASS 'E LAS.  179 

voured  to  renew  his  love  of  pleasure.  He  neglected  their 
officiousness,  repulsed  their  invitations,  and  spent  day  after 
day  on  the  banks  of  rivulets  sheltered  with  trees,  where  he 
sometimes  listened  to  the  birds  in  the  branches,  sometimes 
observed  the  fish  playing  in  the  streams,  and  anon  cast  his 
eyes  upon  the  pastures  and  mountains  filled  with  animals, 
of  which  some  were  biting  the  herbage,  and  some  sleeping 
among  the  bushes.  The  singularity  of  his  humour  made 
him  much  observed.  One  of  the  sages,  in  whose  conversa- 
tion he  had  formerly  delighted,  followed  him  secretly,  in 
hope  of  discovering  the  cause  of  his  disquiet.  Rasselas, 
who  knew  not  that  any  one  was  near  him,  having  for  some 
time  fixed  his  eyes  upon  the  goats  that  were  browsing 
among  the  rocks,  began  to  compare  their  condition  with  his 
own. 

"What,"  said  he,  "makes  the  difference  between  man 
and  all  the  rest  of  the  animal  creation  ?  Every  beast  that 
strays  beside  me  has  the  same  corporal  necessities  with 
myself:  he  is  hungry,  and  crops  the  grass ;  he  is  thirsty,  and 
drinks  the  stream  ;  his  thirst  and  hunger  are  appeased  ;  he 
is  satisfied,  and  sleeps;  he  rises  again,  and  is  hungry;  he  is 
again  fed,  and  is  at  rest.  I  am  hungry  and  thirsty,  like  him, 
but  when  thirst  and  hunger  cease,  I  am  not  at  rest  I  am, 
like  him,  pained  with  want,  but  am  not,  like  him,  satisfied 
with  fulness.  The  intermediate  hours  are  tedious  and 
gloomy;  I  long  again  to  be  hungry,  that  I  may  again 
quicken  the  attention.  The  birds  peck  the  berries  or  the 
corn,  and  fly  away  to  the  groves,  where  they  sit  in  seeming 
happiness  on  the  branches,  and  waste  their  lives  in  tuning 
one  unvaried  series  of  sounds.  I  likewise  can  call  the 
lutist  and  the  singer;  but  the  sounds  that  pleased  me 
yesterday  weary  me  to-day,  and  will  grow  yet  more  weari- 
some to-morrow.  I  can  discover  in  me  no  power  of  per- 
ception which  is  not  glutted  with  its  proper  pleasure,  yet  I 
do  not  feel  myself  delighted.  Man  surely  has  some  latent 
sense  for  which  this  place  affords  no  gratification ;  or  he 


!8o  RASSELAS. 

ha-s  some  desire  distinct  from  sense,  which  must  be  satisfied 
before  he  can  be  happy." 

After  this  he  lifted  up  his  head,  and  seeing  the  moon 
rising,  walked  towards  the  palace.  As  he  passed  through 
the  fields,  and  saw  the  animals  around  him,  "  Ye,"  said  he, 
"are  happy,  and  need  not  envy  me  that  walk  thus  among 
you,  burdened  with  myself;  nor  do  I,  ye  gentle  beings,  envy 
your  felicity  ;  for  it  is  not  the  felicity  of  man.  I  have  many 
distresses  from  which  you  are  free ;  I  fear  pain  when  I  do 
not  feel  it;  I  sometimes  shrink  at  evils  recollected,  and 
sometimes  start  at  evils  anticipated  :  surely  the  equity  of 
Providence  has  balanced  peculiar  sufferings  with  peculiar 
enjoyments." 

With  observations  like  these  the  Prince  amused  himself 
as  he  returned,  uttering  them  with  a  plaintive  voice,  yet  with 
a  look  that  discovered  him  to  feel  some  complacence  in  his 
own  perspicacity,  and  to  receive  some  solace  of  the  miseries 
of  life  from  consciousness  of  the  delicacy  with  which  he  felt 
and  the  eloquence  with  which  he  bewailed  them.  He 
mingled  cheerfully  in  the  diversions  of  the  evening,  and  all 
rejoiced  to  find  that  his  heart  was  lightened. 


CHAPTER  III. 
7%i?  IVants  of  him  that  Wants  Nothing. 

ON  the  next  day,  his  old  instructor^  imagining  that  he  had 
now  made  himself  acquainted  with  his  disease  of  mind,  was 
in  hope  of  curing  it  by  counsel,  and  officiously  sought  an 
opportunity  of  conference,  which  the  Prince,  having  long 
considered  him  as  one  whose  intellects  were  exhausted, 
was  not  very  willing  to  afford.  "  Why,"  said  he,  "  does  this 
man  thus  intrude  upon  me  ?  Shall  I  never  be  suffered  to 
forget  these  lectures,  which  pleased  only  while  they  were 
new,  and  to  become  new  again,  must  be  forgotten?"  He 
then  walked  into  the  wood,  and  composed  himself  to  his 


RASSELAS.  181 

usual  meditations ;  when,  before  his  thoughts  had  taken 
any  settled  form,  he  perceived  his  pursuer  at  his  side,  and 
was  at  first  prompted  by  his  impatience  to  go  hastily  away  • 
but  being  unwilling  to  offend  a  man  whom  he  had  once 
reverenced  and  still  loved,  he  invited  him  to  sit  down  with 
him  on  the  bank. 

The  old  man,  thus  encouraged,  began  to  lament  the 
change  which  had  been  lately  observed  in  the  Prince,  and 
to  inquire  why  he  so  often  retired  from  the  pleasures  of  the 
palace  to  loneliness  and  silence.  "  I  fly  from  pleasure,"  said 
the  Prince,  "  because  pleasure  has  ceased  to  please  :  I  am 
lonely  because  I  am  miserable,  and  am  unwilling  to  cloud 
with  my  presence  the  happiness  of  others."  "  You,  sir," 
said  the  sage,  "  are  the  first  who  has  complained  of 
misery  in  the  Happy  Valley.  I  hope  to  convince  you  that 
your  complaints  have  no  real  cause.  You  are  here  in 
full  possession  of  all  the  Emperor  of  Abyssinia  can  bestow  ; 
here  is  neither  labour  to  be  endured  nor  danger  to  be 
dreaded,  yet  here  is  all  that  labour  or  danger  can  procure 
or  purchase.  Look  round  and  tell  me  which  of  your  wants 
is  without  supply :  if  you  want  nothing,  how  are  you 
unhappy  ?  " 

"  That  I  want  nothing,"  said  the  Prince,  "  or  that  1  know 
not  what  I  want,  is  the  cause  of  my  complaint :  if  I  had  any 
known  want,  I  should  have  a  certain  wish  ;  that  wish  would 
excite  endeavour,  and  I  should  not  then  repine  to  see  the 
sun  move  so  slowly  towards  the  western  mountains,  or  to 
lament  when  the  day  breaks,  and  sleep  will  no  longer  hide 
me  from  myself.  When  I  see  the  kids  and  the  lambs 
chasing  one  another,  I  fancy  that  I  should  be  happy  if  I 
had  something  to  pursue.  But,  possessing  all  that  I  can 
want,  I  find  one  day  and  one  hour  exactly  like  another, 
except  that  the  latter  is  still  more  tedious  than  the  former. 
Let  your  experience  inform  me  how  the  day  may  now  seem 
as  short  as  in  my  childhood,  while  nature  was  yet  fresh,  and 
every  moment  showed  me  what  I  never  had  observed  before. 


1 83  RASSELAS. 

I  have  already  enjoyed  too  much  :  give  me  something  to 
desire."  The  old  man  was  surprised  at  this  new  species  of 
affliction,  and  knew  not  what  to  reply,  yet  was  unwilling  to 
be  silent.  "  Sir,"  said  he,  "  if  you  had  seen  the  miseries  of 
the  world,  you  would  know  how  to  value  your  present  state." 
"  Now,"  said  the  Prince,  "  you  have  given  me  something  to 
desire.  I  shall  long  to  see  the  miseries  of  the  world,  since 
the  sight  of  them  is  necessary  to  happiness." 


CHAPTER  IV. 

The  Prince  continues  to  Grieve  and  Muse. 

AT  this  time  the  sound  of  music  proclaimed  the  hour  of 
repast,  and  the  conversation  was  concluded.  The  old  man 
went  away  sufficiently  discontented  to  find  that  his  reason- 
ings had  produced  the  only  conclusion  which  they  were 
intended  to  prevent.  But  in  the  decline  of  life,  shame  and 
grief  are  of  short  duration  :  whether  it  be  that  we  bear  easily 
what  we  have  borne  long ;  or  that,  finding  ourselves  in  age 
less  regarded,  we  less  regard  others  ;  or,  that  we  look  with 
slight  regard  upon  afflictions  to  which  we  know  that  the 
hand  of  death  is  about  to  put  an  end. 

The  Prince,  whose  views  were  extended  to  a  wider  space, 
could  not  speedily  quiet  his  emotions.  He  had  been  before  ter- 
rified at  the  length  of  life  which  nature  promised  him,  because 
he  considered  that  in  a  long  time  much  must  be  endured  : 
he  now  rejoiced  in  his  youth,  because  in  many  years  much 
might  be  done.  The  first  beam  of  hope  that  had  been 
ever  darted  into  his  mind  rekindled  youth  in  his  cheeks, 
and  doubled  the  lustre  of  his  eyes.  He  was  fired  with  the 
desire  of  doing  something,  though  he  knew  not  yet,  with 
distinctness,  either  end  or  means.  He  was  now  no  longer 
gloomy  and  unsocial ;  but  considering  himself  as  master  of 
a  secret  stock  of  happiness,  which  he  could  only  enjoy  by 
concealing  it,  he  affected  to  be  busy  in  all  the  schemes  of 


RASSELAS.  183 

diversion,  and  endeavoured  to  make  others  pleased  with  the 
state  of  which  he  himself  was  weary.  But  pleasures  can 
never  be  so  multiplied  or  continued  as  not  to  leave  much  of 
life  unemployed  ;  there  were  many  hours,  both  of  the  night 
and  day,  which  he  could  spend  without  suspicion  in  solitary 
thought.  The  load  of  life  was  much  lightened ;  he  went 
eagerly  into  the  assemblies,  because  he  supposed  the  fre- 
quency of  his  presence  necessary  to  the  success  of  his 
purposes  ;  he  retired  gladly  to  privacy,  because  he  had  now 
a  subject  of  thought.  His  chief  amusement  was  to  picture 
to  himself  that  world  which  he  had  never  seen,  to  place 
himself  in  various  conditions,  to  be  entangled  in  imaginary 
difficulties,  and  to  be  engaged  in  wild  adventures ;  but  his 
benevolence  always  terminated  his  projects  in  the  relief  of 
distress,  the  detection  of  fraud,  the  defeat  of  oppression,  and 
the  diffusion  of  happiness. 

Thus  passed  twenty  months  of  the  life  of  Rasselas.  He 
busied  himself  so  intensely  in  visionary  bustle  that  he  forgot 
his  real  solitude ;  and  amidst  hourly  preparations  for  the 
various  incidents  of  human  affairs,  neglected  to  consider  by 
what  means  he  should  mingle  with  mankind. 

One  day,  as  he  was  sitting  on  a  bank,  he  feigned  to  him- 
self an  orphan  virgin  robbed  of  her  little  portion  by  a 
treacherous  lover,  and  crying  after  him  for  restitution.  So 
strongly  was  the  image  impressed  upon  his  mind,  that  he 
started  up  in  the  maid's  defence,  and  ran  forward  to  seize 
the  plunderer  with  all  the  eagerness  of  real  pursuit.  Fear 
naturally  quickens  the  flight  of  guilt.  Rasselas  could  not 
catch  the  fugitive  with  his  utmost  efforts ;  but,  resolving  to 
weary  by  perseverance  him  whom  he  could  not  surpass  in 
speed,  he  pressed  on  till  the  foot  of  the  mountain  stopped 
his  course. 

Here  he  recollected  himself,  and  smiled  at  his  own  use- 
less impetuosity.  Then  raising  his  eyes  to  the  mountain, 
"This,"  said  he,  "  is  the  fatal  obstacle  that  hinders  at  once 
the  enjoyment  of  pleasure  and  the  exercise  of  virtue.  How 


184  RASSELAS. 

long  is  it  that  my  hopes  and  wishes  have  flown  beyond  this 
boundary  of  my  life,  which  yet  I  never  have  attempted  to 
surmount?"  Struck  with  this  reflection,  he  sat  down  to 
muse,  and  remembered  that  since  he  first  resolved  to  escape 
from  his  confinement,  the  sun  had  passed  twice  over  him 
in  his  annual  course.  He  now  felt  a  degree  of  regret  with 
which  he  had  never  been  before  acquainted.  He  considered 
how  much  might  have  been  done  in  the  time  which  had 
passed,  and  left  nothing  real  behind  it.  He  compared 
twenty  months  with  the  life  of  man.  "  In  life,"  said  he,  "  is 
not  to  be  counted  the  ignorance  of  infancy  or  imbecility  of 
age.  We  are  long  before  we  are  able  to  think,  and  we  soon 
cease  from  the  power  of  acting.  The  true  period  of  human 
existence  may  be  reasonably  estimated  at  forty  years,  of 
which  I  have  mused  away  the  four-and-twentieth  part. 
What  I  have  lost  was  certain,  for  I  have  certainly  possessed 
it ;  but  of  twenty  months  to  come,  who  can  assure  me  ? " 

The  consciousness  of  his  own  folly  pierced  him  deeply, 
and  he  was  long  before  he  could  be  reconciled  to  himself. 
"  The  rest  of  my  time,"  said  he,  "  has  been  lost  by  the  crime 
or  folly  of  my  ancestors,  and  the  absurd  institutions  of  my 
country ;  I  remember  it  with  disgust, yet  without  remorse:  but 
the  months  that  have  passed  since  new  light  darted  into  my 
soul,  since  I  formed  a  scheme  of  reasonable  felicity,  have 
been  squandered  by  my  own  fault.  I  have  lost  that  which 
can  never  be  restored ;  I  have  seen  the  sun  rise  and  set  for 
twenty  months,  an  idle  gazer  on  the  light  of  heaven  ;  in  this 
time  the  birds  have  left  the  nest  of  their  mother,  and  com- 
mitted themselves  to  the  woods  and  to  the  skies;  the  kid 
has  forsaken  the  teat,  and  learned  by  degrees  to  climb  the 
rocks  in  quest  of  independent  sustenance.  I  only  have 
made  no  advances,  but  am  still  helpless  and  ignorant.  The 
moon,  by  more  than  twenty  changes,  admonished  me  of  the 
flux  of  life  ;  the  stream  that  rolled  before  my  feet  upbraided 
my  inactivity.  I  sat  feasting  on  intellectual  luxury,  regard- 
less alike  of  the  examples  of  the  earth  and  the  instructions 


XASSELAS.  !8S 

of  the  planets.  Twenty  months  are  passed  :  who  shall 
restore  them  ?  " 

These  sorrowful  meditations  fastened  upon  his  mind  ;  he 
passed  four  months  in  resolving  to  lose  no  more  time  in 
idle  resolves,  and  was  awakened  to  more  vigorous  exertion 
by  hearing  a  maid,  who  had  broken  a  porcelain  cup,  remark 
that  what  cannot  be  repaired  is  not  to  be  regretted. 

This  was  obvious ;  and  Rasselas  reproached  himself  that 
he  had  not  discovered  it ;  having  not  known,  or  not  con- 
sidered, how  many  useful  hints  are  obtained  by  chance,  and 
how  often  the  mind,  hurried  by  her  own  ardour  to  distant 
views,  neglects  the  truths  that  lie  open  before  her.  He  for 
a  few  hours  regretted  his  regret,  and  from  that  time  bent  his 
whole  mind  upon  the  means  of  escaping  from  the  Valley  of 
Happiness. 


CHAPTER  V. 

Tht  Prince  meditates  his  Escape. 

HE  now  found  that  it  would  be  very  difficult  to  effect  that 
which  it  was  very  easy  to  suppose  effected.  When  he 
looked  round  about  him,  he  saw  himself  confined  by  the 
bars  of  nature,  which  had  never  yet  been  broken,  and  by 
the  gate  through  which  none  that  once  had  passed  it  were 
ever  able  to  return.  He  was  now  impatient  as  an  eagle  in 
a  grate.  He  passed  week  after  week  in  clambering  the 
mountains,  to  see  if  there  was  any  aperture  which  the 
bushes  might  conceal,  but  found  all  the  summits  inaccessible 
by  their  prominence.  The  iron  gate  he  despaired  to  open, 
for  it  was  not  only  secured  with  all  the  power  of  art,  but 
was  always  watched  by  successive  sentinels,  and  was,  by 
its  position,  exposed  to  the  perpetual  observation  of  all  the 
inhabitants. 

He  then  examined  the  cavern  through  which  the  waters 
of  the  lake  were  discharged ;  and,  looking  down  at  a.  time 


1 86  RASSELAS. 

when  the  sun  shone  strongly  upon  its  mouth,  he  discovered 
it  to  be  full  of  broken  rocks,  which,  though  they  permitted 
the  stream  to  flow  through  many  narrow  passages,  would 
stop  any  body  of  solid  bulk.  He  returned,  discouraged  and 
dejected  :  but  having  now  known  the  blessing  of  hope, 
resolved  never  to  despair. 

Jn  these  fruitless  researches  he  spent  ten  months.  The 
time,  however,  passed  cheerfully  away :  in  the  morning  he 
rose  with  new  hope,  in  the  evening  applauded  his  own 
diligence,  and  in  the  night  slept  soundly  after  his  fatigue. 
He  met  a  thousand  amusements,  which  beguiled  his  labour 
and  diversified  his  thoughts.  He  discerned  the  various 
instincts  of  animals  and  properties  of  plants,  and  found  the 
place  replete  with  wonders,  of  which  he  proposed  to  solace 
himself  with  the  contemplation,  if  he  should  never  be  able 
to  accomplish  his  flight ;  rejoicing  that  his  endeavours, 
though  yet  unsuccessful,  had  supplied  him  with  a  source  of 
inexhaustible  inquiry. 

But  his  original  curiosity  was  not  yet  abated  :  he  resolved 
to  obtain  some  knowledge  of  the  ways  of  men.  His  wish 
still  continued,  but  his  hope  grew  less.  He  ceased  to 
survey  any  longer  the  walls  of  his  prison,  and  spared  to 
search  by  new  toils  for  interstices  which  he  knew  could  not 
be  found,  yet  determined  to  keep  his  design  always  in 
vie\v,  and  lay  hold  on  any  expedient  that  time  should  offer. 


CHAPTER  VI. 

A  Dissertation  on  the  Art  of  Flying. 

AMONG  the  artists  that  had  been  allured  into  the  Happy 
Valley,  to  labour  for  the  accommodation  and  pleasure  of  its 
inhabitants,  was  a  man  eminent  for  his  knowledge  of  the 
mechanic  powers,  who  had  contrived  many  engines  both  of 
use  and  recreation.  By  a  wheel  which  the  stream  turned,  he 
forced  the  water  into  a  tower,  whence  it  was  distributed  to  all 


RASSELAS.  187 

the  apartments  of  the  palace.  He  erected  a  pavilion  in  the 
garden,  around  which  he  kept  the  air  always  cool  by  artificial 
showers.  One  of  the  groves,  appropriated  to  the  ladies, 
was  ventilated  by  fans,  to  which  the  rivulets  that  ran  through 
it  gave  a  constant  motion  ;  and  instruments  of  soft  music 
were  played  at  proper  distances,  of  which  some  played  by 
the  impulse  of  the  wind,  and  some  by  the  power  of  the 
stream. 

This  artist  was  sometimes  visited  by  Rasselas,  who  was 
pleased  with  every  kind  of  knowledge,  imagining  that  the 
time  would  come  when  all  his  acquisitions  should  be  of  use 
to  him  in  the  open  world.  He  came  one  day  to  amuse 
himself  in  his  usual  manner,  and  found  the  master  busy  in 
building  a  sailing  chariot.  He  saw  that  the  design  was 
practicable  upon  a  level  surface,  and  with  expressions  of 
great  esteem  solicited  its  completion.  The  workman  was 
pleased  to  find  himself  so  much  regarded  by  the  Prince,  and 
resolved  to  gain  yet  higher  honours.  "  Sir,"  said  he,  "  you 
have  seen  but  a  small  part  of  what  the  mechanic  sciences 
can  perform.  I  have  been  long  of  opinion  that,  instead  of 
the  tardy  conveyance  of  ships  and  chariots,  man  might  use 
the  swifter  migration  of  wings ;  that  the  fields  of  air  are 
open  to  knowledge,  and  that  only  ignorance  and  idleness 
need  crawl  upon  the  ground." 

This  hint  rekindled  the  Prince's  desire  of  passing  the 
mountains.  Having  seen  what  the  mechanist  had  already 
performed,  he  was  willing  to  fancy  that  he  could  do  more ; 
yet  resolved  to  inquire  further  before  he  suffered  hope  to 
afflict  him  by  disappointment.  "  I  am  afraid,"  said  he  to 
the  artist,  "that  your  imagination  prevails  over  your  skill, 
and  that  you  now  tell  me  rather  what  you  wish  than  what 
you  know.  Every  animal  has  his  element  assigned  him ; 
the  birds  have  the  air,  and  man  and  beasts  the  earth." 
"  So,"  replied  the  mechanist,  "  fishes  have  the  water,  in 
which  yet  beasts  can  swim  by  nature  and  man  by  art.  He 
that  can  swim  needs  not  despair  to  fly ;  to  swim  is  to  fly  in 


1 88  RASSELAS. 

a  grosser  fluid,  and  to  fly  is  to  swim  in  a  subtler.  We  are" 
only  to  proportion  our  power  of  resistance  to  the  different 
density  of  matter  through  which  we  are  to  pass.  You  will 
be  necessarily  upborne  by  the  air  if  you  can  renew  any 
impulse  upon  it  faster  than  the  air  can  recede  from  the 
pressure." 

"  But  the  exercise  of  swimming,"  said  the  Prince,  "  is  very 
laborious;  the  strongest  limbs  are  soon  weaned.  I  am 
afraid  the  act  of  flying  will  be  yet  more  violent ;  and  wings 
will  be  of  no  great  use  unless  we  can  fly  further  than  we  can 
swim." 

"  The  labour  of  rising  from  the  ground,"  said  the  artist, 
"  will  be  great,  as  we  see  it  in  the  heavier  domestic  fowls ; 
but  as  we  mount  higher  the  earth's  attraction  and  the  body's 
gravity  will  be  gradually  diminished,  till  we  shall  arrive  at  a 
region  where  the  man  shall  float  in  the  air  without  any 
tendency  to  fall ;  no  care  will  then  be  necessary  but  to  move 
forward,  which  the  gentlest  impulse  will  effect.  You,  sir, 
whose  curiosity  is  so  extensive,  will  easily  conceive  with 
what  pleasure  a  philosopher,  furnished  with  wings  and 
hovering  in  the  sky,  would  see  the  earth  and  all  its  inhabi- 
tants rolling  beneath  him,  and  presenting  to  him  successively, 
by  its  diurnal  motion,  all  the  countries  within  the  same 
parallel.  How  must  it  amuse  the  pendent  spectator  to  see 
the  moving  scene  of  land  and  ocean,  cities  and  deserts ;  to 
survey  with  equal  security  the  marts  of  trade  and  the  fields 
of  battle ;  mountains  infested  by  barbarians,  and  fruitful 
regions  gladdened  by  plenty  and  lulled  by  peace.  How 
easily  shall  we  then  trace  the  Nile  through  all  his  passages, 
pass  over  to  distant  regions,  and  examine  the  face  of  nature 
from  one  extremity  of  the  earth  to  the  other." 

"  All  this,"  said  the  Prince,  "  is  much  to  be  desired,  but 
I  am  afraid  that  no  man  will  be  able  to  breathe  in  these 
regions  of  speculation  and  tranquillity.  I  have  been  told 
that  respiration  is  difficult  upon  lofty  mountains ;  yet  from 
these  precipices,  though  so  high  as  to  produce  great  tenuity 


RASSELAS.  189 

of  air,  it  is  very  easy  to  fall ;  therefore  I  suspect  that  from 
any  height  where  life  can  be  supported,  there  may  be  danger 
of  too  quick  descent." 

"  Nothing,"  replied  the  artist,  "  will  ever  be  attempted  if 
all  possible  objections  must  be  first  overcome.  If  you  will 
favour  my  project,  I  will  try  the  first  flight  at  my  own  hazard. 
I  have  considered  the  structure  of  all  volant  animals,  and 
find  the  folding  continuity  of  the  bat's  wings  most  easily 
accommodated  to  the  human  form.  Upon  this  model  I 
shall  begin  my  task  to-morrow ;  and  in  a  year  expect  to 
tower  into  the  air  beyond  the  malice  and  pursuit  of  man. 
But  I  will  work  only  on  this  condition :  that  the  art  shall 
not  be  divulged,  and  that  you  shall  not  require  me  to  make 
wings  for  any  but  ourselves." 

"  Why,"  said  Rasselas,  "  should  you  envy  others  so  great 
an  advantage  ?  All  skill  ought  to  be  exerted  for  universal 
good ;  every  man  has  owed  much  to  others,  and  ought  to 
repay  the  kindness  that  he  has  received." 

"  If  men  were  all  virtuous,"  returned  the  artist,  "  I  should 
with  great  alacrity  teach  them  to  fly.  But  what  would  be 
the  security  of  the  good  if  the  bad  could  at  pleasure  invade 
them  from  the  sky  ?  Against  an  army  sailing  through  the 
clouds,  neither  walls,  mountains,  nor  seas,  could  afford 
security.  A  flight  of  northern  savages  might  hover  in  the 
wind,  and  light  with  irresistible  violence  upon  the  capital  of 
a  fruitful  region.  Even  this  valley,  the  retreat  of  princes, 
the  abode  of  happiness,  might  be  violated  by  the  sudden 
descent  of  some  of  the  naked  nations  that  swarm  on  the 
coast  of  the  southern  sea  ! " 

The  Prince  promised  secrecy,  and  waited  for  the  per- 
formance, not  wholly  hopeless  of  success.  He  visited  the 
work  from  time  to  time,  observed  its  progress,  and  remarked 
many  ingenious  contrivances  to  facilitate  motion,  and  unite 
levity  with  strength.  The  artist  was  every  day  more  certain 
that  he  should  leave  vultures  and  eagles  behind  him,  and 
the  contagion  of  his  confidence  seized  upon  the  Prince.  In 


190  RASSELAS. 

a  year  the  wings  were  finished;  and  on  a  morning  appointed 
the  maker  appeared,  furnished  for  flight,  on  a  little  promon- 
tory :  he  waved  his  pinions  a  while  to  gather  air,  then 
leaped  from  his  stand,  and  in  an  instant  dropped  into  the 
lake.  His  wings,  which  were  of  no  use  in  the  air,  sustained 
him  in  the  water ;  and  the  Prince  drew  him  to  land  half 
dead  with  terror  and  vexation. 


CHAPTER  VII. 

The  Prince  finds  a  Man  of  Learning. 

THE  Prince  was  not  much  afflicted  by  this  disaster,  having 
suffered  himself  to  hope  for  a  happier  event  only  because 
he  had  no  other  means  of  escape  in  view.  He  still  per- 
sisted in  his  design  to  leave  the  Happy  Valley  by  the  first 
opportunity. 

His  imagination  was  now  at  a  stand ;  he  had  no  prospect 
of  entering  into  the  world  ;  and  notwithstanding  all  his 
endeavours  to  support  himself,  discontent  by  degrees  preyed 
upon  him ;  and  he  began  again  to  lose  his  thoughts  in 
sadness  when  the  rainy  season,  which  in  these  countries  is 
periodical,  made  it  inconvenient  to  wander  in  the  woods. 

The  rain  continued  longer  and  with  more  violence  than 
had  ever  been  known  :  the  clouds  broke  on  the  surrounding 
mountains,  and  the  torrents  streamed  into  the  plain  on 
every  side,  till  the  cavern  was  too  narrow  to  discharge  the 
water.  The  lake  overflowed  its  banks,  and  all  the  level  of 
the  valley  was  covered  with  the  inundation.  The  eminence 
on  which  the  palace  was  built,  and  some  other  spots  of 
rising  ground,  were  all  that  the  eye  could  now  discover. 
The  herds  and  flocks  left  the  pasture,  and  both  the  wild 
beasts  and  the  tame  retreated  to  the  mountains. 

This  inundation  confined  all  the  princes  to  domestic 
amusements ;  and  the  attention  of  Rasselas  was  particularly 
seized  by  a  poem,  which  Imlac  rehearsed,  upon  the  various 


RASSELAS. 


191 


conditions  of  humanity.  He  commanded  the  poet  to  attend 
him  in  his  apartment,  and  recite  his  verses  a  second  time ; 
then  entering  into  familiar  talk,  he  thought  himself  happy 
in  having  found  a  man  who  knew  the  world  so  well,  and 
could  so  skilfully  paint  the  scenes  of  life.  He  asked  a 
thousand  questions  about  things,  to  which,  though  common 
to  all  other  mortals,  his  confinement  from  childhood  had 
kept  him  a  stranger.  The  poet  pitied  his  ignorance,  and 
loved  his  curiosity,  and  entertained  him  from  day  to  day 
with  novelty  and  instruction,  so  that  the  Prince  regretted  the 
necessity  of  sleep,  and  longed  till  the  morning  should  renew 
his  pleasure. 

As  they  were  sitting  together,  the  Prince  commanded 
Imlac  to  relate  his  history,  and  to  tell  by  what  accident  he 
was  forced,  or  by  what  motive  induced,  to  close  his  life  in 
the  Happy  Valley.  As  he  was  going  to  begin  his  narrative, 
Rasselas  was  called  to  a  concert,  and  obliged  to  restrain 
his  curiosity  till  the  evening. 


CHAPTER    VIII. 

The  History  of  Imlac. 

THE  close  of  the  day  is,  in  the  regions  of  the  torrid  zone,  > 
the  only  season  of  diversion  and   entertainment,  and  it  was 
therefore    midnight    before    the    music    ceased    and    the 
princesses  retired.     Rasselas  then  called  for  his  companion, 
and  required  him  to  begin  the  story  of  his  life. 

"  Sir,"  said  Imlac,  "  my  history  will  not  be  long  :  the  life 
that  is  devoted  to  knowledge  passes  silently  away,  and  is 
very  little  diversified  by  events.  To  talk  in  public,  to  think 
in  solitude,  to  read  and  to  hear,  to  inquire  and  answer  in- 
quiries, is  the  business  of  a  scholar.  He  wanders  about  the 
world  without  pomp  or  terror,  and  is  neither  known  nor 
valued  but  by  men  like  himself. 

"  I  was  born  in  the  kingdom  of  Goiama,  at  no  great  dis- 


192  RASSELAS. 

tance  from  the  fountain  of  the  Nile.  My  father  was  a 
wealthy  merchant,  who  traded  between  the  inland  countries 
of  Africa  and  the  ports  of  the  Red  Sea.  He  was  honest, 
frugal,  and  diligent,  but  of  mean  sentiments  and  narrow 
comprehension ;  he  desired  only  to  be  rich,  and  to  conceal 
his  riches,  lest  he  should  be  spoiled  by  the  governors  of  the 
province." 

"  Surely,"  said  the  Prince,  "  my  father  must  be  negligent 
of  his  charge  if  any  man  in  his  dominions  dares  take  that 
which  belongs  to  another.  Does  he  not  know  that  kings 
are  accountable  for  injustice  permitted  as  well  as  done  ?  If 
I  were  emperor,  not  the  meanest  of  my  subjects  should  be 
oppressed  with  impunity.  My  blood  boils  when  I  am  told 
that  a  merchant  durst  not  enjoy  his  honest  gains  for  fear  of 
losing  them  by  the  rapacity  of  power.  Name  the  governor 
who  robbed  the  people,  that  I  may  declare  his  crimes  to  the 
Emperor  !  " 

"  Sir,"  said  Imlac,  "  your  ardour  is  the  natural  effect  of 
virtue  animated  by  youth.  The  time  will  come  when  you 
will  acquit  your  father,  and  perhaps  hear  with  less  impatience 
of  the  governor.  Oppression  is,  in  the  Abyssinian  dominions, 
neither  frequent  nor  tolerated  ;  but  no  form  of  government 
has  been  yet  discovered  by  which  cruelty  can  be  wholly 
prevented.  Subordination  supposes  power  on  one  part  and 
subjection  on  the  other  ;  and  if  power  be  in  the  hands  of 
men  it  will  sometimes  be  abused.  The  vigilance  of  the 
supreme  magistrate  may  do  much,  but  much  will  still  remain 
undone.  He  can  never  know  all  the  crimes  that  are  com- 
mitted, and  can  seldom  punish  all  that  he  knows." 

"  This,"  said  the  Prince,  "  I  do  not  understand  ;  but  I 
had  rather  hear  thee  than  dispute.  Continue  thy  narra- 
tion." 

"  My  father,"  proceeded  Imlac,  "  originally  intended  that 
I  should  have  no  other  education  than  such  as  might  qualify 
me  for  commerce ;  and  discovering  in  me  great  strength 
of  memory  and  quickness  of  apprehension,  often  declared 


RASSELAS.  193 

his  hope  that  I  should  be  some  time  the  richest  man  in 
Abyssinia." 

"Why,"  said  the  Prince,  "did  thy  father  desire  the  in- 
crease of  his  wealth  when  it  was  already  greater  than  he 
durst  discover  or  enjoy  ?  I  am  unwilling  to  doubt  thy  veracity, 
yet  inconsistencies  cannot  both  be  true." 

"  Inconsistencies,"  answered  Imlac,  "  cannot  both  be 
right ;  but,  imputed  to  man,  they  may  both  be  true.  Yet 
diversity  is  not  inconsistency.  My  father  might  expect  a 
time  of  greater  security.  However,  some  desire  is  necessary 
to  keep  life  in  motion  ;  and  he  whose  real  wants  are  supplied 
must  admit  those  of  fancy." 

"  This,"  ssid  the  Prince,  "  I  can  in  some  measure  conceive. 
I  repent  that  I  interrupted  thee." 

"  With  this  hope,"  proceeded  Imlac,  "  he  sent  me  to 
school.  But  when  I  had  once  found  the  delight  of  know- 
ledge, and  felt  the  pleasure  of  intelligence  and  the  pride  of 
invention,  I  began  silently  to  despise  riches,  and  determined 
to  disappoint  the  purposes  of  my  father,  whose  grossness  of 
conception  raised  my  pity.  I  was  twenty  years  old  before 
his  tenderness  would  expose  me  to  the  fatigue  of  travel ;  in 
which  time  I  had  been  instructed,  by  successive  masters,  in 
all  the  literature  of  my  native  country.  As  every  hour  taught 
me  something  new,  I  lived  in  a  continual  course  of  gratifi- 
cation ;  but  as  I  advanced  towards  manhood,  I  lost  much 
of  the  reverence  with  which  I  had  been  used  to  look  on  my 
instructors ;  because  when  the  lessons  were  ended  I  did  not 
find  them  wiser  or  better  than  common  men. 

"  At  length  my  father  resolved  to  initiate  me  in  commerce  ; 
and,  opening  one  of  his  subterranean  treasuries,  counted  out 
ten  thousand  pieces  of  gold.  '  This,  young  man,'  said  he, 
'  is  the  stock  with  which  you  must  negotiate.  I  began  with 
less  than  a  fifth  part,  and  you  see  how  diligence  and  parsi- 
mony have  increased  it.  This  is  your  own,  to  waste  or  to 
improve.  If  you  squander  it  by  negligence  or  caprice,  you 
must  wait  for  my  death  before  you  will  be  rich  ;  if  in  four 

G 


194  RASSELAS. 

years  you  double  your  stock,  we  will  thenceforward  let  sub- 
ordination cease,  and  live  together  as  friends  and  partners, 
for  he  shall  be  always  equal  with  me  who  is  equally  skilled 
in  the  art  of  growing  rich.' 

"  We  laid  out  our  money  upon  camels,  concealed  in  bales 
of  cheap  goods,  and  travelled  to  the  shore  of  the  Red  Sea. 
When  I  cast  my  eye  on  the  expanse  of  waters,  my  heart 
bounded  like  that  of  a  prisoner  escaped.  I  felt  an  inex- 
tinguishable curiosity  kindle  in  my  mind,  and  resolved  to 
snatch  this  opportunity  of  seeing  the  manners  of  other 
nations,  and  of  learning  sciences  unknown  in  Abyssinia. 

"  I  remembered  that  my  father  had  obliged  me  to  the 
improvement  of  my  stock,  not  by  a  promise,  which  I  ought 
not  to  violate,  but  by  a  penalty,  which  I  was  at  liberty  to 
incur ;  and  therefore  determined  to  gratify  my  predominant 
desire,  and,  by  drinking  at  the  fountain  of  knowledge,  to 
quench  the  thirst  of  curiosity. 

"  As  I  was  supposed  to  trade  without  connection  with  my 
father,  it  was  easy  for  me  to  become  acquainted  with  the 
master  of  a  ship,  and  procure  a  passage  to  some  other 
country.  I  had  no  motives  of  choice  to  regulate  my  voyage. 
It  was  sufficient  for  me  that,  wherever  I  wandered,  I  should 
see  a  country  which  I  had  not  seen  before.  I  therefore 
entered  a  ship  bound  for  Surat,  having  left  a  letter  for  my 
father  declaring  my  intention." 


CHAPTER  IX. 

The  History  of  Inilac  (continued}. 

"  WHEN  I  first  entered  upon  the  world  of  waters,  and  lost 
sight  of  land,  I  looked  round  about  me  in  pleasing  terror,  and 
thinking  my  soul  enlarged  by  the  boundless  prospect,  imagined 
that  I  could  gaze  around  me  for  ever  without  satiety ;  but 
in  a  short  time  I  grew  weary  of  looking  on  barren  uniformity, 
where  I  could  only  see  again  what  I  had  already  seen.  I 


RASSELAS  195 

then  descended  into  the  ship,  and  doubted  for  a  while 
whether  all  my  future  pleasures  would  not  end,  like  this,  in 
disgust  and  disappointment.  '  Yet  surely/  said  I,  l  the 
ocean  and  the  land  are  very  different.  The  only  variety  of 
water  is  rest  and  motion.  But  the  earth  has  mountains  and 
valleys,  deserts  and  cities ;  it  is  inhabited  by  men  of  different 
customs  and  contrary  opinions ;  and  I  may  hope  to  find 
variety  in  life,  though  I  should  miss  it  in  nature.' 
.  "  With  this  thought  I  quieted  my  mind  :  and  amused  my- 
self during  the  voyage,  sometimes  by  learning  from  the 
sailors  the  art  of  navigation,  which  I  have  never  practised, 
and  sometimes  by  forming  schemes  for  my  conduct  in  dif- 
ferent situations,  in  not  one  of  which  I  have  been  ever 
placed. 

"  I  was  almost  weary  of  my  naval  amusements  when  we 
safely  landed  at  Surat.  I  secured  my  money,  and  pur- 
chasing some  commodities  for  show,  joined  myself  to  a 
caravan  that  was  passing  into  the  inland  country.  My 
companions,  for  some  reason  or  other,  conjecturing  that  I 
was  rich,  and,  by  my  inquiries  and  admiration,  finding  that 
I  was  ignorant,  considered  me  as  a  novice  whom  they  had  a 
right  to  cheat,  and  who  was  to  learn,  at  the  usual  expense, 
the  art  of  fraud.  They  exposed  me  to  the  theft  of  ser- 
vants and  the  exaction  of  officers,  and  saw  me  plundered 
upon  false  pretences,  without  any  advantage  to  themselves 
but  that  of  rejoicing  in  the  superiority  of  their  own 
knowledge." 

"  Stop  a  moment,"  said  the  Prince ;  "  is  there  such  de- 
pravity in  man  as  that  he  should  injure  another  without 
benefit  to  himself?  I  can  easily  conceive  that  all  are 
pleased  with  superiority;  but  your  ignorance  was  merely 
accidental,  which,  being  neither  your  crime  nor  your  folly, 
could  afford  them  no  reason  to  applaud  themselves  ;  and 
the  knowledge  which  they  had,  anfl  which  you  wanted,  they 
might  as  effectually  have  shown  by  warning  as  betraying  you." 

"  Pride,"  said  Imlac,  "  is  seldom  delicate  ;  it  will  please 


196  RASSELAS. 

itself  with  very  mean  advantages ;  and  envy  feels  not  its 
own  happiness  but  when  it  may  be  compared  with  the 
misery  of  others.  They  were  my  enemies  because  they 
grieved  to  think  me  rich,  and  my  oppressors  because  they 
delighted  to  find  me  weak." 

"Proceed,"  said  the  Prince:  "I  doubt  not  of  the  facts 
which  you  relate,  but  imagine  that  you  impute  them  to  mis- 
taken  motives." 

"  In  this  company,"  said  Imlac,  "  I  arrived  at  Agra,  the 
capital  of  Hindostan,  the  city  in  which  the  Great  Mogul  com- 
monly resides.  I  applied  myself  to  the  language  of  the 
country,  and  in  a  few  months  was  able  to  converse  with  the 
learned  men  ;  some  of  whom  I  found  morose  and  reserved, 
and  others  easy  and  communicative :  some  were  unwilling 
to  teach  another  what  they  had  with  difficulty  learned  them- 
selves ;  and  some  showed  that  the  end  of  their  studies  was 
to  gain  the  dignity  of  instructing. 

'  To  the  tutor  of  the  young  princes  I  recommended  my- 
self so  much  that  I  was  presented  to  the  Emperor  as  a  man 
of  uncommon  knowledge.  The  Emperor  asked  me  many 
questions  concerning  my  country  and  my  travels;  and 
though  I  cannot  now  recollect  anything  that  he  uttered  above 
the  power  of  a  common  man,  he  dismissed  me,  astonished  at 
his  wisdom  and  enamoured  of  his  goodness. 

"  My  credit  was  now  so  high  that  the  merchants  with  whom 
I  had  travelled  applied  to  me  for  recommendations  to  the 
ladies  of  the  Court.  I  was  surprised  at  their  confidence  of 
solicitation,  and  greatly  reproached  them  with  their  practices 
on  the  road.  They  heard  me  with  cold  indifference,  and 
showed  no  tokens  of  shame  or  sorrow. 

"  They  then  urged  their  request  with  the  offer  of  a  bribe  ; 
but  what  I  would  not  do  for  kindness,  I  would  not  do  for 
money,  and  refused  them ;  not  because  they  had  injured  me, 
but  because  I  would  not  enable  them  to  injure  others  ;  for 
I  knew  they  would  have  made  use  of  my  credit  to  cheat 
those  who  should  buy  their  wares; 


RASSELAS.  !9y 

"  Having  resided  at  Agra  till  there  was  no  more  to  be 
learned,  I  travelled  into  Persia,  where  I  saw  many  remains 
of  ancient  magnificence,  and  observed  many  new  accommo- 
dations of  life.  The  Persians  are  a  nation  eminently  social, 
and  their  assemblies  afforded  me  daily  opportunities  of 
remarking  characters  and  manners,  and  of  tracing  human 
nature  through  all  its  variations. 

'  From  Persia  I  passed  into  Arabia,  where  I  saw  a  nation 
pastoral  and  warlike,  who  lived  without  any  settled  habita- 
tion, whose  wealth  is  their  flocks  and  herds,  and  who  have 
carried  on  through  ages  an  hereditary  war  with  mankind* 
though  they  neither  covet  nor  envy  their  possessions. " 

CHAPTER  X. 

Iftilac's  History  {continued).     A  Dissertation  upon  Poetry, 

"  WHEREVER  I  went  I  found  that  poetry  was  considered  as 
the  highest  learning,  and  regarded  with  a  veneration  some- 
what approaching  to  that  which  man  would  pay  to  angelic 
nature.  And  yet  it  fills  me  with  wonder,  that  in  almost  all 
countries  the  most  ancient  poets  are  considered  as  the  best ; 
whether  it  be  that  every  other  kind  of  knowledge  is  an 
acquisition  gradually  attained,  and  poetry  is  a  gift  conferred 
at  once  ;  or  that  the  first  poetry  of  every  nation  surprised 
them  as  a  novelty,  and  retained  the  credit  by  consent  which 
it  received  by  accident  at  first ;  or  whether,  as  the  province  of 
poetry  is  to  describe  nature  and  passion,  which  are  always 
the  same,  the  first  writers  took  possession  of  the  most 
striking  objects  for  description  and  the  most  probable  occur- 
rences for  fiction,  and  left  nothing  to  those  that  followed 
them  but  transcription  of  the  same  events  and  new  combi- 
nations of  the  same  images.  Whatever  be  the  reason,  it  is 
commonly  observed  that  the  early  writers  are  in  possession 
of  nature,  and  their  followers  of  art ;  that  the  first  excel  in 
strength  and  invention,  and  the  latter  in  elegance  and 
refinement. 


198  RASSELAS. 

"  I  was  desirous  to  add  my  name  to  this  illustrious  frater- 
nity. I  read  all  the  poets  of  Persia  and  Arabia,  and  was  able 
to  repeat  by  memory  the  volumes  that  are  suspended  in  the 
mosque  of  Mecca.  But  I  soon  found  that  no  man  was  ever 
great  by  imitation.  My  desire  of  excellence  impelled  me  to 
transfer  my  attention  to  nature  and  to  life.  Nature  was  to 
be  my  subject,  and  men  to  be  my  auditors.  I  could  never 
describe  what  I  had  not  seen.  I  could  not  hope  to  move 
those  with  delight  or  terror  whose  interests  and  opinions  I 
did  not  understand. 

"  Being  now  resolved  to  be  a  poet,  I  saw  everything  with 
a  new  purpose  ;  my  sphere  of  attention  was  suddenly  mag- 
nified ;  no  kind  of  knowledge  was  to  be  overlooked.  I 
ranged  mountains  and  deserts  for  images  and  resemblances, 
and  pictured  upon  my  mind  every  tree  of  the  forest  and 
flower  of  the  valley.  I  observed  with  equal  care  the 
crags  of  the  rock  and  the  pinnacles  of  the  palace.  Some- 
times I  wandered  along  the  mazes  of  the  rivulet,  and  some- 
times watched  the  changes  of  the  summer  clouds.  To  a 
poet  nothing  can  be  useless.  Whatever  is  beautiful  and 
whatever  is  dreadful  must  be  familiar  to  his  imagination  ; 
he  must  be  conversant  with  all  that  is  awfully  vast  or 
elegantly  little.  The  plants  of  the  garden,  the  animals  of 
the  wood,  the  minerals  of  the  earth,  and  meteors  of  the  sky, 
must  all  concur  to  store  his  mind  with  inexhaustible  variety; 
for  every  idea  is  useful  for  the  enforcement  or  decoration 
of  moral  or  religious  truth,  and  he  who  knows  most  will 
have  most  power  of  diversifying  his  scenes  and  of  gra- 
tifying his  reader  with  remote  allusions  and  unexpected 
instruction. 

"  All  the  appearances  of  nature  I  was  therefore  careful  to 
study,  and  every  country  which  I  have  surveyed  has  contri- 
buted something  to  my  poetical  powers." 

"  In  so  wide  a  survey,"  said  the  Prince,  "  you  must 
surely  have  left  much  unobserved.  I  have  lived  till  now 
within  the  circuit  of  the  mountains,  and  yet  cannot  walk 


RASSELAS.  199 

abroad  without  the  sight  of  something  which  I  had  never 
beheld  before,  or  never  heeded." 

"  This  business  of  a  poet,"  said  Imlac,  "  is  to  examine, 
not  the  individual,  but  the  species ;  to  remark  general  pro- 
perties and  large  appearances.  He  does  not  number  the 
streaks  of  the  tulip,  or  describe  the  different  shades  of  the 
verdure  of  the  forest.  He  is  to  exhibit  in  his  portraits  of 
nature  such  prominent  and  striking  features  as  recall  the 
original  to  every  mind,  and  must  neglect  the  minuter  discri- 
minations, which  one  may  have  remarked  and  another  have 
neglected,  for  those  characteristics  which  are  alike  obvious 
to  vigilance  and  carelessness. 

"  But  the  knowledge  of  nature  is  only  half  the  task  of  a 
poet ;  he  must  be  acquainted  likewise  with  all  the  modes  of 
life.  His  character  requires  that  he  estimate  the  happiness 
and  misery  of  every  condition,  observe  the  power  of  all  the 
passions  in  all  their  combinations,  and  trace  the  changes  of 
the  human  mind,  as  they  are  modified  by  various  institutions 
and  accidental  influences  of  climate  or  custom,  from  the 
sprightlin ess  of  infancy  to  the  despondence  of  decrepitude. 
He  must  divest  himself  of  the  prejudices  of  his  age  and 
country ;  he  must  consider  right  and  wrong  in  their  abstracted 
and  invariable  state  ;  he  must  disregard  present  laws  and 
opinions,  and  rise  to  general  and  transcendental  truths, 
which  will  always  be  the  same.  He  must,  therefore,  content 
himself  with  the  slow  progress  of  his  name,  contemn  the 
praise  of  his  own  time,  and  commit  his  claims  to  the  justice 
of  posterity.  He  must  write  as  the  interpreter  of  nature  and 
the  legislator  of  mankind,  and  consider  himself  as  presiding 
over  the  thoughts  and  manners  of  future  generations,  as 
a  being  superior  to  time  and  place. 

"  His  labour  is  not  yet  at  an  end.  He  must  know  many 
languages  and  many  sciences,  and,  that  his  style  may  be 
worthy  of  his  thoughts,  must  by  incessant  practice  fami- 
liarize to  himself  every  delicacy  of  speech  and  grace  of 
harmony." 


200  RASSELAS. 

CHAPTER  XI. 

Imlac1  s  Narrative  (continued],     A  Hint  on  Pilgrimage. 

IMLAC  now  felt  the  enthusiastic  fit,  and  was  proceeding  to 
aggrandize  his  own  profession,  when  the  Prince  cried  out : 
"  Enough  !  thou  hast  convinced  me  that  no  human  being 
can  ever  be  a  poet.  Proceed  with  thy  narration." 

"  To  be  a  poet,"  said  Imlac,  "  is  indeed  very  difficult." 
"So  difficult,"  returned  the  Prince,  "  that  I  will  at  present 
hear  no  more  of  his  labours.  Tell  me  whither  you  went 
when  you  had  seen  Persia." 

"From  Persia,"  said  the  poet,  "  I  travelled  through  Syria, 
and  for  three  years  resided  in  Palestine,  where  I  conversed 
with  great  numbers  of  the  northern  and  western  nations  of 
Europe;  the  nations  which  are  now  in  possession  of  all 
power  and  all  knowledge,  whose  armies  are  irresistible,  and 
whose  fleets  command  theremotest  parts  of  the  globe.  When 
I  compared  these  men  with  the  natives  of  our  own  kingdom 
and  those  that  surround  us,  they  appeared  almost  another 
order  of  beings.  In  their  countries  it  is  difficult  to  wish  for 
anything  that  may  not  be  obtained  :  a  thousand  arts,  of 
which  we  never  heard,  are  continually  labouring  for  their 
convenience  and  pleasure ;  and  whatever  their  own  climate 
has  denied  them  is  supplied  by  their  commerce." 

"  By  what  means,"  said  the  Prince,  "  are  the  Europeans 
thus  powerful  ?  or  why,  since  they  can  so  easily  visit  Asia 
and  Africa  for  trade  or  conquest,  cannot  the  Asiatics  and 
Africans  invade  their  coast,  plant  colonies  in  their  ports,  and 
give  laws  to  their  natural  princes  ?  The  same  wind  that 
carries  them  back  would  bring  us  thither." 

"  They  are  more  powerful,  sir,  than  we,"  answered  Imlac, 
"because  they  are  wiser ;  knowledge  will  always  predominate 
over  ignorance,  as  man  governs  the  other  animals.  But  why 
their  knowledge  is  more  than  ours,  I  know  not  what  reason 


RASSELAS.  201 

can  be  given  but  the  unsearchable  will   of  the  Supreme 
Being." 

"  When,"  said  the  Prince  with  a  sigh,  "  shall  I  be  able  to 
visit  Palestine,  and  mingle  with  this  mighty  confluence  of 
nations?  Till  that  happy  moment  shall  arrive,  let  rne  fill  up 
the  time  with  such  representations  as  thou  canst  give  me.  I 
am  not  ignorant  of  the  motive  that  assembles  such  numbers 
in  that  place,  and  cannot  but  consider  it  as  the  centre 
of  wisdom  and  piety,  to  which  the  best  and  wisest  men  of 
every  land  must  be  continually  resorting." 

"  There  are  some  nations,"  said  Imlac,  "  that  send  few 
visitants  to  Palestine  :  for  many  numerous  and  learned  sects 
in  Europe  concur  to  censure  pilgrimage  as  superstitious,  or 
deride  it  as  ridiculous." 

"  You  know,"  said  the  Prince,  "how  little  my  life  has  made 
me  acquainted  with  diversity  of  opinions ;  it  will  be  too  long 
to  hear  the  arguments  on  both  sides ;  you,  that  have  con- 
sidered them,  tell  me  the  result." 

"Pilgrimage,"  said  Imlac,  "  like  many  other  acts  of  piety, 
may  be  reasonable  or  superstitious,  according  to  the  principles 
upon  which  it  is  performed.  Long  journeys  in  search  of  truth 
are  not  commanded.  Truth,  such  as  is  necessary  to  the 
regulation  of  life,  is  always  found  where  it  is  honestly  sought. 
Change  of  place  is  no  natural  cause  of  the  increase  of  piety,  for 
it  inevitably  produces  dissipation  of  mind.  Yet,  since  men  go 
every  day  to  view  the  fields  where  great  actions  have  been 
performed,  and  return  with  stronger  impressions  of  the  event, 
curiosity  of  the  same  kind  may  naturally  dispose  us  to  view 
that  country  whence  our  religion  had  its  beginning,  and  I 
believe  no  man  surveys  those  awful  scenes  without  some  con- 
firmation of  holy  resolutions.  That  the  Supreme  Being  may 
be  more  easily  propitiated  in  one  place  than  in  another,  is 
the  dream  of  idle  superstition ;  but  that  some  places  may 
operate  upon  our  own  minds  in  an  uncommon  manner,  is 
an  opinion  which  hourly  experience  will  justify.  He  who 
supposes  that  his  vices  may  be  more  successfully  combated 


202  R  ASS  EL  AS. 

in  Palestine  will  perhaps  find  himself  mistaken;  yet  he  may 
go  thither  without  folly :  he  who  thinks  they  will  be  more 
freely  pardoned,  dishonours  at  once  his  reason  and  religion." 

"These,"  said  the  Prince,  "are  European  distinctions.  I 
will  consider  them  another  time.  What  have  you  found  to 
be  the  effect  of  knowledge  ?  Are  those  nations  happier  than 
we?" 

"  There  is  so  much  infelicity,"  said  the  poet,  "  in  the  world, 
that  scarce  any  man  has  leisure  from  his  own  distresses  to 
estimate  the  comparative  happiness  of  others.  Knowledge 
is  certainly  one  of  the  means  of  pleasure,  as  is  confessed  by 
the  natural  desire  which  every  mind  feels  of  increasing  its 
ideas.  Ignorance  is  mere  privation,  by  which  nothing  can 
be  produced  ;  it  is  a  vacuity  in  which  the  soul  sits  motion- 
less and  torpid  for  want  of  attraction ;  and,  without  knowing 
why,  we  always  rejoice  when  we  learn,  and  grieve  when  we 
forget.  I  am  therefore  inclined  to  conclude  that  if  nothing 
counteracts  the  natural  consequence  of  learning,  we  grow 
more  happy  as  our  minds  take  a  wider  range. 

"  In  enumerating  the  particular  comforts  of  life  we  shall 
find  many  advantages  on  the  side  of  the  Europeans.  They 
cure  wounds  and  diseases  with  which  we  languish  and  perish. 
We  suffer  inclemencies  of  weather  which  they  can  obviate. 
They  have  engines  for  the  despatch  of  many  laborious  works, 
which  we  must  perform  by  manual  industry.  There  is  such 
communication  between  distant  places,  that  one  friend  can 
hardly  be  said  to  be  absent  from  another.  Their  policy 
removes  ail  public  inconveniences  :  they  have  roads  cut 
through  the  mountains,  and  bridges  laid  over  their  rivers. 
And,  if  we  descend  to  the  privacies  of  life,  their  habitations 
are  more  commodious,  and  their  possessions  are  more  secure." 

"  They  are  surely  happy,"  said  the  Prince,  "  who  have  all 
these  conveniences,  of  which  I  envy  none  so  much  as  the 
facility  with  which  separated  friends  interchange  their 
thoughts." 

"  The  Europeans,"  answered  Imlac,  "  are  less  unhappy 


RASSELAS.  203 

than  we,  but  they  are  not  happy.  Human  life  is  every- 
where a  state  in  which  much  is  to  be  endured  and  little  to 
be  enjoyed." 

CHAPTER  XII. 

The  Story  of  Imlac  (continued}. 

"I  AM  not  willing,"  said  the  Prince,  "to  suppose  that 
happiness  is  so  parsimoniously  distributed  to  mortals  ;  nor 
can  I  believe  but  that,  if  I  had  the  choice  of  life,  I  should 
be  able  to  fill  every  day  with  pleasure.  I  would  injure  no 
man,  and  should  provoke  no  resentments  :  I  would  relieve 
every  distress,  and  should  enjoy  the  benedictions  of  grati- 
tude. I  would  choose  my  friends  among  the  wise,  and  my 
wife  among  the  virtuous;  and  therefore  should  be  in  no 
danger  from  treachery  or  unkindness.  My  children  should 
by  my  care  be  learned  and  pious,  and  would  repay  to  my 
age  what  their  childhood  had  received.  What  would  dare 
to  molest  him  who  might  call  on  every  side  to  thousands 
enriched  by  his  bounty  or  assisted  by  his  power  ?  And 
why  should  not  life  glide  away  in  the  soft  reciprocation  of 
protection  and  reverence  ?  All  this  may  be  done  without 
the  help  of  European  refinements,  which  appear  by  their 
effects  to  be  rather  specious  than  useful.  Let  us  leave 
them,  and  pursue  our  journey." 

"  From  Palestine,"  said  Imlac,  "  I  passed  through  many 
regions  of  Asia ;  in  the  more  civilized  kingdoms  as  a  trader, 
and  among  the  barbarians  of  the  mountains  as  a  pilgrim. 
At  last  I  began  to  long  for  my  native  country,  that  I  might 
repose,  after  my  travels  and  fatigues,  in  the  places  where  I 
had  spent  my  earliest  years,  and  gladden  my  old  companions 
with  the  recital  of  my  adventures.  Often  did  I  figure  to 
myself  those  with  whom  I  had  sported  away  the  gay  hours 
of  dawning  life,  sitting  round  me  in  its  evening,  wondering 
at  my  tales  and  listening  to  my  counsels. 

'•'  When  this  thought  had  taken  possession  of  my  mind  I 


204  RASSELAS. 

considered  every  moment  as  wasted  which  did  not  bring  me 
nearer  to  Abyssinia.  I  hastened  into  Egypt,  and,  notwith- 
standing my  impatience,  was  detained  ten  months  in  the 
contemplation  of  its  ancient  magnificence,  and  in  inquiries 
after  the  remains  of  its  ancient  learning.  I  found  in  Cairo 
a  mixture  of  all  nations  ;  some  brought  thither  by  the  love 
of  knowledge,  some  by  the  hope  of  gain,  many  by  the  desire 
of  living  after  their  own  manner  without  observation,  and 
of  lying  hid  in  the  obscurity  of  multitudes  :  for  in  a  city 
populous  as  Cairo  it  is  possible  to  obtain  at  the  same  time 
the  gratifications  of  society  and  the  secrecy  of  solitude. 

"  From  Cairo  I  travelled  to  Suez,  and  embarked  on  the 
Red  Sea,  passing  along  the  coast  till  I  arrived  at  the  port 
from  which  I  had  departed  twenty  years  before.  Here  I 
joined  myself  to  a  caravan,  and  re-entered  my  native 
country. 

"  I  now  expected  the  caresses  of  my  kinsmen  and  the 
congratulations  of  my  friends  ;  and  was  not  without  hope 
that  my  father,  whatever  value  he  had  set  upon  riches, 
would  own  with  gladness  and  pride  a  son  who  was  able  to 
add  to  the  felicity  and  honour  of  the  nation.  But  I  was 
soon  convinced  that  my  thoughts  were  vain.  My  father 
had  been  dead  fourteen  years,  having  divided  his  wealth 
among  my  brothers,  who  were  removed  to  some  other 
provinces.  Of  my  companions,  the  greater  part  was  in  the 
grave ;  of  the  rest,  some  could  with  difficulty  remember  me, 
and  some  considered  me  as  one  corrupted  by  foreign 
manners. 

"A  man  used  to  vicissitudes  is  not  easily  dejected.  I 
forgot,  after  a  time,  my  disappointment,  and  endeavoured 
to  recommend  myself  to  the  nobles  of  the  kingdom  :  they 
admitted  me  to  their  tables,  heard  my  story,  and  dismissed 
me.  I  opened  a  school,  and  was  prohibited  to  teach.  I 
then  resolved  to  sit  down  in  the  quiet  of  domestic  life,  and 
addressed  a  lady  that  was  fond  of  my  conversation,  but 
rejected  my  suit  because  my  father  was  a  merchant. 


RASSELAS.  205 

"  Wearied  at  last  with  solicitation  and  repulses,  I  resolved 
to  hide  myself  for  ever  from  the  world,  and  depend  no 
longer  on  the  opinion  or  caprice  of  others.  I  waited  for 
the  time  when  the  gate  of  the  Happy  Valley  should  open, 
that  I  might  bid  farewell  to  hope  and  fear  :  the  day  came ; 
my  performance  was  distinguished  with  favour,  and  I 
resigned  myself  with  joy  to  perpetual  confinement." 

"  Hast  thou  here  found  happiness  at  last  ?  "  said  Rasselas. 
"  Tell  me  without  reserve  :  art  thou  content  with  thy  con- 
dition ?  or  dost  thou  wish  to  be  again  wandering  and 
inquiring?  All  the  inhabitants  of  this  valley  celebrate 
their  lot,  and  at  the  annual  visit  of  the  Emperor  invite 
others  to  partake  of  their  felicity." 

"  Great  Prince,"  said  Imlac,  ll  I  shall  speak  the  truth  :  I 
know  not  one  of  all  your  attendants  who  does  not  lament 
the  hour  when  he  entered  this  retreat.  I  am  less  unhappy 
than  the  rest,  because  I  have  a  mind  replete  with  images, 
which  I  can  vary  and  combine  at  pleasure.  I  can  amuse 
my  solitude  by  the  renovation  of  the  knowledge  which 
begins  to  fade  from  my  memory,  and  by  recollection  of 
the  accidents  of  my  past  life.  Yet  all  this  ends  in  the 
sorrowful  consideration  that  my  acquirements  are  now 
useless,  and  that  none  of  my  pleasures  can  be  again  enjoyed. 
The  rest,  whose  minds  have  no  impression  but  of  the 
present  moment,  are  either  corroded  by  malignant  passions, 
or  sit  stupid  in  the  gloom  of  perpetual  vacancy." 

"What  passions  can  infest  those,"  said  the  Prince, 
"  who  have  no  rivals  ?  We  are  in  a  place  where  impotence 
precludes  malice,  and  where  all  envy  is  repressed  by  com- 
munity of  enjoyments." 

"  There  may  be  community,"  said  Imlac,  "  of  material 
possessions,  but  there  can  never  be  community  of  love  or  of 
esteem.  It  must  happen  that  one  will  please  more  than 
another :  he  that  knows  himself  despised  will  always  be 
envious ;  and  still  more  envious  and  malevolent  if  he  is 
condemned  to  live  in  the  presence  of  those  who  despise  him. 


206  RASSELAS. 

The  invitations  by  which  they  allure  others  to  a  state  which 
they  feel  to  be  wretched  proceed  from  the  natural  malignity 
of  hopeless  misery.  They  are  weary  of  themselves  and  of 
each  other,  and  expect  to  find  relief  in  new  companions. 
They  envy  the  liberty  which  their  folly  has  forfeited,  and 
would  gladly  see  all  mankind  imprisoned  like  themselves. 

"  From  this  crime,  however,  I  am  wholly  free.  No  man 
can  say  that  he  is  wretched  by  my  persuasion.  I  look  with 
pity  on  the  crowds  who  are  annually  soliciting  admission  to 
captivity,  and  wish  that  it  were  lawful  for  me  to  warn  them 
of  their  danger." 

"  My  dear  Imlac,"  said  the  Prince,  "  I  will  open  to  thee 
my  whole  heart.  I  have  long  meditated  an  escape  from 
the  Happy  Valley.  I  have  examined  the  mountain  on  every 
side,  but  find  myself  insuperably  barred  :  teach  me  the  way 
to  break  my  prison ;  thou  shalt  be  the  companion  of  my 
flight,  the  guide  of  my  rambles,  the  partner  of  my  fortune, 
and  my  sole  director  in  the  choice  of  life." 

" Sir,"  answered  the  poet,  "your  escape  will  be  difficult, 
and  perhaps  you  may  soon  repent  your  curiosity.  The 
world,  which  you  figure  to  yourself  smooth  and  quiet  as  the 
lake  in  the  valley,  you  will  find  a  sea  foaming  with  tempests  and 
boiling  with  whirlpools ;  you  will  be  sometimes  overwhelmed 
by  the  waves  of  violence,  and  sometimes  dashed  against 
the  rocks  of  treachery.  Amidst  wrongs  and  frauds,  competi- 
tions and  anxieties,  you  will  wish  a  thousand  times  for  these 
seats  of  quiet,  and  willingly  quit  hope  to  be  free  from  fear." 

u  Do  not  seek  to  deter  me  from  my  purpose,"  said  the 
Prince.  "  I  am  impatient  to  see  what  thou  hast  seen ;  and 
since  thou  art  thyself  weary  of  the  valley,  it  is  evident  that 
thy  former  state  was  better  than  this.  Whatever  be  the 
consequence  of  my  experiment,  I  am  resolved  to  judge  with 
mine  own  eyes  of  the  various  conditions  of  men,  and  then 
to  make  deliberately  my  choice  of  life" 

"  I  am  afraid,"  said  Imlac,  "  you  are  hindered  by  stronger 
restraints  than  my  persuasions  ;  yet,  if  your  determination 


RASSELAS.  207 

is  fixed,  I  do  not  counsel  you  to  despair.     Few  things  are 
impossible  to  diligence  and  skill." 


CHAPTER  XIII. 

fiasselas  discovers  the  Means. of  Escape. 

THE  Prince  now  dismissed  his  favourite  to  rest  j  but  the 
narrative  of  wonders  and  novelties  filled  his  mind  with  per- 
turbation. He  revolved  all  that  he  had  heard,  and  prepared 
innumerable  questions  for  the  morning. 

Much  of  his  uneasiness  was  now  removed.  He  had  a 
friend  to  whom  he  could  impart  his  thoughts,  and  whose 
experience  could  assist  him  in  his  designs.  His  heart  was 
no  longer  condemned  to  swell  with  silent  vexation.  He 
thought  that  even  the  Happy  Valley  might  be  endured  with 
such  a  companion,  and  that  if  they  could  range  the  world 
together,  he  should  have  nothing  further  to  desire. 

In  a  few  days  the  water  was  discharged,  and  the  ground 
dried.  The  Prince  and  Imlac  then  walked  out  together,  to 
converse  without  the  notice  of  the  rest  The  Prince,  whose 
thoughts  were  always  on  the  wing,  as  he  passed  by  the  gate 
said,  with  a  countenance  of  sorrow,  "  Why  art  thou  so  strong, 
and  why  is  man  so  weak  ?  " 

a  Man  is  not  weak,"  answered  his  companion;  "know- 
ledge is  more  than  equivalent  to  force.  The  master  of 
mechanics  laughs  at  strength.  I  can  burst  the  gate,  but  cannot 
do  it  secretly.  Some  other  expedient  must  be  tried." 

As  they  were  walking  on  the  side  of  the  mountain  they 
observed  that  the  coneys,  which  the  rain  had  driven  from 
their  burrows,  had  taken  shelter  among  the  bushes,  and 
formed  holes  behind  them,  tending  upwards  in  an  oblique 
line.  "  It  has  been  the  opinion  of  antiquity,"  said  Imlac, 
"  that  human  reason  borrowed  many  arts  from  the  instinct 
of  animals ;  let  us  therefore  not  think  ourselves  degraded 
by  learning  from  the  coney.  We  may  escape  by  piercing  the 
mountain  in  the  same  direction.  We  will  besrin  where  the 


2o8  RASSELAS. 

summit  hangs  over  the  middle  part,  and  labour  upward  till 
we  shall  issue  out  beyond  the  prominence." 

The  eyes  of  the  Prince,  when  he  heard  this  proposal, 
sparkled  with  joy.  The  execution  was  easy  and  the  success 
certain. 

No  time  was  now  lost.  They  hastened  early  in  the 
morning  to  choose  a  place  proper  for  their  mine.  They 
clambered  with  great  fatigue  among  crags  and  brambles, 
and  returned  without  having  discovered  any  part  that 
favoured  their  design.  The  second  and  the  third  day  were 
spent  in  the  same  manner,  and  with  the  same  frustration ; 
but  on  the  fourth  they  found  a  small  cavern  concealed  by  a 
thicket,  where  they  resolved  to  make  their  experiment. 

Imlac  procured  instruments  proper  to  hew  stone  and 
remove  earth,  and  they  fell  to  their  work  on  the  next  day 
with  more  eagerness  than  vigour.  They  were  presently 
exhausted  by  their  efforts,  and  sat  down  to  pant  upon  the 
grass.  The  Prince  for  a  moment  appeared  to  be  dis- 
couraged. "  Sir,"  said  his  companion,  "  practice  will 
enable  us  to  continue  our  labour  for  a  longer  time.  Mark, 
however,  how  far  we  have  advanced,  and  ye  will  find  that 
our  toil  will  sometime  have  an  end.  Great  works  are  per- 
formed not  by  strength,  but  perseverance ;  yonder  palace 
was  raised  by  single  stones,  yet  you  see  its  height  and  spa- 
ciousness. He  that  shall  walk  with  vigour  three  hours  a 
day  will  pass  in  seven  years  a  space  equal  to  the  circum- 
ference of  the  globe." 

They  returned  to  their  work  day  after  day,  and  in  a  short 
time  found  a  fissure  in  the  rock,  which  enabled  them  to  pass 
far  with  very  little  obstruction.  This  Rasselas  considered  as 
a  good  omen.  "  Do  not  disturb  your  mind,"  said  Imlac, 
<;  with  other  hopes  or  fears  than  reason  may  suggest :  if  you 
are  pleased  with  the  prognostics  of  good,  you  will  be  terrified 
likewise  with  tokens  of  evil,  and  your  whole  life  will  be  a 
prey  to  superstition.  Whatever  facilitates  our  work  is  more 
an  pmen  ;  it  is  a  cause  of  success,  This  is  one  of  those 


RASSELAS.  209 

pleasing  surprises  which  often  happen  to  active  resolution. 
Many  things  difficult  to  design  prove  easy  to  performance." 


CHAPTER  XIV. 

Rasselas  and  Imlac  receive  an  Unexpected  Visit. 

THEY  had  now  wrought  their  way  to  the  middle,  and  solaced 
their  toil  with  the  approach  of  liberty,  when  the  Prince, 
coming  down  to  refresh  himself  with  air,  found  his  sister 
Nekayah  standing  at  the  mouth  of  the  cavity.  He  started, 
and  stood  confused,  afraid  to  tell  his  design,  and  yet  hope- 
less to  conceal  it.  A  few  moments  determined  him  to  re- 
pose on  her  fidelity,  and  secure  her  secrecy  by  a  declaration 
without  reserve. 

"  Do  not  imagine,"  said  the  Princess,  "  that  I  came  hither 
as  a  spy.  I  had  long  observed  from  my  window  that  you 
and  Imlac  directed  your  walk  every  day  towards  the  same 
point,  but  I  did  not  suppose  you  had  any  better  reason  for  the 
preference  than  a  cooler  shade  or  more  fragrant  bank,  nor 
followed  you  with  any  other  design  than  to  partake  of  your 
conversation.  Since,  then,  not  suspicion  but  fondness  has 
detected  you,  let  me  not  lose  the  advantage  of  my  discovery. 
I  am  equally  weary  of  confinement  with  yourself,  and  not  less 
desirous  of  knowing  what  is  done  or  suffered  in  the  world. 
Permit  me  to  fly  with  you  from  this  tasteless  tranquillity, 
which  will  yet  grow  more  loathsome  when  you  have  left  me. 
You  may  deny  me  to  accompany  you,  but  cannot  hinder 
me  from  following." 

The  Prince,  who  loved  Nekayah  above  his  other  sisters, 
had  no  inclination  to  refuse  her  request,  and  grieved  that  he 
had  lost  an  opportunity  of  showing  his  confidence  by  a 
voluntary  communication.  It  was  therefore  agreed  that  she 
should  leave  the  valley  with  them ;  and  that  in  the  mean- 
time she  should  watch,  lest  any  other  straggler  should,  by 
chance  or  curiosity,  follow  them  to  the  mountain. 

At  length  their  labour  was  at  an   end-     They  saw  light 


210  RASSELAS. 

beyond  the  prominence,  and  issuing  to  the  top  of  the  moun- 
tain, beheld  the  Nile,  yet  a  narrow  current,  wandering 
beneath  them. 

The  Prince  looked  round  with  rapture,  anticipated  all  the 
pleasures  of  travel,  and  in  thought  was  already  transported 
beyond  his  father's  dominions.  Imlac,  though  very  joyful 
at  his  escape,  had  less  expectation  of  pleasure  in  the  world, 
which  he  had  before  tried  and  of  which  he  had  been  weary. 

Rasselas  was  so  much  delighted  with  a  wider  horizon 
that  he  could  not  soon  be  persuaded  to  return  into  the 
valley.  He  informed  his  sister  that  the  way  was  now  open, 
and  that  nothing  now  remained  but  to  prepare  for  their 
departure. 

CHAPTER  XV. 
The  Prince  and  Princess  leave  the  Valley ',  and  see  many  Wonders. 

THE  Prince  and  Princess  had  jewels  sufficient  to  make  them 
rich  whenever  they  came  into  a  place  of  commerce,  which, 
by  Imlac's  direction,  they  hid  in  their  clothes,  and  on  the 
night  of  the  next  full  moon  all  left  the  valley.  The  Prin- 
cess was  followed  only  by  a  single  favourite,  who  did  not 
know  whither  she  was  going. 

They  clambered  through  the  cavity,  and  began  to  go 
down  on  the  other  side.  The  Princess  and  her  maid  turned 
their  eyes  toward  every  part,  and  seeing  nothing  to  bound 
their  prospect,  considered  themselves  in  clanger  of  being  lost 
in  a  dreary  vacuity.  They  stopped  and  trembled.  "  I  am 
almost  afraid,"  said  the  Princess,  "  to  begin  a  journey  of 
which  I  cannot  perceive  an  end,  and  to  venture  into  this 
immense  plain,  where  I  may  be  approached  on  every  side 
by  men  whom  I  never  saw."  The  Prince  felt  nearly  the 
same  emotions,  though  he  thought  it  more  manly  to  con- 
ceal them. 

Imlac  smiled  at  their  terrors,  and  encouraged  them  to 
proceed.  But  the  Princess  continued  irresolute  till  she  had 
been  imperceptibly  drawn  forward  too  far  to  return. 


RASSELAS.  2ii 

In  the  morning  they  found  some  shepherds  in  the  field, 
who  set  some  milk  and  fruits  before  them.  The  Princess 
wondered  that  she  did  not  see  a  palace  ready  for  her  recep- 
tion and  a  table  spread- with  delicacies  ;  but  being  faint  and 
hungry,  she  drank  the  milk  and  ate  the  fruits,  and  thought 
them  of  a  higher  flavour  than  the  products  of  the  valley. 

They  travelled  forward  by  easy  journeys,  being  all  un- 
accustomed to  toil  and  difficulty,  and  knowing  that,  though 
they  might  be  missed,  they  could  not  be  pursued.  In  a 
few  days  they  came  into  a  more  populous  region,  where 
Imlac  was  diverted  with  the  admiration  which  his  com- 
panions expressed  at  the  diversity  of  manners,  stations,  and 
employments.  Their  dress  was  such  as  might  not  bring 
upon  them  the  suspicion  of  having  anything  to  conceal ;  yet 
the  Prince,  wherever  he  came,  expected  to  be  obeyed,  and 
the  Princess  was  frighted  because  those  who  came  into  her 
presence  did  not  prostrate  themselves.  Imlac  was  forced  to 
observe  them  with  great  vigilance,  lest  they  should  betray 
their  rank  by  their  unusual  behaviour,  and  detained  them 
several  weeks  in  the  first  village  to  accustom  them  to  the 
sight  of  common  mortals. 

By  degrees  the  royal  wanderers  were  taught  to  understand 
that  they  had  for  a  time  laid  aside  their  dignity,  and  were  to 
expect  only  such  regard  as  liberality  and  courtesy  could 
procure.  And  Imlac  having  by  many  admonitions  pre- 
pared them  to  endure  the  tumults  of  a  port  and  the  rugged- 
ness  of  the  commercial  race,  brought  them  down  to  the 
sea-coast. 

The  Prince  and  his  sister,  to  whom  everything  was  new, 
were  gratified  equally  at  all  places,  and  therefore  remained 
for  some  months  at  the  port  without  any  inclination  to  pass 
further.  Imlac  was  content  with  their  stay,  because  he  did 
not  think  it  safe  to  expose  them,  unpractised  in  the  world, 
to  the  hazards  of  a  foreign  country. 

At  last  he  began  to  fear  lest  they  should  be  discovered, 
and  proposed  to  fix  a  day  for  their  departure.  They  had  no 


2ia  RASSELAS. 

pretensions  to  judge  for  themselves,  and  referred  the  whole 
scheme  to  his  direction.  He  therefore  took  passage  in  a 
ship  to  Suez,  and,  when  the  time  came,  with  great  difficulty 
prevailed  on  the  Princess  to  enter  the  vessel.  They  had  a 
quick  and  prosperous  voyage,  and  from  Suez  travelled  by 
land  to  Cairo. 

CHAPTER  XVI. 

They  enter  Cairo,  and  find  every  Man  happy. 

As  they  approached  the  city,  which  filled  the  strangers 
with  astonishment,  "  This,"  said  Imlac  to  the  Prince,  "  is 
the  place  where  travellers  and  merchants  assemble  from  all 
corners  of  the  earth.  You  will  here  find  men  of  every  cha- 
racter and  every  occupation.  Commerce  is  here  honour- 
able. I  will  act  as  a  merchant,  and  you  shall  live  as 
strangers  who  have  no  other  end  of  travel  than  curiosity ; 
it  will  soon  be  observed  that  we  are  rich.  Our  reputation 
will  procure  us  access  to  all  whom  we  shall  desire  to  know ; 
you  shall  see  all  the  conditions  of  humanity,  and  enable 
yourselves  at  leisure  to  make  your  choice  of  life" 

They  now  entered  the  town,  stunned  by  the  noise  and 
offended  by  the  crowds.  Instruction  had  not  yet  so  pre- 
vailed over  habit  but  that  they  wondered  to  see  themselves 
pass  undistinguished  along  the  streets,  and  met  by  the 
lowest  of  the  people  without  reverence  or  notice.  The 
Princess  could  not  at  first  bear  the  thought  of  being  levelled 
with  the  vulgar,  and  for  some  time  continued  in  her  chamber, 
where  she  was  served  by  her  favourite  Pekuah,  as  in  the 
palace  of  the  valley. 

Imlac,  who  understood  traffic,  sold  part  of  the  jewels  the 
next  day,  and  hired  a  house,  which  he  adorned  with  such 
magnificence  that  he  was  immediately  considered  as  a 
merchant  of  great  wealth.  His  politeness  attracted  many 
acquaintances,  and  his  generosity  made  him  courted  by 
many  dependants.  His  companions,  not  being  able  to  mix 
in  the  conversation,  could  make  no  discovery  of  their 


R  ASS  EL  AS.  213 

ignorance  or  surprise,  and  were  gradually  initialed  in  the 
world  as  they  gained  knowledge  of  the  language. 

The  Prince  had  by  frequent  lectures  been  taught  the  use 
and  nature  of  money ;  but  the  ladies  could  not  for  a  long 
time  comprehend  what  the  merchants  did  with  small  pieces 
of  gold  and  silver,  or  why  things  of  so  little  use  should  be 
received  as  an  equivalent  to  the  necessaries  of  life. 

They  studied  the  language  two  years,  while  Imlac  was 
preparing  to  set  before  them  the  various  ranks  and  conditions 
of  mankind.  He  grew  acquainted  with  all  who  had  any- 
thing uncommon  in  their  fortune  or  conduct.  He  frequented 
the  voluptuous  and  the  frugal,  the  idle  and  the  busy,  the 
merchants  and  the  men  of  learning. 

The  Prince  now  being  able  to  converse  with  fluency,  and 
having  learned  the  caution  necessary  to  be  observed  in  his 
intercourse  with  strangers,  began  to  accompany  Imlac  to 
places  of  resort,  and  to  enter  into  all  assemblies,  that  he 
might  make  his  choice  of  life. 

For  some  time  he  thought  choice  needless,  because  all 
appeared  to  him  really  happy.  Wherever  he  went  he  met 
gaiety  and  kindness,  and  heard  the  song  of  joy  or  the  laugh 
of  carelessness.  He  began  to  believe  that  the  world  over- 
flowed with  universal  plenty,  and  that  nothing  was  withheld 
either  from  want  or  merit ;  that  every  hand  showered  libe- 
rality and  every  heart  melted  with  benevolence  :  "  And  who 
then,"  says  he,  "will  be  suffered  to  be  wretched?" 

Imlac  permitted  the  pleasing  delusion,  and  was  unwilling 
to  crush  the  hope  of  inexperience :  till  one  day,  having  sat 
a  while  silent,  "  I  know  not,"  said  the  Prince,  "  what  can  be 
the  reason  that  I  am  more  unhappy  than  any  of  our  friends. 
I  see  them  perpetually  and  unalterably  cheerful,  but  feel 
my  own  mind  restless  and  uneasy.  I  am  unsatisfied  with 
those  pleasures  which  I  seem  most  to  court.  I  live  in  the 
crowds  of  jollity,  not  so  much  to  enjoy  company  as  to  shun 
myself,  and  am  only  loud  and  merry  to  concearmy  sadness." 

"  Every  man,"  said  Imlac,  "  may  by  examining  his  own 


214  RASSELAS. 

mind  guess  what  passes  in  the  mkids  of  others.  When  you 
feel  that  your  own  gaiety  is  counterfeit,  it  may  justly  lead  you 
to  suspect  that  of  your  companions  not  to  be  sincere.  Envy 
is  commonly  reciprocal.  We  are  long  before  we  are  con- 
vinced that  happiness  is  never  to  be  found,  and  each 
believes  it  possessed  by  others,  to  keep  alive  the  hope  of 
obtaining  it  for  himself.  In  the  assembly  where  you  passed 
the  last  night  there  appeared  such  sprightliness  of  air  and 
volatility  of  fancy  as  might  have  suited  beings  of  a  higher 
order,  formed  to  inhabit  serener  regions,  inaccessible  to  care 
or  sorrow ;  yet,  believe  me,  Prince,  there  was  not  one  who 
did  not  dread  the  moment  when  solitude  should  deliver  him 
to  the  tyranny  of  reflection." 

"  This,"  said  the  Prince,  "  may  be  true  of  others  since  it  is 
true  of  me ;  yet,  whatever  be  the  general  infelicity  of  man, 
one  condition  is  more  happy  than  another,  and  wisdom 
surely  directs  us  to  take  the  least  evil  in  the  choice  of  life." 

"The  causes  of  good  and  evil,"  answered  Imlac,  "are  so 
various  and  uncertain,  so  often  entangled  with  each  other, 
so  diversified  by  various  relations,  and  so  much  subject  to 
accidents  which  cannot  be  foreseen,  that  he  who  would  fix 
his  condition  upon  incontestible  reasons  of  preference  must 
live  and  die  inquiring  and  deliberating." 

"  But,  surely,"  said  Rasselas,  "  the  wise  men,  to  whom  we 
listen  with  reverence  and  wonder,  chose  that  mode  of  life 
for  themselves  which  they  thought  most  likely  to  make  them 
happy." 

"  Very  few,"  said  the  poet,  "  live  by  choice.  Every  man 
is  placed  in  the  present  condition  by  causes  which  acted 
without  his  foresight,  and  with  which  he  did  not  always 
willingly  co-operate ;  and  therefore  you  will  rarely  meet  one 
who  does  not  think  the  lot  of  his  neighbour  better  than  his 
own." 

"I  am  pleased  to  think,"  said  the  Prince,  "  that  my  birth 
has  given  me  at  least  one  advantage  over  others  by  enabling 
me  to  determine  for  myself.  I  have  here  the  world  before 


RASSELAS.  215 

me.      I  will  review  it  at  leisure  :  surely  happiness  is  some- 
where to  be  found." 


CHAPTER    XVII. 

The  Prince  associates  with.  Young  Men  of  Spirit  and  Gaiety. 

RASSELAS  rose  next  day,  and  resolved  to  begin  his  experi- 
ments upon  life.  "  Youth,"  cried  he,  "  is  the  time  of  glad- 
ness :  I  will  join  myself  to  the  young  men  whose  only 
business  is  to  gratify  their  desires,  and  whose  time  is  all 
spent  in  a  succession  of  enjoyments." 

To  such  societies  he  was  readily  admitted,  but  a  few  days 
brought  him  back  weary  and  disgusted.  Their  mirth  was 
without  images,  their  laughter  without  motive;  their  pleasures 
were  gross  and  sensual,  in  which  the  mind  had  no  part ; 
their  conduct  was  at  once  wild  and  mean — they  laughed  at 
order  and  at  law,  but  the  frown  of  power  dejected  and  the 
eye  of  wisdom  abashed  them. 

The  Prince  soon  concluded  that  he  shonld  never  be 
happy  in  a  course  of  life  of  which  he  was  ashamed.  He 
thought  it  unsuitable  to  a  reasonable  being  to  act  without  a 
plan,  and  to  be  sad  or  cheerful  only  by  chance.  "  Happi- 
ness," said  he,  "  must  be  something  solid  and  permanent, 
without  fear  and  without  uncertainty." 

But  his  young  companions  had  gained  so  much  of  his  re- 
gard by  their  frankness  and  courtesy  that  he  could  not  leave 
them  without  warning  and  remonstrance.  "  My  friends," 
said  he,  "  I  have  seriously  considered  our  manners  and  our 
prospects,  and  find  that  we  have  mistaken  our  own  interest 
The  first  years  of  man  must  make  provision  for  the  last.  He 
that  never  thinks,  never  can  be  wise.  Perpetual  levity  must 
end  in  ignorance,  and  intemperance,  though  it  may  fire  the 
spirits  for  an  hour,  will  make  life  short  or  miserable.  Let  us 
consider  that  youth  is  of  no  long  duration,  and  that  in 
mature  age,  when  the  enchantments  of  fancy  shall  cease,  and 
phantoms  of  delight  dance  no  more  about  us,  we  shall  have 


216  RASSELAS. 

no  comforts  but  the  esteem  of  wise  men  and  the  means  of 
doing  good.  Let  us  therefore  stop  while  to  stop  is  in  our 
power  :  let  us  live  as  men  who  are  some  time  to  grow  old, 
and  to  whom  it  will  be  the  most  dreadful  of  all  evils  to  count 
their  past  years  by  follies,  and  to  be  reminded  of  their 
former  luxuriance  of  health  only  by  the  maladies  which  riot 
has  produced." 

They  stared  awhile  in  silence  one  upon  another,  and  at  last 
drove  him  away  by  a  general  chorus  of  continued  laughter. 

The  consciousness  that  his  sentiments  were  just  and  his 
intention  kind  was  scarcely  sufficient  to  support  him  against 
the  horror  of  derision.  But  he  recovered  his  tranquillity  and 
pursued  his  search. 

CHAPTER   XVIII. 

7"he  Prince  finds  a  Wise  and  Happy  Man. 

As  he  was  one  day  walking  in  the  street  he  saw  a  spacious 
building  which  all  were  by  the  open  doors  invited  to  enter. 
He  followed  the  stream  of  people,  and  found  ita  hall  or  school 
of  declamation,  in  which  professors  read  lectures  to  their 
auditory.  He  fixed  his  eye  upon  a  sage  raised  above  the  rest, 
who  discoursed  with  great  energy  on  the  government  of  the 
passions.  His  look  was  venerable,  his  action  graceful,  his 
pronunciation  clear,  and  his  diction  elegant.  He  showed 
with  great  strength  of  sentiment  and  variety  of  illustration 
that  human  nature  is  degraded  and  debased  when  the  lower 
faculties  predominate  over  the  higher ;  that  when  fancy,  the 
parent  of  passion,  usurps  the  dominion  of  the  mind,  nothing 
ensues  but  the  natural  effect  of  unlawful  government,  perturb- 
ation, and  confusion  ;  that  she  betrays  the  fortresses  of  the 
intellect  to  rebels,  and  excites  her  children  to  sedition 
against  their  lawful  sovereign.  He  compared  reason  to  the 
sun,  of  which  the  light  is  constant,  uniform,  and  lasting  ;  and 
fancy  to  a  meteor,  of  bright  but  transitory  lustre,  irregular  in 
its  motion  and  delusive  in  its  direction, 


ZASS2LAS.  217 

He  then  communicated  the  various  precepts  given  from 
time  to  time  for  the  conquest  of  passion,  and  displayed  the 
happiness  of  those  who  had  obtained  the  important  victory, 
after  which  man  is  no  longer  the  slave  of  fear  nor  the  fool 
of  hope  ;  is  no  more  emaciated  by  envy,  inflamed  by  anger, 
emasculated  by  tenderness,  or  depressed  by  grief;  but  walks 
on  calmly  through  the  tumults  or  privacies  of  life,  as  the 
sun  pursues  alike  his  course  through  the  calm  or  the  stormy 
sky. 

He  enumerated  many  examples  of  heroes  immovable  by 
pain  or  pleasure,  who  looked  with  indifference  on  those 
modes  or  accidents  to  which  the  vulgar  give  the  names  of 
good  and  evil.  He  exhorted  his  hearers  to  lay  aside  their 
prejudices,  and  arm  themselves  against  the  shafts  of  malice 
or  misfortune,  by  invulnerable  patience  :  concluding  that 
this  state  only  was  happiness,  and  that  this  happiness  was  in 
every  one's  power. 

Rasselas  listened  to  him  with  the  veneration  due  to  the 
instructions  of  a  superior  being,  and  waiting  for  him  at  the 
door,  humbly  implored  the  liberty  of  visiting  so  great  a 
master  of  true  wisdom.  The  lecturer  hesitated  a  moment, 
when  Rasselas  put  a  purse  of  gold  into  his  hand,  which  he 
received  with  a  mixture  of  joy  and  wonder. 

"  I  have  found,"  said  the  Prince  at  his  return  to  Imlac, 
"  a  man  who  can  teach  all  that  is  necessary  to  be  known  ; 
who,  from  the  unshaken  throne  of  rational  fortitude,  looks 
down  on  the  scenes  of  life  changing  beneath  him.  He 
speaks,  and  attention  watches  his  lips.  He  reasons,  and 
conviction  closes  his  periods.  This  man  shall  be  my  future 
guide  :  I  will  learn  his  doctrines  and  imitate  his  life." 

"  Be  not  too  hasty,"  said  Imlac,  "  to  trust  or  to  admire 
the  teachers  of  morality  :  they  discourse  like  angels,  but 
they  live  like  men." 

Rasselas,  who  could  not  conceive  how  any  man  could 
reason  so  forcibly  without  feeling  the  cogency  of  his  own 
arguments,  paid  his  visit  in  a  few  days,  and  was  denied 


218  RASSELAS. 

admission.  He  had  now  learned  the  power  of  money,  and 
made  his  way  by  a  piece  of  gold  to  the  inner  apartment, 
where  he  found  the  philosopher  in  a  room  half  darkened, 
with  his  eyes  misty  and  his  face  pale.  "  Sir,"  said  he,  "you 
are  come  at  a  time  when  all  human  friendship  is  useless ; 
what  I  suffer  cannot  be  remedied,  what  I  have  lost  cannot 
be  supplied.  My  daughter,  my  only  daughter,  from  whose 
tenderness  I  expected  all  the  comforts  of  my  age,  died 
last  night  of  a  fever.  My  views,  my  purposes,  my  hopes 
are  at  an  end :  I  am  now  a  lonely  being,  disunited  from 
society." 

"Sir,"  said  the  Prince,  "mortality  is  an  event  by  which  a 
wise  man  can  never  be  surprised :  we  know  that  death  is 
always  near,  and  it  should  therefore  always  be  expected." 
"  Young  man/'  answered  the  philosopher,  "  you  speak  like 
one  that  has  never  felt  the  pangs  of  separation."  "  Have 
you  then  forgot  the  precepts,"  said  Rasselas,  "  which  you  so 
powerfully  enforced  ?  Has  wisdom  no  strength  to  arm  the 
heart  against  calamity  ?  Consider  that  external  things  are 
naturally  variable,  but  truth  and  reason  are  always  the 
same."  "  What  comfort,"  said  the  mourner,  "  can  truth  and 
reason  afford  me  ?  Of  what  effect  are  they  now,  but  to  tell 
me  that  my  daughter  will  not  be  restored  ?  " 

The  Prince,  whose  humanity  would  not  suffer  him  to 
insult  misery  with  reproof,  went  away,  convinced  of  the 
emptiness  of  rhetorical  sounds,  and  the  inefficacy  of  polished 
periods  and  studied  sentences. 

CHAPTER  XIX. 

A  Glimpse  of  Pastoral  Life. 

HE  was  still  eager  upon  the  same  inquiry ;  and  having  heard 
of  a  hermit  that  lived  near  the  lowest  cataract  of  the  Nile, 
and  filled  the  whole  country  with  the  fame  of  his  sanctity, 
resolved  to  visit  his  retreat,  and  inquire  whether  that  felicity 
which  public  life  could  not  afford  was  to  be  found  in 


RASSELAS.  219 

solitude,  and  whether  a  man  whose  age  and  virtue  made 
him  venerable  could  teach  any  peculiar  art  of  shunning 
evils  or  enduring  them. 

Imlac  and  the  Princess  agreed  to  accompany  him,  and 
after  the  necessary  preparations,  they  began  their  journey. 
Their  way  lay  through  the  fields,  where  shepherds  tended 
their  flocks  and  the  lambs  were  playing  upon  the  pasture. 
"  This,"  said  the  poet,  "  is  the  life  which  has  been  often 
celebrated  for  its  innocence  and  quiet;  let  us  pass  the 
heat  of  the  day  among  the  shepherds'  tents,  and  know 
whether  all  our  searches  are  not  to  terminate  in  pastoral 
simplicity." 

The  proposal  pleased  them  ;  and  they  induced  the  shep- 
herds, by  small  presents  and  familiar  questions,  to  tell  the 
opinion  of  their  own  state.  They  were  so  rude  and  ignorant, 
so  little  able  to  compare  the  good  with  the  evil  of  the  occu- 
pation, and  so  indistinct  in  their  narratives  and  descriptions, 
that  very  little  could  be  learned  from  them.  But  it  was 
evident  that  their  hearts  were  cankered  with  discontent ;  that 
they  considered  themselves  as  condemned  to  labour  for  the 
luxury  of  the  rich,  and  looked  up  with  stupid  malevolence 
towards  those  that  were  placed  above  them. 

The  Princess  pronounced  with  vehemence  that  she  would 
never  suffer  these  envious  savages  to  be  her  companions, 
and  that  she  should  not  soon  be  desirous  of  seeing  any  more 
specimens  of  rustic  happiness ;  but  could  not  believe  that 
all  the  accounts  of  primeval  pleasures  were  fabulous,  and 
was  in  doubt  whether  life  had  anything  that  could  be  justly 
preferred  to  the  placid  gratification  of  fields  and  woods.  She 
hoped  that  the  time  would  come  when,  with  a  few  virtuous 
and  elegant  companions,  she  should  gather  flowers  planted 
by  her  own  hands,  fondle  the  lambs  of  her  own  ewe,  and 
listen  without  care,  among  brooks  and  breezes,  to  one  of  her 
maidens  reading  in  the  shade. 


220  RASSELAS. 

CHAPTER  XX. 

The  Danger  of  Prosperity. 

ON  the  next  day  they  continued  their  journey  till  the  heat 
compelled  them  to  look  round  for  shelter.  At  a  small  dis- 
tance they  saw  a  thick  wood,  which  they  no  sooner  entered 
than  they  perceived  that  they  were  approaching  the  habita- 
tions of  men.  The  shrubs  were  diligently  cut  away  to  open 
walks  where  the  shades  were  darkest ;  the  boughs  of  oppo- 
site trees  were  artificially  interwoven  •  seats  of  flowery  turf 
were  raised  in  vacant  spaces ;  and  a  rivulet  that  wantoned 
along  the  side  of  a  winding  path  had  its  banks  sometimes 
opened  into  small  basins,  and  its  stream  sometimes  obstructed 
by  little  mounds  of  stone  heaped  together  to  increase  its 
murmurs. 

They  'passed  slowly  through  the  wood,  delighted  with 
such  unexpected  accommodations,  and  entertained  each 
other  with  conjecturing  what  or  who  he  could  be  that  in 
those  rude  and  unfrequented  regions  had  leisure  and  art  for 
such  harmless  luxury. 

As  they  advanced  they  heard  the  sound  of  music,  and 
saw  youths  and  virgins  dancing  in  the  grove  ;  and  going 
still  farther  beheld  a  stately  palace  built  upon  a  hill  sur- 
rounded by  woods.  The  laws  of  Eastern  hospitality  allowed 
them  to  enter,  and  the  master  welcomed  them  like  a  man 
liberal  and  wealthy. 

He  was  skilful  enough  in  appearances  soon  to  discern 
that  they  were  no  common  guests,  and  spread  his  table  with 
magnificence.  The  eloquence  of  Imlac  caught  his  atten- 
tion, and  the  lofty  courtesy  of  the  Princess  excited  his 
respect.  When  they  offered  to  depart,  he  entreated  their 
stay,  and  was  the  next  day  more  unwilling  to  dismiss  them 
than  before.  They  were  easily  persuaded  to  stop,  and  civility 
grew  up  in  time  to  freedom  and  confidence. 

The  Prince  now  saw  all  the  domestics  cheerful  and  all 
the  face  of  nature  smiling  round  the  place,  and  could  not 


RASSELAS.  221 

forbear  to  hope  that  he  should  find  here  what  he  was  seek- 
ing ;  but  when  he  was  congratulating  the  master  upon  his 
possessions  he  answered  with  a  sigh,  "  My  condition  has 
indeed  the  appearance  of  happiness,  but  appearances  are 
delusive.  My  prosperity  puts  my  life  in  danger :  the  Bassa 
of  Egypt  is  my  enemy,  incensed  only  by  my  wealth  and 
popularity.  I  have  been  hitherto  protected  against  him  by 
the  princes  of  the  country ;  but  as  the  favour  of  the  great  is 
uncertain,  I  know  not  how  soon  my  defenders  may  be  per- 
suaded to  share  the  plunder  with  the  Bassa.  I  have  sent 
my  treasures  into  a  distant  country,  and  upon  the  first 
alarm  am  prepared  to  follow  them.  Then  will  my  enemies 
riot  in  my  mansion,  and  enjoy  the  gardens  which  I  have 
planted." 

They  all  joined  in  lamenting  his  danger  and  deprecating 
his  exile  ;  and  the  Princess  was  so  much  disturbed  with  the 
tumult  of  grief  and  indignation  that  she  retired  to  her  apart- 
ment. They  continued  with  their  kind  inviter  a  few  days 
longer,  and  then  went  to  find  the  hermit. 

CHAPTER  XXI. 

The  Happiness  of  Solitude.     The  Hermits  History. 

THEY  came  on  the  third  day,  by  the  direction  of  the 
peasants,  to  the  hermit's  cell.  It  was  a  cavern  in  the  side 
of  a  mountain,  overshadowed  with  palm  trees,  at  such  a 
distance  from  the  cataract  that  nothing  more  was  heard  than 
a  gentle  uniform  murmur,  such  as  composes  the  mind  to 
pensive  meditation,  especially  when  it  was  assisted  by  the 
wind  whistling  among  the  branches.  The  first  rude  essay  of 
nature  had  been  so  much  improved  by  human  labour  that 
the  cave  contained  several  apartments  appropriated  to  dif- 
ferent uses,  and  often  afforded  lodging  to  travellers  whom 
darkness  or  tempests  happened  to  overtake. 

The  hermit  sat  on  a  bench  at  the  door,  to  enjoy  the 
coolness  of  the  evening.  On  one  side  lay  a  book  with 


222  RASSELAS. 

pens  and  paper,  on  the  other  mechanical  instruments  of 
various  kinds.  As  they  approached  him  unregarded,  the 
Princess  observed  that  he  had  not  the  countenance  of  a  man 
that  had  found  or  could  teach  the  way  to  happiness. 

They  saluted  him  with  great  respect,  which  he  repaid  like 
a  man  not  unaccustomed  to  the  forms  of  Courts.  "  My 
children,"  said  he,  "  if  you  have  lost  your  way,  you  shall  be 
willingly  supplied  with  such  conveniences  for  the  night  as 
this  cavern  will  afford.  I  have  all  that  nature  requires,  and 
you  will  not  expect  delicacies  in  a  hermit's  cell." 

They  thanked  him ;  and,  entering,  were  pleased  with  the 
neatness  and  regularity  of  the  place.  The  hermit  set  flesh 
and  wine  before  them,  though  he  fed  only  upon  fruits  and 
water.  His  discourse  was  cheerful  without  levity,  and  pious 
without  enthusiasm.  He  soon  gained  the  esteem  of  his 
guests,  and  the  Princess  repented  her  hasty  censure. 

At  last  Imlac  began  thus  :  "  I  do  not  now  wonder  that 
your  reputation  is  so  far  extended :  we  have  heard  at  Cairo 
of  your  wisdom,  and  came  hither  to  implore  your  direction 
for  this  young  man  and  maiden  in  the  choice  of  life" 

"  To  him  that  lives  well,"  answered  the  hermit,  "  every 
form  of  life  is  good;  nor  can  I  give  any  other  rule  for 
choice  than  to  remove  all  apparent  evil." 

"He  will  most  certainly  remove  from  evil,"  said  the 
Prince,  "  who  shall  devote  himself  to  that  solitude  which 
you  have  recommended  by  your  example." 

"  I  have  indeed  lived  fifteen  years  in  solitude,"  said  the 
hermit,  "  but  have  no  desire  that  my  example  should  gain 
any  imitators.  In  my  youth  I  professed  arms,  and  was 
raised  by  degrees  to  the  highest  military  rank.  I  have 
traversed  wide  countries  at  the  head  of  my  troops,  and  seen 
many  battles  and  sieges.  At  last,  being  disgusted  by  the 
preferments  of  a  younger  officer,  and  feeling  that  my  vigour 
was  beginning  to  decay,  I  resolved  to  close  my  life  in  peace, 
having  found  the  world  full  of  snares,  discord,  and  misery. 
I  had  once  escaped  from  the  pursuit  of  the  enemy  by  the 


R  ASS  EL  AS.  223 

shelter  of  this  cavern,  and  therefore  chose  it  for  my  final 
residence.  I  employed  artificers  to  form  it  into  chambers, 
and  stored  it  with  all  that  I  was  likely  to  want. 

"For  some  time  after  my  retreat  I  rejoiced  like  a 
tempest-beaten  sailor  at  his  entrance  into  the  harbour,  being 
delighted  with  the  sudden  change  of  the  noise  and  hurry  of 
war  to  stillness  and  repose.  When  the  pleasure  of  novelty 
went  away,  I  employed  my  hours  in  examining  the  plants 
which  grow  in  the  valley,  and  the  minerals  which  I  collected 
from  the  rocks.  But  that  inquiry  is  now  grown  tasteless  and 
irksome.  I  have  been  for  some  time  unsettled  and  distracted : 
my  mind  is  disturbed  with  a  thousand  perplexities  of  doubt 
and  vanities  of  imagination,  which  hourly  prevail  upon  me, 
because  I  have  no  opportunities  of  relaxation  or  diversion. 
I  am  sometimes  ashamed  to  think  that  I  could  not  secure 
myself  from  vice  but  by  retiring  from  the  exercise  of  virtue, 
and  begin  to  suspect  that  I  was  rather  impelled  by  resent- 
ment than  led  by  devotion  into  solitude.  My  fancy  riots  in 
scenes  of  folly,  and  I  lament  that  I  have  lost  so  much,  and 
have  gained  so  little.  In  solitude,  if  I  escape  the  example 
of  bad  men,  I  want  likewise  the  counsel  and  conversation 
of  the  good.  I  have  been  long  comparing  the  evils  with 
the  advantages  of  society,  and  resolve  to  return  into  the 
world  to-morrow.  The  life  of  a  solitary  man  will  be 
certainly  miserable,  but  not  certainly  devout." 

They  heard  his  resolution  with  surprise,  but  after  a  short 
pause  offered  to  conduct  him  to  Cairo.  He  dug  up  a  con- 
siderable treasure  which  he  had  hid  among  the  rocks,  and 
accompanied  them  to  the  city,  on  which,  as  he  approached 
it,  he  gazed  with  rapture. 

CHAPTER  XXIL 

The  Happiness  of  a  Life  led  according  to  Nature. 

RASSELAS  went  often  to  an  assembly  of  learned  men,  who 
met  at  stated  times  to  unbend  their  minds  and  compare 


224  R  ASS  EL  A3. 

their  opinions.  Their  manners  were  somewhat  coarse,  but 
their  conversation  was  instructive,  and  their  disputations 
acute,  though  sometimes  too  violent,  and  often  continued 
till  neither  controvertist  remembered  upon  what  question 
he  began.  Some  faults  were  almost  general  among  them  : 
every  one  was  pleased  to  hear  the  genius  or  knowledge  of 
another  depreciated. 

In  this  assembly  Rasselas  was  relating  his  interview  with 
the  hermit,  and  the  wonder  with  which  he  heard  him  cen- 
sure a  course  of  life  which  he  had  so  deliberately  chosen 
and  so  laudably  followed.  The  sentiments  of  the  hearers 
were  various.  Some  were  of  opinion  that  the  folly  of  his 
choice  had  been  justly  punished  by  condemnation  to  per- 
petual perseverance.  One  of  the  youngest  among  them, 
with  great  vehemence,  pronounced  him  a  hypocrite.  Some 
talked  of  the  right  of  society  to  the  labour  of  individuals, 
and  considered  retirement  as  a  desertion  of  duty.  Others 
readily  allowed  that  there  was  a  time  when  the  claims  of  the 
public  were  satisfied,  and  when  a  man  might  properly 
sequester  himself,  to  review  his  life  and  purify  his  heart. 

One,  who  appeared  more  affected  with  the  narrative  thaq 
the  rest,  thought  it  likely  that  the  hermit  would  in  a  few 
years  go  back  to  his  retreat,  and  perhaps,  if  shame  did  not 
restrain  or  death  intercept  him,  return  once  more  from  his 
retreat  into  the  world.  "  For  the  hope  of  happiness,"  said 
he,  "  is  so  strongly  impressed,  that  the  longest  experience 
is  not  able  to  efface  it.  Of  the  present  state,  whatever  it 
be,  we  feel  arid  are  forced  to  confess  the  misery ;  yet 
when  the  same  state  is  again  at  a  distance,  imagination 
paints  it  as  desirable.  But  the  time  will  surely  come  when 
desire  will  no  longer  be  our  torment,  and  no  man  shall  be 
wretched  but  by  his  own  fault. 

"  This,"  said  a  philosopher  who  had  heard  him  with  tokens 
of  great  impatience,  "  is  the  present  condition  of  a  wise  man. 
The  time  is  already  come  when  none  are  wretched  but  by 
their  own  fault.  Nothing  is  more  idle  than  to  inquire  after 


RASSELAS.  22$ 

happiness  which  nature  has  kindly  placed  within  our  reach. 
The  way  to  be  happy  is  to  live  according  to  nature,  in 
obedience  to  that  universal  and  unalterable  law  with  which 
every  heart  is  originally  impressed ;  which  is  not  written  on 
it  by  precept,  but  engraven  by  destiny;  not  instilled  by 
education,  but  infused  at  our  nativity.  He  that  lives  accord- 
ing to  nature  will  suffer  nothing  from  the  delusions  of  hope 
or  importunities  of  desire ;  he  will  receive  and  reject  with 
equability  of  temper ;  and  act  or  suffer  as  the  reason  of 
things  shall  alternately  prescribe.  Other  men  may  amuse 
themselves  with  subtle  definitions  or  intricate  ratiocination. 
Let  them  learn  to  be  wise  by  easier  means  :  let  them  observe 
the  hind  of  the  forest  and  the  linnet  of  the  grove  :  let  them 
consider  the  life  of  animals,  whose  motions  are  regulated  by 
instinct ;  they  obey  their  guide,  and  are  happy.  Let  us 
therefore  at  length  cease  to  dispute,  and  learn  to  live  : 
throw  away  the  encumbrance  of  precepts,  which  they  who 
utter  them  with  so  much  pride  and  pomp  do  not  under- 
stand, and  carry  with  us  this  simple  and  intelligible  maxim  : 
that  deviation  from  nature  is  deviation  from  happiness." 

When  he  had  spoken  he  looked  round  him  with  a  placid 
air,  and  enjoyed  the  consciousness  of  his  own  beneficence. 

"Sir,"  said  the  Prince  with  great  modesty,  "as  I,  like  all 
the  rest  of  mankind,  am  desirous  of  felicity,  my  closest 
attention  has  been  fixed  upon  your  discourse  :  I  doubt  not 
the  truth  of  a  position  which  a  man  so  learned  has  so  con- 
fidently advanced.  Let  me  only  know  what  it  is  to  live 
according  to  nature." 

"  When  I  find  young  men  so  humble  and  so  docile,"  said 
the  philosopher,  "  I  can  deny  them  no  information  which 
my  studies  have  enabled  me  to  afford.  To  live  according 
to  nature  is  to  act  always  with  due  regard  to  the  fitness 
arising  from  the  relations  and  qualities  of  causes  and  effects ; 
to  concur  with  the  great  and  unchangeable  scheme  of 
universal  felicity;  to  co-operate  with  the  general  disposition 
and  tendency  of  the  present  system  of  things." 


226  RASSELAS. 

The  Prince  soon  found  that  this  was  one  of  the  sages 
whom  he  should  understand  less  as  he  heard  him  longer. 
He  therefore  bowed  and  was  silent ;  and  the  philosopher, 
supposing  him  satisfied  and  the  rest  vanquished,  rose  up 
and  departed  with  the  air  of  a  man  that  had  co-operated 
with  the  present  system. 


CHAPTER  XXIII. 

The  Prince  and  his  Sister  divide  between  them  the  Work 
of  Observation. 

RASSELAS  returned  home  full  of  reflections,  doubting  how 
to  direct  his  future  steps.  Of  the  way  to  happiness  he 
found  the  learned  and  simple  equally  ignorant ;  but  as  he 
was  yet  young,  he  flattered  himself  that  he  had  time  remain- 
ing for  more  experiments  and  further  inquiries.  He  com- 
municated to  Imlac  his  observations  and  his  doubts,  but 
was  answered  by  him  with  new  doubts  and  remarks  that 
gave  him  no  comfort.  He  therefore  discoursed  more  fre- 
quently and  freely  with  his  sister,  who  had  yet  the  same 
hope  with  himself,  and  always  assisted  him  to  give  some 
reason  why,  though  he  had  been  hitherto  frustrated,  he 
might  succeed  at  last. 

"We  have  hitherto,"  said  she,  "  known  but  little  of  the 
world ;  we  have  never  yet  been  either  great  or  mean.  In 
our  own  country,  though  we  had  royalty,  we  had  no  power ; 
and  in  this  we  have  not  yet  seen  the  private  recesses  of 
domestic  peace.  Imlac  favours  not  our  search,  lest  we 
should  in  time  find  him  mistaken.  We  will  divide  the  task 
between  us  ;  you  shall  try  what  is  to  be  found  in  the  splen- 
dour of  Courts,  and  I  will  range  the  shades  of  humbler 
life.  Perhaps  command  and  authority  may  be  the  supreme 
blessings,  as  they  afford  the  most  opportunities  of  doing 
good ;  or  perhaps  what  this  world  can  give  may  be  found 
in  the  modest  habitations  of  middle  fortune — too  low  for 
great  designs,  and  too  high  for  penury  and  distress." 


RASSELAS. 


227 


CHAPTER  XXIV. 

The  Prince  examines  the  Happiness  of  high  Stations. 

RASSELAS  applauded  the  design,  and  appeared  next  day 
with  a  splendid  retinue  at  the  Court  of  the  Bassa.  He  was 
soon  distinguished  for  his  magnificence,  and  admitted,  as  a 
Prince  whose  curiosity  had  brought  him  from  distant  coun- 
tries, to  an  intimacy  with  the  great  officers  and  frequent 
conversation  with  the  Bassa  himself. 

He  was  at  first  inclined  to  believe  that  the  man  must  be 
pleased  with  his  own  condition  whom  all  approached  with 
reverence  and  heard  with  obedience,  and  who  had  the 
power  to  extend  his  edicts  to  a  whole  kingdom.  "  There 
can  be  no  pleasure,"  said  he,  "  equal  to  that  of  feeling  at 
once  the  joy  of  thousands  all  made  happy  by  wise  adminis- 
tration. Yet,  since  by  the  law  of  subordination  this 
sublime  delight  can  be  in  one  nation  but  the  lot  of  one,  it 
is  surely  reasonable  to  think  that  there  is  some  satisfaction 
more  popular  and  accessible,  and  that  millions  can  hardly 
be  subjected  to  the  will  of  a  single  man,  only  to  fill  his 
particular  breast  with  incommunicable  content." 

These  thoughts  were  often  in  his  mind,  and  he  found  no 
solution  of  the  difficulty.  But  as  presents  and  civilities 
gained  him  more  familiarity,  he  found  that  almost  every 
man  who  stood  high  in  his  employment  hated  all  the  rest 
and  was  hated  by  them,  and  that  their  lives  were  a  continual 
succession  of  plots  and  detections,  stratagems  and  escapes, 
faction  and  treachery.  Many  of  those  who  surrounded  the 
Bassa  were  sent  only  to  watch  and  report  his  conduct : 
every  tongue  was  muttering  censure,  and  every  eye  was 
searching  for  a  fault. 

At  last  the  letters  of  revocation  arrived :  the  Bassa  was 
carried  in  chains  to  Constantinople,  and  his  name  was  men- 
tioned no  more. 

"  What  are  we  now  to  think  of  the  prerogatives  of  power  ?  " 
said  Rasselas  to  his  sister  ;  "  is  it  without  efficacy  to  good  ? 


228  RASSZLAS. 

or  is  the  subordinate  degree  only  dangerous,  and  the 
supreme  safe  and  glorious  ?  Is  the  Sultan  the  only  happy 
man  in  his  dominions  ?  or  is  the  Sultan  himself  subject  to 
the  torments  of  suspicion  and  the  dread  of  enemies  ?  " 

In  a  short  time  the  second  Bassa  was  deposed.  The 
Sultan  that  had  advanced  him  was  murdered  by  the  Janis- 
saries, and  his  successor  had  other  views  or  different 
favourites. 

CHAPTER  XXV. 

The  Princess  pursues  her  Inquiry  with  more  Diligence 
than  Success. 

THE  Princess  in  the  meantime  insinuated  herself  into  many 
families ;  for  there  are  few  doors  through  which  liberality, 
joined  with  good  humour,  cannot  find  its  way.  The 
daughters  of  many  houses  were  airy  and  cheerful ;  but 
Nekayah  had  been  too  long  accustomed  to  the  conversation 
of  Imlac  and  her  brother  to  be  much  pleased  with  childish 
levity  and  prattle  which  had  no  meaning.  She  found  their 
thoughts  narrow,  their  wishes  low,  and  their  merriment  often 
artificial.  Their  pleasures,  poor  as  they  were,  could  not  be 
preserved  pure,  but  were  embittered  by  petty  competitions 
and  worthless  emulation.  They  were  always  jealous  of  the 
beauty  of  each  other,  of  a  quality  to  which  solicitude  can  add 
nothing,  and  from  which  detraction  can  take  nothing  away. 
Many  were  in  love  with  triflers  like  themselves,  and  many 
fancied  that  they  were  in  love  when  in  truth  they  were  only 
idle.  Their  affection  was  not  fixed  on  sense  or  virtue,  and 
therefore  seldom  ended  but  in  vexation.  Their  grief,  how- 
ever, like  their  joy,  was  transient ;  everything  floated  in 
their  mind  unconnected  with  the  past  or  future,  so  that  one 
desire  easily  gave  way  to  another,  as  a  second  stone,  cast 
into  the  water,  effaces  and  confounds  the  circles  of  the  first/ 
With  these  girls  she  played  as  with  inoffensive  animals, 
and  found  them  proud  of  her  countenance  and  weary  of  her 
company. 


RASSELAS.  22$ 

But  her  purpose  was  to  examine  more  deeply,  and  her 
affability  easily  persuaded  the  hearts  that  were  swelling  with 
sorrow  to  discharge  their  secrets  in  her  ear,  and  those  whom 
hope  flattered  or  prosperity  delighted  often  courted  her  to 
partake  their  pleasure. 

The  Princess  and  her  brother  commonly  met  in  the 
evening  in  a  private  summer-house  on  the  banks  of  the 
Nile,  and  related  to  each  other  the  occurrences  of  the  day. 
As  they  were  sitting  together  the  Princess  cast  her  eyes 
upon  the  river  that  flowed  before  her.  "Answer,"  said  she, 
"  great  father  of  waters,  thou  that  rollest  thy  floods  through 
eighty  nations,  to  the  invocations  of  the  daughter  of  thy 
native  king.  Tell  me  if  thou  waterest  through  all  thy  course 
a  single  habitation  from  which  thou  dost  not  hear  the 
murmurs  of  complaint." 

"  You  are  then,"  said  Rasselas,  not  more  successful  in 
private  houses  than  I  have  been  in  Courts."  "I  have,  since 
the  last  partition  of  our  provinces,"  said  the  Princess,  "  en- 
abled myself  to  enter  familiarly  into  many  families,  where 
there  was  the  fairest  show  of  prosperity  and  peace,  and  know 
not  one  house  that  is  not  haunted  by  some  fury  that  de- 
stroys their  quiet. 

"  I  did  not  seek  ease  among  the  poor,  because  I  concluded 
that  there  it  could  not  be  found.  But  I  saw  many  poor 
whom  I  had  supposed  to  live  in  affluence.  Poverty  has  in 
large  cities  very  different  appearances.  It  is  often  concealed 
iu  splendour  and  often  in  extravagance.  It  is  the  care  of  a 
very  great  part  of  mankind  to  conceal  their  indigence  from 
the  rest.  They  support  themselves  by  temporary  expe- 
dients, and  every  day  is  lost  in  contriving  for  the  morrow. 

"  This,  however,  was  an  evil  which,  though  frequent,  I 
saw  with  less  pain,  because  I  could  relieve  it.  Yet  some 
have  refused  my  bounties,  more  offended  with  my  quickness 
to  detect  their  wants  than  pleased  with  my  readiness  to 
succour  them  ;  and  others,  whose  exigences  compelled  them 
to  admit  my  kindness,  have  never  been  able  to  forgive  their 


230  RASSELAS. 

benefactress.  Many,  however,  have  been  sincerely  grateful 
without  the  ostentation  of  gratitude  or  the  hope  of  other 
favours." 

CHAPTER  XXVI. 

The  Princess  continues  her  Remarks  iipon  Private  Life. 

NEKAYAH,  perceiving  her  brother's  attention  fixed,  proceeded 
in  her  narrative. 

"  In  families  where  there  is  or  is  not  poverty  there  is  com- 
monly discord.  If  a  kingdom  be,  as  Imlac  tells  us,  a  great 
family,  a  family  likewise  is  a  little  kingdom,  torn  with  fac- 
tions and  exposed  to  revolutions.  An  unpractised  observer 
expects  the  love  of  parents  and  children  to  be  constant  and 
equal.  But  this  kindness  seldom  continues  beyond  the 
years  of  infancy  ;  in  a  short  time  the  children  become  rivals 
to  their  parents.  Benefits  are  allowed  by  reproaches,  and 
gratitude  debased  by  envy. 

"  Parents  and  children  seldom  act  in  concert ;  each  child 
endeavours  to  appropriate  the  esteem  or  the  fondness  of  the 
parents  ;  and  the  parents,  with  yet  less  temptation,  betray 
each  other  to  their  children.  Thus  some  place  their  confidence 
in  the  father  and  some  in  the  mother,  and  by  degrees  the 
house  is  filled  with  artifices  and  feuds. 

"  The  opinions  of  children  and  parents,  of  the  young  and 
the  old,  are  naturally  opposite,  by  the  contrary  effects  of  hope 
and  despondency,  of  expectation  and  experience,  without 
crime  or  folly  on  either  side.  The  colours  of  life  in  youth 
and  age  appear  different,  as  the  face  of  nature  in  spring  and 
winter.  And  how  can  children  credit  the  assertions  of 
parents  which  their  own  eyes  show  them  to  be  false  ? 

"  Few  parents  act  in  such  a  manner  as  much  to  enforce 
theii  maxims'  by  the  credit  of  their  lives.  The  old  man 
trusts  wholly  to  slow  contrivance  and  gradual  progression ; 
the  youth  expects  to  force  his  way  by  genius,  vigour,  and 
precipitance.  The  old  man  pays  regard  to  riches,  and  the 
youth  reverences  virtue.  The  old  man  deifies  prudence ; 


RASSELAS.  231 

the  youth  commits  himself  to  magnanimity  and  chance. 
The  young  man,  who  intends  no  ill,  believes  that  none  is 
intended,  and  therefore  acts  with  openness  and  candour  ; 
but  his  father,  having  suffered  the  injuries  of  fraud,  is  im- 
pelled to  suspect  and  too  often  allured  to  practise  it.  Age 
looks  with  anger  on  the  temerity  of  youth,  and  youth  with 
contempt  on  the  scrupulosity  of  age.  Thus  parents  and 
children  for  the  greatest  part  live  on  to  love  less  and  less ; 
and  if  those  whom  nature  has  thus  closely  united  are  the 
torments  of  each  other,  where  shall  we  look  for  tenderness 
and  consolation  ?  " 

"  Surely,"  said  the  Prince,  "  you  must  have  been  unfor- 
tunate in  your  choice  of  acquaintance.  I  am  unwilling  to 
believe  that  the  most  tender  of  all  relations  is  thus  impeded 
in  its  effects  by  natural  necessity." 

"  Domestic  discord,"  answered  she,  "  is  not  inevitably 
and  fatally  necessary ;  but  yet  it  is  not  easily  avoided.  We 
seldom  see  that  a  whole  family  is  virtuous  :  the  good  and 
the  evil  cannot  well  agree,  and  the  evil  can  yet  less  agree 
with  one  another.  Even  the  virtuous  fall  sometimes  to 
variance,  when  their  virtues  are  of  different  kinds  and  tend- 
ing to  extremes.  In  general,  those  parents  have  most  re- 
verence who  most  deserve  it ;  for  he  that  lives  well  cannot 
be  despised. 

"  Many  other  evils  infest  private  life.  Some  are  the 
slaves  of  servants  whom  they  have  trusted  with  their 
affairs.  Some  are  kept  in  continual  anxiety  by  the  caprice 
of  rich  relations,  whom  they  cannot  please  and  dare  not 
offend.  Some  husbands  are  imperious,  and  some  wives  per- 
verse ;  and,  as  it  is  always  more  easy  to  do  evil  than  good, 
though  the  wisdom  or  virtue  of  one  can  very  rarely  make  many 
happy,  the  folly  or  vice  of  one  makes  many  miserable." 

"  If  such  be  the  general  effect  of  marriage,"  said  the 
Prince,  "  I  shall  for  the  future  think  it  dangerous  to  connect 
rny  interest  with  that  of  another,  lest  I  should  be  unhappy 
by  my  partner's  fault." 


232  RASSELAS. 

"  I  have  met,"  said  the  Princess,  "  with  many  who  live 
single  for  that  reason ;  but  I  never  found  that  their  pru- 
dence ought  to  raise  envy.  They  dream  away  their  time 
without  friendship,  without  fondness,  and  are  driven  to  rid 
themselves  of  the  day,  for  which  they  have  no  use,  by 
childish  amusements  or  vicious  delights.  They  act  as  beings 
under  the  constant  sense  of  some  known  inferiority,  that  fills 
their  minds  with  rancour  and  their  tongues  with  censure. 
They  are  peevish  at  home  and  malevolent  abroad  ;  and,  as 
the  outlaws  of  human  nature,  make  it  their  business  and 
their  pleasure  to  disturb  that  society  which  debars  them  from 
its  privileges.  To  live  without  feeling  or  exciting  sympathy, 
to  be  fortunate  without  adding  to  the  felicity  of  others,  or 
afflicted  without  tasting  the  balm  of  pity,  is  a  state  more 
gloomy  than  solitude ;  it  is  not  retreat  but  exclusion  from 
mankind.  Marriage  has  many  pains,  but  celibacy  has  no 
pleasures." 

"  What  then  is  to  be  done?"  said  Rasselas.  "The  more 
we  inquire  the  less  we  can  resolve.  Surely  he  is  most 
likely  to  please  himself  that  has  no  other  inclination  to 
regard." 

CHAPTER  XXVII. 

Disquisition  upon    Greatness, 

THE  conversation  had  a  short  pause.  The  Prince,  having 
considered  his  sister's  observation,  told  her  that  she  had 
surveyed  life  with  prejudice,  and  supposed  misery  where  she 
did  not  find  it.  "  Your  narrative,"  says  he,  "  throws  yet  a 
darker  gloom  upon  the  prospects  of  futurity.  The  predic- 
tions of  Imlac  were  but  faint  sketches  of  the  evils  painted  by 
Nekayah.  I  have  been  lately  convinced  that  quiet  is  not 
the  daughter  of  grandeur  or  of  power ;  that  her  presence  is 
not  to  be  bought  by  wealth  nor  enforced  by  conquest.  It 
is  evident  that  as  any  man  acts  in  a  wider  compass,  he  must 
be  more  exposed  to  opposition  from  enmity,  or  miscarriage 
from  chance.  Whoever  has  many  to  please  or  to  govern 


KASSELAS.  233 

must  use  the  ministry  of  many  agents,  some  of  wnom  will  be 
wicked  and  some  ignorant ;  by  some  he  will  be  misled  and 
by  others  betrayed.  If  he  gratifies  one,  he  will  offend 
another ;  those  that  are  not  favoured  will  think  themselves 
injured  ;  and  since  favours  can  be  conferred  but  upon  few, 
the  greater  number  will  be  always  discontented." 

"The  discontent/'  said  the  Princess,  "which  is  thus 
unreasonable,  I  hope  that  I  shall  always  have  spirit  to 
despise  and  you  power  to  repress." 

"  Discontent,"  answered  Rasselas,  will  not  always  be 
without  reason  under  the  most  just  and  vigilant  adminis- 
tration of  public  affairs.  None,  however  attentive,  can  always 
discover  that  merit  which  indigence  or  faction  may  happen 
to  obscure  ;  and  none,  however  powerful,  can  always  reward 
it.  Yet,  he  that  sees  inferior  desert  advanced  above  him 
will  naturally  impute  that  preference  to  partiality  or  caprice, 
and  indeed  it  can  scarcely  he  hoped  that  any  man,  how- 
ever magnanimous  by  nature  or  exalted  by  condition,  will 
be  able  to  persist  for  ever  in  fixed  and  inexorable  justice  of 
distribution ;  he  will  sometimes  indulge  his  own  affections, 
and  sometimes  those  of  his  favourites ;  he  will  permit  some 
to  please  him  who  can  never  serve  him ;  he  will  discover  in 
those  whom  he  loves  qualities  which  in  reality  they  do  not 
possess  ;  and  to  those  from  whom  he  receives  pleasure  he 
will  in  his  turn  endeavour  to  give  it.  Thus  will  recom- 
mendations sometimes  prevail  which  were  purchased  by 
money,  or  by  the  more  destructive  bribery  of  flattery  and 
servility. 

"  He  that  hath  much  to  do  will  do  something  wrong,  and 
of  that  wrong  must  suffer  the  consequences  ;  and  if  it  were 
possible  that  he  should  always  act  rightly,  yet  when  such 
numbers  are  to  judge  of  his  conduct,  the  bad  will  censure 
and  obstruct  him  by  malevolence,  and  the  good  sometimes 
by  mistake. 

"  The  highest  stations  cannot  therefore  hope  to  be  the 
abodes  of  happiness,  which  I  would  willingly  believe  to  have 


234  RASSELAS. 

fled  from  thrones  and  palaces  to  seats  of  humble  privacy 
and  placid  obscurity.  For  what  can  hinder  the  satisfaction 
or  intercept  the  expectations  of  him  whose  abilities  are 
adequate  to  his  employments,  who  sees  with  his  own  eyes 
the  whole  circuit  of  his  influence,  who  chooses  by  his  own 
knowledge  all  whom  he  trusts,  and  whom  none  are  tempted 
to  deceive  by  hope  or  fear  ?  Surely  he  has  nothing  to  do 
but  to  love  and  to  be  loved,  to  be  virtuous  and  to  be  happy." 
"  Whether  perfect  happiness  would  be  procured  by  perfect 
goodness,"  said  Nekayah,  "  this  world  will  never  afford  an 
opportunity  of  deciding.  But  this,  at  least,  may  be  main- 
tained, that  we  do  not  always  find  visible  happiness  in  pro- 
portion to  visible  virtue.  All  natural  and  almost  all  political 
evils  are  incident  alike  to  the  bad  and  good :  they  are 
confounded  in  the  misery  of  a  famine,  and  not  much  dis- 
tinguished in  the  fury  of  a  faction  ;  they  sink  together  in  a 
tempest,  and  are  driven  together  from  their  country  by  in- 
vaders. All  that  virtue  can  afford  is  quietness  of  conscience, 
and  a  steady  prospect  of  a  happier  state  :  this  may  enable 
us  to  endure  calamity  with  patience,  but  remember  that 
patience  must  suppose  pain." 

CHAPTER  XXVIII. 

Rasselas  and  Nekayah  continue  their  Conversation. 

"  DEAR  PRINCESS,"  said  Rasselas,  "you  fall  into  the  com- 
mon errors  of  exaggeratory  declamation,  by  producing  in  a 
familiar  disquisition  examples  of  national  calamities  and 
scenes  of  extensive  misery  which  are  found  in  books  rather 
than  in  the  world,  and  which,  as  they  are  horrid,  are  ordained 
to  be  rare.  Let  us  not  imagine  evils  which  we  do  not  feel, 
nor  injure  life  by  misrepresentations.  I  cannot  bear  that 
querulous  eloquence  which  threatens  every  city  with  a  siege 
like  that  of  Jerusalem,  that  makes  famine  attend  on  every 
flight  of  locusts,  and  suspends  pestilence  on  the  wing  of 
every  blast  that  issues  from  the  south. 


RASSELAS.  235 

"  On  necessary  and"  inevitable  evils  which  overwhelm 
kingdoms  at  once,  all  disputation  is  vain :  when  they  hap- 
pen they  must  be  endured.  But  it  is  evident  that  these 
bursts  of  universal  distress  are  more  dreaded  than  felt : 
thousands  and  tens  of  thousands  flourish  in  youth  and  wither 
in  age,  without  the  knowledge  of  any  other  than  domestic 
evils,  and  share  the  same  pleasures  and  vexations,  whether 
their  kings  are  mild  or  cruel,  whether  the  armies  of  their 
country  pursue  their  enemies  or  retreat  before  them.  While 
courts  are  disturbed  with  intestine  competitions,  and  ambas- 
sadors are  negotiating  in  foreign  countries,  the  smith  still 
plies  his  anvil,  and  the  husbandman  drives  his  plough  for- 
ward ;  the  necessaries  of  life  are  required  and  obtained,  and 
the  successive  business  of  the  season  continues  to  make  its 
wonted  revolutions. 

"  Let  us  cease  to  consider  what  perhaps  may  never 
happen,  and  what,  when  it  shall  happen,  will  laugh  at 
human  speculation.  We  will  not  endeavour  to  modify  the 
motions  of  the  elements  or  to  fix  the  destiny  of  kingdoms. 
It  is  our  business  to  consider  what  beings  like  us  may 
perform,  each  labouring  for  his  own  happiness,  by  pro- 
moting within  his  circle,  however  narrow,  the  happiness  of 
others. 

"  Marriage  is  evidently  the  dictate  of  nature ;  men  and 
women  were  made  to  be  the  companions  of  each  other ;  and 
therefore  I  cannot  be  persuaded  but  that  marriage  is  one  of 
the  means  of  happiness." 

"  I  know  not,"  said  the  Princess,  "  whether  marriage  be 
more  than  one  of  the  innumerable  modes  of  human  misery. 
When  I  see  and  reckon  the  various  forms  of  connubial  infe- 
licity, the  unexpected  causes  of  lasting  discord,  the  diversi- 
ties of  temper,  the  oppositions  of  opinion,  the  rude  collisions 
of  contrary  desire  where  both  are  urged  by  violent  impulses, 
the  obstinate  contest  of  disagreeing  virtues  where  both  are 
supported  by  consciousness  of  good  intention,  I  am  some- 
times disposed  to  think,  with  the  severer  casuists  of  most 


236  RASSELAS. 

nations,  that  marriage  is  rather  permitted  than  approved, 
and  that  none,  but  by  the  instigation  of  a  passion  too  much 
indulged,  entangle  themselves  with  indissoluble  compact." 

"  You  seem  to  forget,"  replied  Rasselas,  "  that  you  have, 
even  now,  represented  celibacy  as  less  happy  than  marriage. 
Both  conditions  may  be  bad,  but  they  cannot  both  be  worse. 
Thus  it  happens,  when  wrong  opinions  are  entertained,  that 
they  mutually  destroy  each  other,  and  leave  the  mind  open 
to  truth." 

"  I  did  not  expect,"  answered  the  Princess,  "  to  hear 
that  imputed  to  falsehood  which  is  the  consequence  only  of 
frailty.  To  the  mind,  as  to  the  eye,  it  is  difficult  to  com- 
pare with  exactness  objects  vast  in  their  extent  and  various 
in  their  parts.  When  we  see  or  conceive  the  whole  at  once, 
we  readily  note  the  discriminations  and  decide  the  prefer- 
ence ;  but  of  two  systems,  of  which  neither  can  be  surveyed 
by  any  human  being  in  its  full  compass  of  magnitude  and 
multiplicity  of  complication,  where  is  the  wonder  that,  judging 
of  the  whole  by  parts,  I  am  alternately  affected  by  one  and 
the  other  as  either  presses  on  my  memory  or  fancy  ?  We 
differ  from  ourselves  just  as  we  differ  from  each  other  when 
we  see  only  part  of  the  question,  as  in  the  multifarious  rela- 
tions of  politics  and  morality ;  but  when  we  perceive  the 
whole  at  once,  as  in  numerical  computations,  all  agree  in  one 
judgment,  and  none  ever  varies  in  his  opinion." 

"  Let  us  not  add,"  said  the  Prince,  "  to  the  other  evils  of 
life  the  bitterness  of  controversy,  nor  endeavour  to  vie  with 
each  other  in  subtilties  of  argument.  We  are  employed  in  a 
search  of  which  both  are  equally  to  enjoy  the  success  or 
suffer  by  the  miscarriage  ;  it  is  therefore  fit  that  we  assist 
each  other.  You  surely  conclude  too  hastily  from  the  infe- 
licity of  marriage  against  its  institution  ;  will  not  the  misery 
of  life  prove  equally  that  life  cannot  be  the  gift  of  Heaven  ? 
The  world  must  be  peopled  by  marriage  or  peopled  with- 
out it." 

"  How  the  world  is  tp  be  peopled,"  returned  Nekayah, 


RASSELAS.  237 

"  is  not  my  care,  and  need  not  be  yours.  I  see  no  danger 
that  the  present  generation  should  omit  to  leave  successors 
behind  them  ;  we  are  not  now  inquiring  for  the  world,  but 
for  ourselves." 


CHAPTER  XXIX. 
The  Debate  on  Marriage  (continued). 

11  THE  good  of  the  whole,"  says  Rasselas,  "  is  the  same  with 
the  good  of  all  its  parts.  If  marriage  be  best  for  mankind, 
it  must  be  evidently  best  for  individuals ;  or  a  permanent 
and  necessary  duty  must  be  the  cause  of  evil,  and  some  must 
be  inevitably  sacrificed  to  the  convenience  of  others.  In 
the  estimate  which  you  have  made  of  the  two  states  it 
appears  that  the  incommodities  of  a  single  life  are  in  a  great 
measure  necessary  and  certain,  but  those  of  the  conjugal 
state  accidental  and  avoidable.  I  cannot  forbear  to  flatter 
myself  that  prudence  and  benevolence  will  make  marriage 
happy.  The  general  folly  of  mankind  is  the  cause  of  general 
complaint.  What  can  be  expected  but  disappointment  and 
repentance  from  a  choice  made  in  the  immaturity  of  youth, 
in  the  ardour  of  desire,  without  judgment,  without  foresight, 
without  inquiry  after  conformity  of  opinions,  similarity  of 
manners,  rectitude  of  judgment,  or  purity  of  sentiment? 

"  Such  is  the  common  process  of  marriage.  A  youth  and 
maiden,  meeting  by  chance  or  brought  together  by  artifice, 
exchange  glances,  reciprocate  civilities,  go  home  and  dream 
of  one  another.  Having  little  to  divert  attention  or  diversify 
thought,  they  find  themselves  uneasy  when  they  are  apart, 
and  therefore  conclude  that  they  shall  be  happy  together. 
They  marry,  and  discover  what  nothing  but  voluntary  blind- 
ness before  had  concealed ;  they  wear  out  life  in  altercations, 
and  charge  nature  with  cruelty. 

"  From  those  early  marriages  proceeds  likewise  the  rivalry 
of  parents  and  children  :  the  son  is  eager  to  enjoy  the  world 
before  the  father  is  willing  to  forsake  it,  and  there  is  hardly 


238  RASSELAS. 

room  at  once  for  two  generations.  The  daughter  begins  to 
bloom  before  the  mother  can  be  content  to  fade,  and  neither 
can  forbear  to  wish  for  the  absence  of  the  other. 

"  Surely  all  these  evils  may  be  avoided  by  that  delibera- 
tion and  delay  which  prudence  prescribes  to  irrevocable 
choice.  In  the  variety  and  jollity  of  youthful  pleasures,  life 
may  be  well  enough  supported  without  the  help  of  a  partner. 
Longer  time  will  increase  experience,  and  wider  views  will 
allow  better  opportunities  of  inquiry  and  selection  :  one  ad- 
vantage at  least  will  be  certain,  the  parents  will  be  visibly 
older  than  their  children." 

"  What  reason  cannot  collect,"  said  Nekayah,  "  and  what 
experiment  has  not  yet  taught,  can  be  known  only  from  the 
report  of  others.  I  have  been  told  that  late  marriages  are 
not  eminently  happy.  This  is  a  question  too  important  to 
be  neglected  ;  and  I  have  often  proposed  it  to  those  whose 
accuracy  of  remark  and  comprehensiveness  of  knowledge 
made  their  suffrages  worthy  of  regard.  They  have  generally 
determined  that  it  is  dangerous  for  a  man  and  woman  to 
suspend  their  fate  upon  each  other  at  a  time  when  opinions 
are  fixed  and  habits  are  established,  when  friendships  have 
been  contracted  on  both  sides,  when  life  has  been  planned 
into  method,  and  the  mind  has  long  enjoyed  the  contempla- 
tion of  its  own  prospects. 

"It  is  scarcely  possible  that  two  travelling  through  the 
world  under  the  conduct  of  chance  should  ha\  e  been  both 
directed  to  the  same  path,  and  it  will  not  often  happen  that 
either  will  quit  the  track  which  custom  has  made  pleasing. 
When  the  desultory  levity  of  youth  has  settled  into  regularity, 
it  is  soon  succeeded  by  pride  ashamed  to  yield,  or  obstinacy 
delighting  to  contend.  And  even  though  mutual  esteem 
produces  mutual  desire  to  please,  time  itself,  as  it  modifies 
unchangeably  the  external  mien,  determines  likewise  the 
direction  of  the  passions  and  gives  an  inflexible  rigidity  to 
the  manners.  Long  customs  are  not  easily  broken ;  he  that 
attempts  to  change  the  course  of  his  own  life  very  often 


RASSELAS. 


239 


labours  in  vain,  and  how  shall  we  do  that  for  others  which 
we  are  seldom  able  to  do  for  ourselves  ?  " 

"  But  surely,"  interposed  the  Prince,  "  you  suppose  the 
chief  motive  of  choice  forgotten  or  neglected.  Whenever  I 
shall  seek  a  wife,  it  shall  be  my  first  question  whether  she 
be  willing  to  be  led  by  reason  ?  " 

"Thus  it  is,"  said  Nekayah,  "that  philosophers  are 
deceived.  There  are  a  thousand  familiar  disputes  which 
reason  never  can  decide ;  questions  that  elude  investiga- 
tion, and  make  logic  ridiculous ;  cases  where  something  must 
be  done,  and  where  little  can  be  said.  Consider  the  state 
of  mankind,  and  inquire  how  few  can  be  supposed  to  act 
upon  any  occasions,  whether  small  or  great,  with  all  the 
reasons  of  action  present  to  their  minds.  Wretched  would 
be  the  pair,  above  all  names  of  wretchedness,  who  should.be 
doomed  to  adjust  by  reason,  every  morning,  all  the  minute 
details  of  a  domestic  day. 

"Those  who  marry  at  an  advanced  age  will  probably 
escape  the  encroachments  of  their  children,  but  in  the 
diminution  of  this  advantage  they  will  be  likely  to  leave 
them,  ignorant  and  helpless,  to  a  guardian's  mercy  ;  or  if  that 
should  not  happen,  they  must  at  least  go  out  of  the  world 
before  they  see  those  whom  they  love  best  either  wise  or 
great. 

"  From  their  children,  if  they  have  less  to  fear,  they  have 
less  also  to  hope  ;  and  they  lose  without  equivalent  the  joys 
of  early  love,  and  the  convenience  of  uniting  with  manners 
pliant  and  minds  susceptible  of  new  impressions,  which 
might  wear  away  their  dissimilitudes  by  long  cohabitation,  as 
soft  bodies  by  continual  attrition  conform  their  surfaces  to 
each  other. 

"  I  believe  it  will  be  found  that  those  who  marry  late  are 
best  pleased  with  their  children,  and  those  who  marry  early 
with  their  partners." 

i(  The  union  of  these  two  affections,"  said  Rasselas, 
"  would  produce  all  that  could  be  wished.  Perhaps  there  is 


240  RASSELAS. 

a  time  when  marriage  might  unite  them— a  time  neither  too 
early  for  the  father  nor  too  late  for  the  husband." 

"  Every  hour,"  answered  the  Princess,  "  confirms  my  pre- 
judice in  favour  of  the  position  so  often  uttered  by  the  mouth 
of  Imlac,  that  '  Nature  sets  her  gifts  on  the  right  hand  and 
on  the  left.'  Those  conditions  which  flatter  hope  and  attract 
desire  are  so  constituted  that  as  we  approach  one  we  recede 
from  another.  There  are  goods  so  opposed  that  we  cannot 
seize  both,  but  by  too  much  prudence  may  pass  between 
them  at  too  great  a  distance  to  reach  either.  This  is  often 
the  fate  of  long  consideration :  he  does  nothing  who 
endeavours  to  do  more  than  is  allowed  to  humanity.  Flatter 
not  yourself  with  contrarieties  of  pleasure.  Of  the  blessings 
set  before  you  make  your  choice,  and  be  content.  No  man 
can  taste  the  fruits  of  autumn  while  he  is  delighting  his 
scent  with  the  flowers  of  the  spring  ;  no  man  can  at  the  same 
time  fill  his  cup  from  the  source  and  from  the  mouth  of  the 
Nile." 

CHAPTER    XXX. 

Imlac  enters,  and  changes  the  Conversation. 

HERE  Imlac  entered,  and  interrupted  them.  "Imlac," 
said  Rasselas,  "  I  have  been  taking  from  the  Princess  the 
dismal  history  of  private  life,  and  am  almost  discouraged 
from  further  search." 

"  It  seems  to  me,"  said  Imlac,  "  that  while  you  are  making 
the  choice  of  life  you  neglect  to  live.  You  wander  about 
a  single  city,  which,  however  large  and  diversified,  can  now 
afford  few  novelties,  and  forget  that  you  are  in  a  country 
famous  among  the  earliest  monarchies  for  the  power  and 
wisdom  of  its  inhabitants  ;  a  country  where  the  sciences 
first  dawned  that  illuminate  the  world,  and  beyond  which 
the  arts  cannot  be  traced  of  civil  society  or  domestic  life. 

"  The  old  Egyptians  have  left  behind  them  monuments 
of  industry  and  power  before  which  all  European  magnificence 
is  confessed  to  fade  away.  The  ruins  of  their  architecture 


RASSELAS.  241 

are  the  schools  of  modern  builders,  and  from  the  wonders 
which  time  has  spared  we  may  conjecture,  though  uncer- 
tainly, what  it  has  destroyed." 

"  My  curiosity,"  said  Rasselas,  "  does  not  very  strongly 
lead  me  to  survey  piles  of  stone  or  mounds  of  earth.  My 
business  is  with  man.  I  came  hither,  not  to  measure  frag- 
ments of  temples  or  trace  choked  aqueducts,  but  to  look 
upon  the  various  scenes  of  the  present  world." 

"  The  things  that  are  now  before  us,"  said  the  Princess, 
require  attention,  and  deserve  it  What  have  I  to  do  with 
the  heroes  or  the  monuments  of  ancient  times — with  times 
which  can  never  return,  and  heroes  whose  form  of  life  was 
different  from  all  that  the  present  condition  of  mankind 
requires  or  allows  ?  " 

"  To  know  anything,"  returned  the  poet,  "  we  must  know 
its  effects ;  to  see  men,  we  must  see  their  works,  that  we 
may  learn  what  reason  has  dictated  or  passion  has  excited, 
and  find  what  are  the  most  powerful  motives  of  action.  To 
judge  rightly  of  the  present,  we  must  oppose  it  to  the  past ; 
for  all  judgment  is  comparative,  and  of  the  future  nothing 
can  be  known.  The  truth  is,  that  no  mind  is  much  employed 
upon  the  present :  recollection  and  anticipation  fill  up  almost 
all  our  moments.  Our  passions  are  joy  and  grief,  love  and 
hatred,  hope  and  fear.  Of  joy  and  grief  the  past  is  the 
object;  and  the  future,  of  hope  and  fear  :  even  love  and 
hatred  respect  the  past,  for  the  cause  must  have  been  before 
the  effect 

"  The  present  state  of  things  is  the  consequence  of  the 
former ;  and  it  is  natural  to  inquire  what  were  the  sources 
of  the  good  that  we  enjoy,  or  the  evils  that  we  suffer.  If 
we  act  only  for  ourselves,  to  neglect  the  study  of  history  is 
not  prudent.  If  we  are  entrusted  with  the  care  of  others,  it 
is  not  just.  Ignorance,  when  it  is  voluntary,  is  criminal ; 
and  he  may  properly  be  charged  with  evil  who  refused  to 
learn  how  he  might  prevent  it. 

"  There  is  no  part  of  history  so  generally  useful  as  that 


242  RASSELAS. 

which  relates  to  the  progress  of  the  human  mind,  the  gradual 
improvement  of  reason,  the  successive  advances  of  science, 
the  vicissitudes  of  learning  and  ignorance,  which  are  the 
light  and  darkness  of  thinking  beings,  the  extinction  and 
resuscitation  of  arts,  and  the  revolutions  of  the  intellectual 
world.  If  accounts  of  battles  and  invasions  are  peculiarly 
the  business  of  princes,  the  useful  or  elegant  arts  are  not 
to  be  neglected  ;  those  who  have  kingdoms  to  govern  have 
understandings  to  cultivate. 

"  Example  is  always  more  efficacious  than  precept.  A 
soldier  is  formed  in  war,  and  a  painter  must  copy  pictures. 
In  this,  contemplative  life  has  the  advantage.  Great  actions 
are  seldom  seen,  but  the  labours  of  art  are  always  at  hand 
for  those  who  desire  to -know  what  art  has  been  able  to 
perform. 

"When  the  eye  or  the  imagination  is  struck  with  any 
uncommon  work,  the  next  transition  of  an  active  mind  is  to 
the  means  by  which  it  was  performed.  Here  begins  the 
true  use  of  such  contemplation.  We  enlarge  our  compre- 
hension by  new  ideas,  and  perhaps  recover  some  art  lost  to 
mankind,  or  learn  what  is  less  perfectly  known  in  our 
own  country.  At  least  we  compare  our  own  with  former 
times,  and  either  rejoice  at  our  improvements,  or,  what  is 
the  first  motion  towards  good,  discover  our  defects." 

"  I  am  willing,"  said  the  Prince,  "  to  see  all  that  can 
deserve  my  search."  "  And  I,"  said  the  Princess,  "  shall 
rejoice  to  learn  something  of  the  manners  of  antiquity." 

11  The  most  pompous  monument  of  Egyptian  greatness, 
and  one  of  the  most  bulky  works  of  manual  industry,"  said 
Imlac,  "  are  the  Pyramids  :  fabrics  raised  before  the  time  of 
history,  and  of  which  the  earliest  narratives  afford  us  only 
uncertain  traditions.  Of  these  the  greatest  is  still  standing, 
very  little  injured  by  time." 

"  Let  us  visit  them,  to-morrow,"  said  Nekayah.  "  I  have 
often  heard  of  the  Pyramids,  and  shall  not  rest  till  I  have 
seen  them,  within  and  without,  with  my  own  eyes." 


RASSELAS.  243 

CHAPTER    XXXI. 

They  visit  the  Pyramids. 

THE  resolution  being  thus  taken,  they  set  out  the  next  day. 
Thc'y  laid  tents  upon  their  camels,  being  resolved  to  stay 
among  the  Pyramids  till  their  curiosity  was  fully  satisfied. 
They  travelled  gently,  turned  aside  to  everything  remarkable, 
stopped  from  time  to  time  and  conversed  with  the  inhabi- 
tants, and  observed  the  various  appearances  of  towns  ruined 
and  inhabited,  of  wild  and  cultivated  nature. 

When  they  came  to  the  Great  Pyramid  they  were  astonished 
at  the  extent  of  the  base  and  the  height  of  the  top.  Imlac 
explained  to  them  the  principles  upon  which  the  pyramidal 
form  was  chosen  for  a  fabric  intended  to  co-extend  its  dura- 
tion with  that  of  the  world :  he  showed  that  its  gradual 
diminution  gave  it  such  stability  as  defeated  all  the  common 
attacks  of  the  elements,  and  could  scarcely  be  overthrown  by 
earthquakes  themselves,the  least  resistible  of  natural  violence. 
A  concussion  that  should  shatter  the  pyramid  would  threaten 
the  dissolution  of  the  continent. 

They  measured  all  its  dimensions,  and  pitched  their  tents 
at  its  foot.  Next  day  they  prepared  to  enter  its  interior 
apartments,  and  having  hired  the  common  guides,  climbed 
up  to  the  first  passage ;  when  the  favourite  of  the  Princess, 
looking  into  the  cavity,  stepped  back  and  trembled. 
"  Pekuah,"  said  the  Princess,  "  of  what  art  thou  afraid  ?  " 

"  Of  the  narrow  entrance,"  answered  the  lady,  "  and  of  the 
dreadful  gloom.  I  dare  not  enter  a  place  which  must  surely 
be  inhabited  by  unquiet  souls.  The  original  possessors  of 
these  dreadful  vaults  will  start  up  before  us,  and  perhaps 
shut  us  in  for  ever."  She  spoke,  and  threw  her  arms  round 
the  neck  of  her  mistress. 

"  If  all  your  fear  be  of  apparitions,"  said  the  Prince, 
"  I  will  promise  you  safety.  There  is  no  danger  from  the 
dead  :  he  that  is  once  buried  will  be  seen  no  more." 

"That  the  dead  are  seen  no  more,"  said  Imlac,  "I  will 


244  RASSELAS. 

not  undertake  to  maintain  against  the  concurrent  and  unvaried 
testimony  of  all  ages  and  of  all  nations.  There  is  no  people, 
rude  or  learned,  among  whom  apparitions  of  the  dead  are 
not  related  and  believed.  This  opinion,  which  perhaps 
prevails  as  far  as  human  nature  is  diffused,  could  become 
universal  only  by  its  truth :  those  that  never  heard  of  one 
another  would  not  have  agreed  in  a  tale  which  nothing  but 
experience  can  make  credible.  That  it  is  doubted  by  single 
cavillers  can  very  little  weaken  the  general  evidence,  and 
some  who  deny  it  with  their  tongues  confess  it  by  their  fears. 

"  Yet  I  do  not  mean  to  add  new  terrors  to  those  which 
have  already  seized  upon  Pekuah.  There  can  be  no  reason 
why  spectres  should  haunt  the  Pyramid  more  than  other 
places,  or  why  they  should  have  power  or  will  to  hurt 
innocence  and  purity.  Our  entrance  is  no  violation  of  their 
privileges  :  we  can  take  nothing  from  them  ;  how,  then,  can 
we  offend  them?  " 

"  My  dear  Pekuah,"  said  the  Princess,  "  I  will  always  go 
before  you,  and  Imlac  shall  follow  you.  Remember  that  you 
are  the  companion  of  the  Princess  of  Abyssinia." 

"  If  the  Princess  is  pleased  that  her  servant  should  die," 
returned  the  lady,  "  let  her  command  some  death  less 
dreadful  than  enclosure  in  this  horrid  cavern.  You  know  I 
dare  not  disobey  you — I  must  go  if  you  command  me ;  but 
if  I  once  enter,  I  never  shall  come  back." 

The  Princess  saw  thai  her  fear  was  too  strong  for  ex- 
postulation or  reproof,  and,  embracing  her,  told  her  that  she 
should  stay  in  the  tent  till  their  return.  Pekuah  was  not 
yet  satisfied,  but  entreated  the  Princess  not  to  pursue  so 
dreadful  a  purpose  as  that  of  entering  the  recesses  of  the 
Pyramids.  "  Though  I  cannot  teach  courage,"  said  Ne- 
kayah,  "  I  must  not  learn  cowardice,  nor  leave  at  last  undone 
what  I  came  hither  only  to  do." 


RASSELAS 


245 


CHAPTER  XXXII. 

They  enter  the  Pyramid. 

PEKUAH  descended  to  the  tents,  and  the  rest  entered  the 
Pyramid.  They  passed  through  the  galleries,  surveyed  the 
vaults  of  marble,  and  examined  the  chest  in  which  the  body 
of  the  founder  is  supposed  to  have  been  deposited.  They 
then  sat  down  in  one  of  the  most  spacious  chambers  to  rest 
awhile,  before  they  attempted  to  return. 

"  We  have  now,"  said  Imlac,  "  gratified  our  minds  with  an 
exact  view  of  the  greatest  work  of  man,  except  the  wall  of 
China. 

"  Of  the  wall  it  is  very  easy  to  assign  the  motive.  It 
secured  a  wealthy  and  timorous  nation  from  the  incursions 
of  barbarians,  whose  unskilfulness  in  the  arts  made  it  easiel 
for  them  to  supply  their  wants  by  rapine  than  by  industry) 
and  who  from  time  to  time  poured  in  upon  the  inhabitants 
of  peaceful  commerce  as  vultures  descend  upon  domestic 
fowl.  Their  celerity  and  fierceness  made  the  wall  necessary, 
and  their  ignorance  made  it  efficacious. 

"But  for  the  Pyramids  no  reason  has  ever  been  given 
adequate  to  the  cost  and  labour  of  the  work.  The  narrow- 
ness of  the  chambers  proves  that  it  could  afford  no  retreat 
from  enemies,  and  treasures  might  have  been  reposited  at 
far  less  expense  with  equal  security.  It  seems  to  have  been 
erected  only  in  compliance  with  that  hunger  of  imagination 
which  preys  incessantly  upon  life,  and  must  be  always 
appeased  by  some  employment.  Those  who  have  already 
all  that  they  can  enjoy  must  enlarge  their  desires.  He  that 
has  built  for  use  till  use  is  supplied,  must  begin  to  build  for 
vanity,  and  extend  his  plan  to  the  utmost  power  of  human 
performance  that  he  may  not  be  soon  reduced  to  form 
another  wish. 

"  I  consider  this  mighty  structure  as  a  monument  of  the 
insufficiency  of  human  enjoyments.  A  king  whose  power 
i§  unlimited,  and  whose  treasures  surmount  all  real  and 


246  RASSELAS. 

imaginary  wants,  is  compelled  to  solace,  by  the  erection  of 
a  pyramid,  the  satiety  of  dominion  and  tastelessness  of 
pleasures,  and  to  amuse  the  tediousness  of  declining  life  by 
seeing  thousands  labouring  without  end,  and  one  stone,  for 
no  purpose,  laid  upon  another.  Whoever  thou  art  that,  not 
content  with  a  moderate  condition,  imaginest  happiness  in 
royal  magnificence,  and  dreamest  that  command  or  riches 
can  feed  the  appetite  of  novelty  with  perpetual  gratifications, 
survey  the  Pyramids,  and  confess  thy  folly  ! " 

CHAPTER  XXXIII. 

77ie  Princess  meets  -with  an  iinexpected  Misfortune. 

THEY  rose  up,  and  returned  through  the  cavity  at  which 
they  had  entered;  and  the  Princess  prepared  for  her 
favourite  a  long  narrative  of  dark  labyrinths  and  costly 
rooms,  and  of  the  different  impressions  which  the  varieties 
of  the  way  had  made  upon  her.  •  But  when  they  came  to 
their  train,  they  found  every  one  silent  and  dejected:  the 
men  discovered  shame  and  fear  in  their  countenances,  and 
the  women  were  weeping  in  their  tents. 

What  had  happened  they  did  not  try  to  conjecture,  but 
immediately  inquired.  "You  had  scarcely  entered  into  the 
Pyramid,"  said  one  of  the  attendants,  "  when  a  troop  of 
Arabs  rushed  upon  us :  we  were  too  few  to  resist  them,  and 
too  slow  to  escape.  They  were  about  to  search  the  tents, 
set  us  on  our  camels,  and  drive  us  along  before  them,  when 
the  approach  of  some  Turkish  horsemen  put  them  to  flight : 
but  they  seized  the  Lady  Pekuah  with  her  two  maids,  and 
carried  them  away :  the  Turks  are  now  pursuing  them  by 
our  instigation,  but  I  fear  they  will  not  be  able  to  overtake 
them." 

The  Princess  was  overpowered  with  surprise  and  grief. 
Rasselas,  in  the  first  heat  of  his  resentment,  ordered  his 
servants  to  follow  him,  and  prepared  to  pursue  the  robbers 
with  his  sabre  in  his  hand.  "  Sir,"  said  Imlac,  "  what  can 


RASSELAS.  247 

you  hope  from  violence  or  valour  ?  The  Arabs  are  mounted 
on  horses  trained  to  battle  and  retreat ;  we  have  only  beasts 
of  burden.  By  leaving  our  present  station  we  may  lose  the 
Princess,  but  cannot  hope  to  regain  Pekuah." 

In  a  short  time  the  Turks  returned,  having  not  been  able 
to  reach  the  enemy.  The  Princess  burst  out  into  new 
lamentations,  and  Rasselas  could  scarcely  forbear  to  reproach 
them  with  cowardice ;  but  Imlac  was  of  opinion  that  the 
escape  of  the  Arabs  was  no  addition  to  their  misfortune,  for 
perhaps  they  would  have  killed  their  captives  rather  than 
have  resigned  them. 

CHAPTER  XXXIV. 

They  return  to  Cairo  "without  Pekuak, 

THERE  was  nothing  to  be  hoped  from  longer  stay.  They 
returned  to  Cairo,  repenting  of  their  curiosity,  censuring  the 
negligence  of  the  government,  lamenting  their  own  rashness, 
which  had  neglected  to  procure  a  guard,  imagining  many 
expedients  by  which  the  loss  of  Pekuah  might  have  been 
prevented,  and  resolving  to  do  something  for  her  recovery, 
though  none  could  find  anything  proper  to  be  done. 

Nekayah  retired  to  her  chamber,  where  her  women  at- 
tempted to  comfort  her  by  telling  her  that  all  had  their 
troubles,  and  that  Lady  Pekuah  had  enjoyed  much  happiness 
in  the  world  for  a  long  time,  and  might  reasonably  expect  a 
change  of  fortune.  They  hoped  that  some  good  would 
befall  her  wheresoever  she  was,  and  that  their  mistress  would 
find  another  friend  who  might  supply  her  place. 

The  Princess  made  them  no  answer ;  and  they  continued 
the  form  of  condolence,  not  much  grieved  in  their  hearts 
that  the  favourite  Avas  lost. 

Next  day  the  Prince  presented  to  the  Bassa  a  memorial 
of  the  wrong  which  he  had  suffered,  and  a  petition  for 
redress.  The  Bassa  threatened  to  punish  the  robbers,  but 
did  not  attempt  to  catch  them;  nor  indeed  could  any 


248  RASSELAS. 

account  or  description  be  given  by  which  he  might  direct 
the  pursuit. 

It  soon  appeared  that  nothing  would  be  done  by  authority. 
Governors  being  accustomed  to  hear  of  more  crimes  than 
they  can  punish,  and  more  wrongs  than  they  can  redress, 
set  themselves  at  ease  by  indiscriminate  negligence,  and 
presently  forget  the  request  when  they  lose  sight  of  the 
petitioner. 

Imlac  then  endeavoured  to  gain  some  intelligence  by 
private  agents.  He  found  many  who  pretended  to  an  exact 
knowledge  of  all  the  haunts  of  the  Arabs,  and  to  regular 
correspondence  with  their  chiefs,  and  who  readily  undertook 
the  recovery  of  Pekuah.  Of  these,  some  were  furnished 
with  money  for  their  journey,  and  came  back  no  more; 
some  were  liberally  paid  for  accounts  which  a  few  days  dis- 
covered to  be  false.  But  the  Princess  would  not  suffer  any 
means,  however  improbable,  to  be  left  untried.  While  she 
was  doing  something,  she  kept  her  hope  alive.  As  one 
expedient  failed,  another  was  suggested ;  when  one  mes- 
senger returned  unsuccessful,  another  was  despatched  to  a 
different  quarter. 

Two  months  had  now  passed,  and  of  Pekuah  nothing  had 
been  heard ;  the  hopes  which  they  had  endeavoured  to  raise 
in  each  other  grew  more  languid ;  and  the  Princess,  when 
she  saw  nothing  more  to  be  tried,  sunk  down  inconsolable 
in  hopeless  dejection.  A  thousand  times  she  reproached 
herself  with  the  easy  compliance  by  which  she  permitted  her 
favourite  to  stay  behind  her.  "  Had  not  my  fondness,"  said 
she,  "  lessened  my  authority,  Pekuah  had  not  dared  to  talk 
of  her  terrors.  She  ought  to  have  feared  me  more  than 
spectres.  A  severe  look  would  have  overpowered  her ;  a 
peremptory  command  would  have  compelled  obedience. 
Why  did  foolish  indulgence  prevail  upon  me  ?  Why  did  I 
not  speak,  and  refuse  to  hear  ?  " 

"  Great  Princess,"  said  Imlac,  "  do  not  reproach  yourself 
for  your  virtue,  or  consider  that  as  blameable  by  which  evil 


RASSELAS. 


249 


has  accidentally  been  caused.  Your  tenderness  for  the 
timidity  of  Pekuah  was  generous  and  kind.  When  we  act 
according  to  our  duty,  we  commit  the  events  to  Him  by 
whose  laws  our  actions  are  governed,  and  who  will  suffer 
none  to  be  finally  punished  for  obedience.  When,  in  prospect 
of  some  good,  whether  natural  or  moral,  we  break  the  rules 
prescribed  us,  we  withdraw  from  the  direction  of  superior 
wisdom,  and  take  all  consequences  upon  ourselves.  Man 
cannot  so  far  know  the  connection  of  causes  and  events  as 
that  he  may  venture  to  do  wrong  in  order  to  do  right.  When 
we  pursue  our  end  by  lawful  means,  we  may  always  console 
our  miscarriage  by  the  hope  of  future  recompense.  When 
we  consult  only  our  own  policy,  and  attempt  to  find  a  nearer 
way  to  good  by  overleaping  the  settled  boundaries  of  right 
and  wrong,  we  cannot  be  happy  even  by  success,  because 
we  cannot  escape  the  consciousness  of  our  fault ;  but  if  we 
miscarry,  the  disappointment  is  irremediably  embittered. 
How  comfortless  is  the  sorrow  of  him  who  feels  at  once  the 
pangs  of  guilt  and  the  vexation  of  calamity  which  guilt  has 
brought  upon  him. 

"  Consider,  Princess,  what  would  have  been  your  condi- 
tion if  the  Lady  Pekuah  had  entreated  to  accompany  you, 
and,  being  compelled  to  stay  in  the  tents,  had  been  carried 
away  j  or  how  would  you  have  borne  the  thought  if  you 
had  forced  her  into  the  Pyramid,  and  she  had  died  before 
you  in  agonies  of  terror  ?  " 

"  Had  either  happened,"  said  Nekayah,  "  I  could  not 
have  endured  life  till  now ;  I  should  have  been  tortured  to 
madness  by  the  remembrance  of  such  cruelty,  or  must  have 
pined  away  in  abhorrence  of  myself." 

"This,  at  least,"  said  Imlac,  "is  the  present  reward  of 
virtuous  conduct,  that  no  unlucky  consequence  can  oblige 
us  to  repent  it." 


250  RASSELAS. 

CHAPTER  XXXV. 

77ie  Princess  languishes  for  want  of  Pekttah. 

NEKAYAH,  being  thus  reconciled  to  herself,  found  that  no 
evil  is  insupportable  but  that  which  is  accompanied  with 
consciousness  of  wrong.  She  was  from  that  time  delivered 
from  the  violence  of  tempestuous  sorrow,  and  sunk  into 
silent  pensiveness  and  gloomy  tranquillity.  She  sat  from 
morning  to  evening  recollecting  all  that  had  been  done  or 
said  by  her  Pekuah,  treasured  up  with  care  every  trifle  on 
which  Pekuah  had  set  an  accidental  value,  and  which  might 
recall  to  mind  any  little  incident  or  careless  conversation. 
The  sentiments  of  her  whom  she  now  expected  to  see  no 
more  were  treasured  in  her  memory  as  rules  of  life,  and  she 
deliberated  to  no  other  end  than  to  conjecture  on  any 
occasion  what  would  have  been  the  opinion  and  counsel 
of  Pekuah. 

The  women  by  whom  she  was  attended  knew  nothing  of 
her  real  condition,  and  therefore  she  could  not  talk  to  them 
but  with  caution  and  reserve.  She  began  to  remit  her 
curiosity,  having  no  great  desire  to  collect  notions  which 
she  had  no  convenience  of  uttering.  Rasselas  endeavoured 
first  to  comfort  and  afterwards  to  divert  her;  he  hired 
musicians,  to  whom  she  seemed  to  listen,  but  did  not  hear 
them  ;  and  procured  masters  to  instruct  her  in  various  arts, 
whose  lectures,  when  they  visited  her  again,  were  again  to 
be  repeated.  She  had  lost  her  taste  of  pleasure  and  her 
ambition  of  excellence ;  and  her  mind,  though  forced  into 
short  excursions,  always  recurred  to  the  image  of  her  friend. 

Imlac  was  every  morning  earnestly  enjoined  to  renew  his 
inquiries,  and  was  asked  every  night  whether  he  had  yet 
heard  of  Pekuah ;  till,  not  being  able  to  return  the  Princess 
the  answer  that  she  desired,  he  was  less  and  less  willing  to 
come  into  her  presence.  She  observed  his  backwardness, 
and  commanded  him  to  attend  her.  "  You  are  not,"  said 
she,  "  to  confound  impatience  with  resentment,  or  to  sup- 


RASSELAS.  25 1 

pose  that  I  charge  you  with  negligence  because  I  repine  at 
your  unsuccessfulness.  I  do  not  much  wonder  at  your 
absence.  I  know  that  the  unhappy  are  never  pleasing,  and 
that  all  naturally  avoid  the  contagion  of  misery.  To  hear 
complaints  is  wearisome  alike  to  the  wretched  and  the  happy ; 
for  who  would  cloud  by  adventitious  grief  the  short  gleams  of 
gaiety  which  life  allows  us  ?  or  who  that  is  struggling  under 
his  own  evils  will  add  to  them  the  miseries  of  another  ? 

"  The  time  is  at  hand  when  none  shall  be  disturbed  any 
longer  by  the  sighs  of  Nekayah  :  my  search  after  happiness 
is  now  at  an  end.  I  am  resolved  to  retire  from  the  world, 
with  all  its  flatteries  and  deceits,  and  will  hide  myself  in 
solitude,  without  any  other  care  than  to  compose  my 
thoughts  and  regulate  my  hours  by  a  constant  succession  of 
innocent  occupations,  till,  with  a  mind  purified  from  earthly 
desires,  I  shall  enter  into  that  state  to  which  all  are  hasten- 
ing, and  in  which  I  hope  again  to  enjoy  the  friendship  of 
Pekuah." 

"  Do  not  entangle  your  mind,"  said  Imlac,  by  irrevocable 
determinations,  nor  increase  the  burden  of  life  by  a  voluntary 
accumulation  of  misery.  The  weariness  of  retirement  will 
continue  to  increase  when  the  loss  of  Pekuah  is  forgot.  That 
you  have  been  deprived  of  one  pleasure  is  no  very  good 
reason  for  rejection  of  the  rest." 

"  Since  Pekuah  was  taken  from  me,"  said  the  Princess, 
"I  have  no  pleasure  to  reject  or  to  retain.  She  that  has  no 
one  to  love  or  trust  has  little  to  hope.  She  wants  the  radical 
principle  of  happiness.  We  may  perhaps  allow  that  what 
satisfaction  this  world  can  afford  must  arise  from  the  con- 
junction of  wealth,  knowledge,  and  goodness.  Wealth  is 
nothing  but  as  it  is  bestowed,  and  knowledge  nothing  but 
as  it  is  communicated.  They  must  therefore  be  imparted 
to  others,  and  to  whom  could  I  now  delight  to  impart 
them  ?  Goodness  affords  the  only  comfort  which  can  be 
enjoyed  without  a  partner,  and  goodness  may  be  practised 
in  retirement. 


252  RASSELAS. 

"  How  far  solitude  may  admit  goodness  Or  advance  it,  I 
shall  not/' replied  Imlac,  "dispute  at  present.  Remember 
the  confession  of  the  pious  hermit.  You  will  wish  to  return 
into  the  world  when  the  image  of  your  companion  has  left 
your  thoughts."  "  That  time."  said  Nekayah,  "  will  never 
come.  The  generous  frankness,  the  modest  obsequiousness, 
and  the  faithful  secrecy  of  my  dear  Pekuah  will  always  be 
more  missed  as  I  shall  live  longer  to  see  vice  and  folly." 

"  The  state  of  a  mind  oppressed  with  a  sudden  calamity," 
said  Imlac,  "  is  like  that  of  the  fabulous  inhabitants  of  the 
new-created  earth,  who,  when  the  first  night  came  upon 
them,  supposed  that  day  would  never  return.  When  the 
clouds  of  sorrow  gather  over  us,  we  see  nothing  beyond 
them,  nor  can  imagine  how  they  will  be  dispelled ;  yet  a 
new  day  succeeded  to  the  night,  and  sorrow  is  never  long 
without  a  dawn  of  ease.  But  they  who  restrain  themselves 
from  receiving  comfort  do  as  the  savages  would  have  done 
had  they  put  out  their  eyes  when  it  was  dark.  Our  minds, 
like  our  bodies,  are  in  continual  flux  ;  something  is  hourly 
lost,  and  something  acquired.  To  lose  much  at  once  is 
inconvenient  to  either,  but  while  the  vital  power  remains 
uninjured,  nature  will  find  the  means  of  reparation.  Distance 
has  the  same  effect  on  the  mind  as  on  the  eye  :  and  while 
we  glide  along  the  stream  of  time,  whatever  we  leave  behind 
us  is  always  lessening,  and  that  which  we  approach  increasing 
in  magnitude.  Do  not  suffer  life  to  stagnate  :  it  will  grow 
muddy  for  want  of  motion ;  commit  yourself  again  to  the 
current  of  the  world ;  Pekuah  will  vanish  by  degrees  ;  you 
will  meet  in  your  way  some  other  favourite,  or  learn  to  diffuse 
yourself  in  general  conversation." 

"At  least,"  said  the  Prince,  "do  not  despair  before  all 
remedies  have  been  tried.  The  inquiry  after  the  unfortunate 
lady  is  still  continued,  and  shall  be  carried  on  with  yet 
greater  diligence,  on  condition  that  you  will  promise  to 
wait  a  year  for  the  event,  without  any  unalterable  resolution." 

Nekayah  thought  this  a  reasonable  demand,  and  made  the 


KASSELAS.  253 

promise  to  her  brother,  who  had  been  obliged  by  Imlac  to 
require  it.  Imlac  had,  indeed,  no  great  hope  of  regaining 
Pekuah ;  but  he  supposed  that  if  he  could  secure  the  interval 
of  a  year,  the  Princess  would  be  then  in  no  danger  of  a 
cloister. 

CHAPTER  XXXVI. 

Ptkiiak  is  still  remembered.     The  Progress  of  Sorrow. 

N  ERA  YAH,  seeing  that  nothing  was  omitted  for  the  recovery 
of  her  favourite,  and  having  by  her  promise  set  her  intention 
of  retirement  at  a  distance,  began  imperceptibly  to  return  to 
common  cares  and  common  pleasures.  She  rejoiced  without 
her  own  consent  at  the  suspension  of  her  sorrows,  and 
sometimes  caught  herself  with  indignation  in  the  act  of 
turning  away  her  mind  from  the  remembrance  of  her  whom 
yet  she  resolved  never  to  forget. 

She  then  appointed  a  certain  hour  of  the  day  for  medita- 
tion on  the  merits  and  fondness  of  Pekuah,  and  for  some 
weeks  retired  constantly  at  the  time  fixed,  and  returned  with 
her  eyes  swollen  and  her  countenance  clouded.  By  degrees 
she  grew  less  scrupulous,  and  suffered  any  important  and 
pressing  avocation  to  delay  the  tribute  of  daily  tears.  She 
then  yielded  to  less  occasions,  and  sometimes  forgot  what 
she  was  indeed  afraid  to  remember,  and  at  last  wholly 
released  herself  from  the  duty  of  periodical  affliction. 

Her  real  love  of  Pekuah  was  not  yet  diminished.  A 
thousand  occurrences  brought  her  back  to  memory,  and  a 
thousand  wants,  which  nothing  but  the  confidence  of  friend- 
ship can  supply,  made  her  frequently  regretted.  She  there- 
fore solicited  Imlac  never  to  desist  from  inquiry,  and  to 
leave  no  art  of  intelligence  untried,  that  at  least  she  might 
have  the  comfort  of  knowing  that  she  did  not  suffer  by 
negligence  or  sluggishness.  "  Yet  what,"  said  she,  "  is  to  be 
expected  from  our  pursuit  of  happiness,  when  we  find  the 
state  of  life  to  be  such  that  happiness  itself  is  the  cause  of 
misery  ?  Why  should  we  endeavour  to  attain  that  of  which 


254  R ASS  EL  AS. 

the  possession  cannot  be  secured?  I  shall  henceforward 
fear  to  yield  my  heart  to  excellence,  however  bright,  or  to 
fondness,  however  tender,  lest  I  should  lose  again  what  I 
have  lost  in  Pekuah." 


CHAPTER  XXXVII. 

The  Princess  hears  News  of  Pekuah. 

IN  seven  months  one  of  the  messengers  who  had  been 
sent  away  upon  the  day  when  the  promise  was  drawn  from 
the  Princess,  returned,  after  many  unsuccessful  rambles,  from 
the  borders  of  Nubia,  with  an  account  that  Pekuah  was  in 
the  hands  of  an  Arab  chief,  who  possessed  a  castle  or  fortress 
on  the  extremity  of  Egypt.  The  Arab,  whose  revenue  was 
plunder,  was  willing  to  restore  her,  with  her  two  attendants, 
for  two  hundred  ounces  of  gold. 

The  price  was  no  subject  of  debate.  The  Princess  was 
in  ecstacies  when  she  heard  that  her  favourite  was  alive,  and 
might  so  cheaply  be  ransomed.  She  could  not  think  of 
delaying  for  a  moment  Pekuah's  happiness  or  her  own,  but 
entreated  her  brother  to  send  back  the  messenger  with  the 
sum  required.  Imlac  being  consulted,  was  not  very  con- 
fident of  the  veracity  of  the  relater,  and  was  still  more 
doubtful  of  the  Arab's  faith,  who  might,  if  he  were  too 
liberally  trusted,  detain  at  once  the  money  and  the  captives. 
He  thought  it  dangerous  to  put  themselves  in  the  power  of 
the  Arab  by  going  into  his  district ;  and  could  not  expect 
that  the  rover  would  so  much  expose  himself  as  to  come 
into  the  lower  country,  where  he  might  be  seized  by  the 
forces  of  the  Bassa. 

It  is  difficult  to  negotiate  where  neither  will  trust.  But 
Imlac,  after  some  deliberation,  directed  the  messenger  to 
propose  that  Pekuah  should  be  conducted  by  ten  horsemen 
to  the  monastery  of  St.  Anthony,  which  is  situated  in  the 
deserts  of  Upper  Egypt,  where  she  should  be  met  by  the 
same  number,  and  her  ransom  should  be  paid. 


RASSELAS.  255 

That  no  time  might  be  lost,  as  they  expected  that  the 
proposal  would  not  be  refused,  they  immediately  began 
their  journey  to  the  monastery ;  and  when  they  arrived, 
Imlac  went  forward  with  the  former  messenger  to  the  Arab's 
fortress.  Rasselas  was  desirous  to  go  with  them;  but 
neither  his  sister  nor  Imlac  would  consent.  The  Arab, 
according  to  the  custom  of  his  nation,  observed  the  laws  of 
hospitality  with  great  exactness  to  those  who  put  themselves 
into  his  power,  and  in  a  few  days  brought  Pekuah  with  her 
maids,  by  easy  journeys,  to  the  place  appointed,  where, 
receiving  the  stipulated  price,  he  restored  her,  with  great 
respect,  to  liberty  and  her  friends,  and  undertook  to  conduct 
them  back  towards  Cairo  beyond  all  danger  of  robbery  or 
violence. 

The  Princess  and  her  favourite  embraced  each  other  with 
transport  too  violent  to  be  expressed,  and  went  out  together 
to  pour  the  tears  of  tenderness  in  secret,  and  exchange  pro- 
fessions of  kindness  and  gratitude.  After  a  few  hours  they 
returned  into  the  refectory  of  the  convent,  where,  in  the 
presence  of  the  prior  and  his  brethren,  the  Prince  required 
of  Pekuah  the  history  of  her  adventures. 

CHAPTER  XXXVIII. 

The  Adventures  of  the  Lady  Pekiiah. 

"Ax  what  time  and  in  what  manner  I  was  forced  away," 
said  Pekuah,  "your  servants  have  told  you.  The  sudden- 
ness of  the  event  struck  me  with  surprise,  and  I  was  at  first 
rather  stupefied  than  agitated  with  any  passion  of  either  fear 
or  sorrow.  My  confusion  was  increased  by  the  speed  and 
tumult  of  our  flight,  while  we  were  followed  by  the  Turks, 
who,  as  it  seemed,  soon  despaired  to  overtake  us,  or  were 
afraid  of  those  whom  they  made  a  show  of  menacing. 

"  When  the  Arabs  saw  themselves  out  of  danger,  they 
slackened  their  course ;  and  as  I  was  less  harassed  by  ex- 
ternal violence,  I  began  to  feel  more  uneasiness  in  my  mind. 


256  RASSELAS. 

After  some  time,  we  stopped  near  a  spring  shaded  with 
trees,  in  a  pleasant  meadow,  where  we  were  set  upon  the 
ground,  and  offered  such  refreshments  as  our  masters  were 
partaking.  I  was  suffered  to  sit  with  my  maids  apart  from 
the  rest,  and  none  attempted  to  comfort  or  insult  us.  Here 
I  first  began  to  feel  the  full  weight  of  my  misery.  The  girls 
sat  weeping  in  silence,  and  from  time  to  time  looked  on  me 
for  succour.  I  knew  not  to  what  condition  we  were  doomed, 
nor  could  conjecture  where  would  be  the  place  of  our  cap- 
tivity, or  whence  to  draw  any  hope  of  deliverance.  I  was 
in  the  hands  of  robbers  and  savages,  and  had  no  reason  to 
suppose  that  their  pity  was  more  than  their  justice,  or  that 
they  would  forbear  the  gratification  of  any  ardour  of  desire 
or  caprice  of  cruelty.  I,  however,  kissed  my  maids,  and 
endeavoured  to  pacify  them  by  remarking  that  we  were  yet 
treated  with  decency,  and  that  since  we  were  now  carried 
beyond  pursuit,  there  was  no  danger  of  violence  to  our  lives. 

"  When  we  were  to  be  set  again  on  horseback,  my  maids 
clung  round  me,  and  refused  to  be  parted ;  but  I  commanded 
them  not  to  irritate  those  who  had  us  in  their  power.  We 
travelled  the  remaining  part  of  the  day  through  an  unfre- 
quented and  pathless  country,  and  came  by  moonlight  to  the 
side  of  a  hill,  where  the  rest  of  the  troop  was  stationed. 
Their  tents  were  pitched  and  their  fires  kindled,  and  our  chief 
was  welcomed  as  a  man  much  beloved  by  his  dependants. 

"We  were  received  into  a  large  tent,  where  we  found 
women  who  had  attended  their  husbands  in  the  expedition. 
They  set  before  us  the  supper  which  they  had  provided,  and 
I  ate  it  rather  to  encourage  my  maids  than  to  comply  with 
any  appetite  of  my  own.  When  the  meat  was  taken  away, 
they  spread  the  carpets  for  repose.  I  was  weary,  and  hoped 
to  find  in  sleep  that  remission  of  distress  which  nature  seldom 
denies.  Ordering  myself,  therefore,  to  be  undressed,  I 
observed  that  the  women  looked  very  earnestly  upon  me, 
not  expecting,  I  suppose,  to  see  me  so  submissively  attended. 
When  my  upper  vest  was  taken  off,  they  were  apparently 


k  ASS E  LAS.  257 

Struck  with  the  splendour  of  my  clothes,  and  one  of  them 
timorously  laid  her  hand  upon  the  embroidery.  She  then 
went  out,  and  in  a  short  time  came  back  with  another 
woman,  who  seemed  to  be  of  higher  rank  and  greater 
authority.  She  did,  at  her  entrance,  the  usual  act  of 
reverence,  and  taking  me  by  the  hand  placed  me  in  a 
smaller  tent,  spread  with  finer  carpets,  where  I  spent  the 
night  quietly  with  my  maids. 

"  In  the  morning,  as  I  was  sitting  on  the  grass,  the  chief 
of  the  troop  came  towards  me.  I  rose  up  to  receive  him, 
and  he  bowed  with  great  respect.  'Illustrious  lady,'  said 
he,  '  my  fortune  is  better  than  I  had  presumed  to  hope  :  I 
am  told  by  my  women  that  I  have  a  princess  in  my  camp.' 
'  Sir,'  answered  I,  '  your  women  have  deceived  themselves 
and  you  ;  I  am  not  a  princess,  but  an  unhappy  stranger  who 
intended  soon  to  have  left  this  country,  in  which  I  am  now 
to  be  imprisoned  for  ever.'  '  Whoever  or  whencesoever  you 
are,'  returned  the  Arab,  '  your  dress  and  that  of  your  servants 
show  your  rank  to  be  high  and  your  wealth  to  be  great. 
Why  should  you,  who  can  so  easily  procure  your  ransom,  think 
yourself  in  danger  of  perpetual  captivity  ?  The  purpose  of 
my  incursions  is  to  increase  my  riches,  or,  more  properly,  to 
gather  tribute.  The  sons  of  Ishmael  are  the  natural  and 
hereditary  lords  of  this  part  of  the  continent,  which  is  usurped 
by  late  invaders  and  low-born  tyrants,  from  whom  we  are 
compelled  to  take  by  the  sword  what  is  denied  to  justice. 
The  violence  of  war  admits  no  distinction  :  the  lance  that  is 
lifted  at  guilt  and  power  will  sometimes  fall  on  innocence  and 
gentleness.' 

"  '  How  little,'  said  I, '  did  I  expect  that  yesterday  it  should 
have  fallen  upon  me.' 

"  '  Misfortunes,'  answered  the  Arab,  '  should  always  be 
expected.  If  the  eye  of  hostility  could  learn  reverence  or 
pity,  excellence  like  yours  had  been  exempt  from  injury. 
But  the  angels  of  affliction  spread  their  toils  alike'  for  the 

virtuous  and  the  wicked,  for  the  mighty  and  the  mean.     Do 

I 


258  RASSELAS. 

not  be  disconsolate ;  I  am  not  one  of  the  lawless  and  cruel 
rovers  of  the  desert ;  I  know  the  rules  of  civil  life ;  I  will 
fix  your  ransom,  give  a  passport  to  your  messenger,  and 
perform  my  stipulation  with  nice  punctuality.' 

"You  will  easily  believe  that  I  was  pleased  with  his 
courtesy,  and  finding  that  his  predominant  passion  was 
desire  for  money,  I  began  now  to  think  my  danger  less,  for 
I  knew  that  no  sum  would  be  thought  too  great  for  the  release 
of  Pekuah.  I  told  him  that  he  should  have  no  reason  to 
charge  me  with  ingratitude  if  I  was  used  with  kindness,  and 
that  any  ransom  which  could  be  expected  for  a  maid  of 
common  rank  would  be  paid,  but  that  he  must  not  persist  to 
rate  me  as  a  princess.  He  said  he  would  consider  what  he 
should  demand,  and  then,  smiling,  bowed  and  retired. 

"  Soon  after  the  women  came  about  me,  each  contending 
to  be  more  officious  than  the  other,  and  my  maids  themselves 
were  served  with  reverence.  We  travelled  onward  by  short 
journeys.  On  the  fourth  day  the  chief  told  me  that  my 
ransom  must  be  two  hundred  ounces  of  gold,  which  I  not 
only  promised  him,  but  told  him  that  I  would  add  fifty  more 
if  I  and  my  maids  were  honourably  treated. 

"  I  never  knew  the  power  of  gold  before.  From  that  time 
I  was  the  leader  of  the  troop.  The  march  of  every  day  was 
longer  or  shorter  as  I  commanded,  and  the  tents  were  pitched 
where  I  chose  to  rest.  We  now  had  camels  and  other 
conveniences  for  travel ;  my  own  women  were  always  at  my 
side,  and  I  amused  myself  with  observing  the  manners  of  the 
vagrant  nations,  and  with  viewing  remains  of  ancient  edifices 
with  which  these  deserted  countries  appear  to  have  been  in 
some  distant  age  lavishly  embellished. 

"  The  chief  of  the  band  was  a  man  far  from  illiterate  :  he 
was  able  to  travel  by  the  stars  or  the  compass,  and  had 
marked  in  his  erratic  expeditions  such  places  as  are  most 
worthy  the  notice  of  a  passenger.  He  observed  to  me  that 
buildings  are  always  best  preserved  in  places  little  frequented 
and  difficult  of  access ;  for  when  once  a  country  declines 


R  ASS  EL  AS.  259 

from  its  primitive  splendour,  the  more  inhabitants  are  left, 
the  quicker  ruin  will  be  made.  Walls  supply  stones  more 
easily  than  quarries  :  and  palaces  and  temples  will  be 
demolished  to  make  stables  of  granite  and  cottages  of 
porphyry.' " 

CHAPTER  XXXIX. 

The  Adventures  of  Pekuah  (continued). 

''  WE  wandered  about  in  this  manner  for  some  weeks,  either, 
as  our  chief  pretended,  for  my  gratification,  or,  as  I  rather 
suspected,  for  some  convenience  of  his  own.  I  endeavoured 
to  appear  contented  where  sullenness  and  resentment  would 
have  been  of  no  use,  and  that  endeavour  conduced  much  to 
the  calmness  of  my  mind ;  but  my  heart  was  always  with 
Nekayah,  and  the  troubles  of  the  night  much  overbalanced 
the  amusements  of  the  day.  My  women,  who  threw  all  their 
cares  upon  their  mistress,  set  their  minds  at  ease  from  the 
time  when  they  saw  me  treated  with  respect,  and  gave  them- 
selves up  to  the  incidental  alleviations  of  our  fatigue  without 
solicitude  or  sorrow.  I  was  pleased  with  their  pleasure,  and 
animated  with  their  confidence.  My  condition  had  lost 
much  of  its  terror,  since  I  found  that  the  Arab  ranged  the 
country  merely  to  get  riches.  Avarice  is  a  uniform  and 
tractable  vice  :  other  intellectual  distempers  are  different  in 
different  constitutions  of  mind ;  that  which  soothes  the  pride 
of  one  will  offend  the  pride  of  another ;  but  to  the  favour  of 
the  covetous  there  is  a  ready  way — bring  money,  and  nothing 
is  denied. 

"  At  last  we  came  to  the  dwelling  of  our  chief;  a  strong 
and  spacious  house,  built  with  stone  in  an  island  of  the 
Nile,  which  lies,  as  I  was  told,  under  the  tropic.  '  Lady, 
said  the  Arab,  '  you  shall  rest  after  your  journey  a  few  weeks 
in  this  place,  where  you  are  to  consider  yourself  as  sovereign. 
My  occupation  is  war :  I  have  therefore  chosen  this  obscure 
residence,  from  which  I  can  issue  unexpected,  and  to  which 
I  can  retire  unpursued.  You  may  now  repose  in  security : 


26o  RASSELAS. 

here  are  few  pleasures,  but  here  is  no  danger.'  He  then  led 
me  into  the  inner  apartments,  and  seating  me  on  the  richest 
couch,  bowed  to  the  ground. 

"  His  women,  who  considered  me  as  a  rival,  looked  on 
me  with  malignity ;  but  being  soon  informed  that  I  was  a 
great  lady  detained  only  for  my  ransom,  they  began  to  vie 
with  each  other  in  obsequiousness  and  reverence. 

"  Being  again  comforted  with  new  assurances  of  speedy 
liberty,  I  was  for  some  days  diverted  from  impatience  by 
the  novelty  of  the  place.  The  turrets  overlooked  the  country 
to  a  great  distance,  and  afforded  a  view  of  many  windings  of 
the  stream.  In  the  day  I  wandered  from  one  place  to 
another,  as  the  course  of  the  sun  varied  the  splendour  of 
the  prospect,  and  saw  many  things  which  I  had  never  seen 
before.  The  crocodiles  and  river  horses  are  common  in 
this  unpeopled  region  ;  and  I  often  looked  upon  them  with 
terror,  though  I  knew  they  could  not  hurt  me.  For  some 
time  I  expected  to  see  mermaids  and  tritons,  which,  as 
Imlac  has  told  me,  the  European  travellers  have  stationed 
in  the  Nile ;  but  no  such  beings  ever  appeared,  and  the 
Arab,  when  I  inquired  after  them,  laughed  at  my  credulity. 

"  At  night  the  Arab  always  attended  me  to  a  tower  set 
apart  for  celestial  observations,  where ,  he  endeavoured  to 
teach  me  the  names  and  courses  of  the  stars.  I  had  no 
great  inclination  to  this  study  ;  but  an  appearance  of  atten- 
tion was  necessary  to  please  my  instructor,  who  valued 
himself  for  his  skill,  and  in  a  little  while  I  found  some 
employment  requisite  to  beguile  the  tediousness  of  time, 
which  was  to  be  passed  always  amidst  the  same  objects.  I 
was  weary  of  looking  in  the  morning  on  things  from  which 
I  had  turned  away  weary  in  the  evening  :  I  therefore  was 
at  last  willing  to  observe  the  stars  rather  than  do  nothing, 
but  could  not  always  compose  my  thoughts,  and  was  very 
often  thinking  on  Nekayah  when  others  imagined  me  con- 
templating the  sky.  Soon  after  the  Arab  went  upon  another 
expedition,  and  then  my  only  pleasure  was  to  talk  with  my 


RASSELAS.  261 

maids  about  the  accident  by  which  we  were  carried  away, 
and  the  happiness  we  should  all  enjoy  at  the  end  of  our 
captivity." 

"  There  were  women  in  your  Arab's  fortress,"  said  the 
Princess ;  "  why  did  you  not  make  them  your  companions, 
enjoy  their  conversation,  and  partake  their  diversions  ?  In 
a  place  where  they  found  business  or  amusement,  why 
should  you  alone  sit  corroded  with  idle  melancholy  ?  or 
why  could  not  you  bear  for  a  few  months  that  condition  to 
which  they  were  condemned  for  life  ?  " 

"  The  diversions  of  the  women,"  answered  Pekuah,  "  were 
only  childish  play,  by  which  the  mind,  accustomed  to 
stronger  operations,  could  not  be  kept  busy.  I  could  do 
all  which  they  delighted  in  doing  by  powers  merely  sensi- 
tive, while  my  intellectual  faculties  were  flown  to  Cairo. 
They  ran  from  room  to  room,  as  a  bird  hops  from  wire  to 
wire  in  his  cage.  They  danced  for  the  sake  of  motion,  as 
lambs  frisk  in  a  meadow.  One  sometimes  pretended  to  be 
hurt  that  the  rest  might  be  alarmed,  or  hid  herself  that 
another  might  seek  her.  Part  of  their  time  passed  in 
watching  the  progress  of  light  bodies  that  floated  on  the 
river,  and  part  in  marking  the  various  forms  into  which 
clouds  broke  in  the  sky. 

"Their  business  was  only  needlework,  in  which  I  and 
my  maids  sometimes  helped  them ;  but  you  know  that  the 
mind  will  easily  straggle  from  the  fingers,  nor  will  you 
suspect  that  captivity  and  absence  from  Nekayah  could 
receive  solace  from  silken  flowers. 

"  Nor  v/as  much  satisfaction  to  be  hoped  from  their  con- 
versation :  for  of  what  could  they  be  expected  to  talk  ? 
They  had  seen  nothing,  for  they  had  lived  from  early  youth 
in  that  narrow  spot :  of  what  they  had  not  seen  they  could 
have  no  knowledge,  for  they  could  not  read.  They  had  no 
idea  but  of  the  few  things  that  were  within  their  view,  and 
had  hardly  names  for  anything  but  their  clothes  and  their 
food.  As  I  bore  a  superior  character,  I  was  often  called  to 


262  RASSELAS. 

terminate  their  quarrels,  which  I  decided  as  equitably  as  I 
could.  If  it  could  have  amused  me  to  hear  the  complaints 
of  each  against  the  rest,  I  might  have  been  often  detained 
by  long  stories  ;  but  the  motives  of  their  animosity  were  so 
small  that  I  could  not  listen  without  interrupting  the  tale." 

"  How,"  said  Rasselas,  "  can  the  Arab,  whom  you  repre- 
sented as  a  man  of  more  than  common  accomplishments, 
take  any  pleasure  in  his  seraglio,  when  it  is  filled  only  with 
women  like  these?  Are  they  exquisitely  beautiful?" 

"They  do  not,"'  said  Pekuah,  "want  that  unaffecting  and 
ignoble  beauty  which  may  subsist  without  sprightliness  or 
sublimity,  without  energy  of  thought  or  dignity  of  virtue. 
But  to  a  man  like  the  Arab  such  beauty  was  only  a  flower 
casually  plucked  and  carelessly  thrown  away.  Whatever 
pleasures  he  might  find  among  them,  they  were  not  those 
of  friendship  or  society.  When  they  were  playing  about 
him,  he  looked  on  them  with  inattentive  superiority  :  when 
they  vied  for  his  regard,  he  sometimes  turned  away  disgusted. 
As  they  had  no  knowledge,  their  talk  could  take  nothing 
from  the  tediousness  of  life  :  as  they  had  no  choice,  their 
fondness,  or  appearance  of  fondness,  excited  in  him  neither 
pride  nor  gratitude.  He  was  not  exalted  in  his  own  esteem 
by  the  smiles  of  a  woman  who  saw  no  other  man,  nor  was 
much  obliged  by  that  regard  of  which  he  could  never  know 
the  sincerity,  and  which  he  might  often  perceive  to  be  exerted 
not  so  much  to  delight  him  as  to  pain  a  rival.  That  which 
he  gave,  and  they  received,  as  love,  was  only  a  careless 
distribution  of  superfluous  time  ;  such  love  as  man  can 
bestow  upon  that  which  he  despises,  such  as  has  neither 
hope  nor  fear,  neither  joy  nor  sorrow." 

"  You  have  reason,  lady,  to  think  yourself  happy,"  said 
Imlac,  "  that  you  have  been  thus  easily  dismissed.  How 
could  a  mind,  hungry  for  knowledge,  be  willing,  in  an 
intellectual  famine,  to  lose  such  a  banquet  as  Pekuah's 
conversation  ?  " 

"  I  am  inclined  to  believe,"  answered  Pekuah,  "that  he 


&4SSELAS.  263 

was  for  some  time  in  suspense;  for  notwithstanding  Kic 
promise,  whenever  I  proposed  to  despatch  a  messenger  to 
Cairo  he  found  some  excuse  for  delay.  While  I  was 
detained  in  his  house  he  made  many  incursions  into  the 
neighbouring  countries,  and  perhaps  he  would  have  refused 
to  discharge  me  had  his  plunder  been  equal  to  his  wishes. 
He  returned  always  courteous,  related  his  adventures, 
delighted  to  hear  my  observations,  and  endeavoured  to 
advance  my  acquaintance  with  the  stars.  When  I  impor- 
tuned him  to  send  away  my  letters,  he  soothed  me  with 
professions  of  honour  and  sincerity ;  and  when  I  could 
be  no  longer  decently  denied,  put  his  troop  again  in  motion, 
and  left  me  to  govern  in  his  absence.  I  was  much  afflicted 
by  this  studied  procrastination,  and  was  sometimes  afraid 
that  I  should  be  forgotten ;  that  you  would  leave  Cairo,  and 
I  must  end  my  days  in  an  island  of  the  Nile. 

"I  grew  at  last  hopeless  and  dejected,  and  cared  so  little 
to  entertain  him,  that  he  for  a  while  more  frequently  talked 
with  my  maids.  That  he  should  fall  in  love  with  them,  or 
with  me,  might  have  been  equally  fatal ;  and  I  was  not 
much  pleased  with  the  growing  friendship.  My  anxiety  was 
not  long ;  for,  as  I  recovered  some  degree  of  cheerfulness, 
he  returned  to  me,  and  I  could  not  forbear  to  despise  my 
former  uneasiness. 

"  He  still  delayed  to  send  for  my  ransom,  and  would  per- 
haps never  have  determined  had  not  your  agent  found  his 
way  to  him.  The  gold,  which  he  would  not  fetch,  he  could 
not  reject  when  it  was  offered.  He  hastened  to  prepare  for 
our  journey  hither,  like  a  man  delivered  from  the  pain  of 
an  intestine  conflict.  I  took  leave  of  my  companions  in 
the  house,  who  dismissed  me  with  cold  indifference." 

Nekayah  having  heard  her  favourite's  relation,  rose  and 
embraced  her;  and  Rasselas  gave  her  a  hundred  ounces  of 
gold,  which  she  presented  to  the  Arab  for  the  fifty  that  were 
promised. 


CHAPTER  XL. 

The  History  of  a  Man  of  Learning. 

THEY  returned  to  Cairo,  and  were  so  well  pleased  at  finding 
themselves  together,  that  none  of  them  went  much  abroad. 
The  Prince  began  to  love  learning,  and  one  day  declared  to 
Imlac  that  he  intended  to  devote  himself  to  science,  and 
pass  the  rest  of  his  days  in  literary  solitude. 

"  Before  you  make  your  final  choice,"  answered  Imlac, 
"you  ought  to  examine  its  hazards,  and  converse  with  some 
of  those  who  are  grown  old  in  the  company  of  themselves. 
I  have  just  left  the  observatory  of  one  of  the  most  learned 
astronomers  in  the  world,  who  has  spent  forty  years  in 
unwearied  attention  to  the  motion  and  appearances  of  the 
celestial  bodies,  and  has  drawn  out  his  soul  in  endless 
calculations.  He  admits  a  few  friends  once  a  month  to 
hear  his  deductions  and  enjoy  his  discoveries.  I  was 
introduced  as  a  man  of  knowledge  worthy  of  his  notice. 
Men  of  various  ideas  and  fluent  conversation  are  commonly 
welcome  to  those  whose  thoughts  have  been  long  fixed  upon 
a  single  point,  and  who  find  the  images  of  other  things 
stealing  away.  I  delighted  him  with  my  remarks.  He  smiled 
at  the  narrative  of  my  travels,  and  was  glad  to  forget  the  con- 
stellations, and  descend  fo  ra  moment  into  the  lower  world. 

"  On  the  next  day  of  vacation  I  renewed  my  visit,  and 
was  so  fortunate  as  to  please  him  again.  He  relaxed  from 
that  time  the  severity  of  his  rule  and  permitted  me  to  enter 
at  my  own  choice.  I  found  him  always  busy,  and  always 
glad  to  be  relieved.  As  each  -knew  much  which  the  other 
was  desirous  of  learning,  we  exchanged  our  notions  with 
great  delight.  I  perceived  that  I  had  every  day  more  of 
his  confidence,  and  always  found  new  cause  of  admiration 
in  the  profundity  of  his  mind.  His  comprehension  is  vast, 
his  memory  capacious  and  retentive,  his  discourse  is 
methodical,  and  his  expression  clear. 


RASSELAS.  265 

"  His  integrity  and  benevolence  are  equal  to  his  learning. 
His  deepest  researches  and  most  favourite  studies  are 
willingly  interrupted  for  any  opportunity  of  doing  good  by 
his  counsel  or  his  riches.  To  his  closest  retreat,  at  his 
most  busy  moments,  all  are  admitted  that  want  his  assist- 
ance :  '  For  though  I  exclude  idleness  and  pleasure,  I  will 
never,'  says  he,  '  bar  my  doors  against  charity.  To  man  is 
permitted  the  contemplation  of  the  skies,  but  the  practice 
of  virtue  is  commanded.'  " 

"  Surely,"  said  the  Princess,  "  this  man  is  happy." 

"I  visited  him,"  said  Imlac,  "with  more  and  more 
frequency,  and  was  every  time  more  enamoured  of  his 
conversation :  he  was  sublime  without  haughtiness,  courteous 
without  formality,  and  communicative  without  ostentation. 
I  was  at  first,  great  Princess,  of  your  opinion,  thought  him 
the  happiest  of  mankind,  and  often  congratulated  him  on 
the  blessing  that  he  enjoyed.  He  seemed  to  hear  nothing 
with  indifference  but  the  praises  of  his  condition,  to  which 
he  always  returned  a  general  answer,  and  diverted  the  con- 
versation to  some  other  topic. 

"  Amidst  this  willingness  to  be  pleased  and  labour  to 
please,  I  had  quickly  reason  to  imagine  that  some  painful 
sentiment  pressed  upon  his  mind.  He  often  looked  up 
earnestly  towards  the  sun,  and  let  his  voice  fall  in  the  midst 
of  his  discourse.  He  would  sometimes,  when  we  were 
alone,  gaze  upon  me  in  silence  with  the  air  of  a  man  who 
longed  to  speak  what  he  was  yet  resolved  to  suppress.  He 
would  often  send  for  me  with  vehement  injunction  of  haste, 
though  when  I  came  to  him  he  had  nothing  extraordinary 
to  say.  And  sometimes,  when  I  was  leaving  him,  would 
call  me  back,  pause  a  few  moments,  and  then  dismiss  me." 


266  PASSELAS. 

CHAPTER  XLL 

The  Astronomer  discovers  the  Cause  of  his  Uneasiness. 

"  AT  last  the  time  came  when  the  secret  burst  his  reserve. 
We  were  sitting  together  last  night  in  the  turret  of  his  house 
watching  the  immersion  of  a  satellite  of  Jupiter.  A  sudden 
tempest  clouded  the  sky  and  disappointed  our  observation. 
We  sat  awhile  silent  in  the  dark,  and  then  he  addressed 
himself  to  me  in  these  words  :  '  Imlac,  I  have  long  con- 
sidered thy  friendship  as  the  greatest  blessing  of  my  life. 
Integrity  without  knowledge  is  weak  and  useless,  and  know- 
ledge without  integrity  is  dangerous  and  dreadful.  I  have 
found  in  thee  all  the  qualities  requisite  for  trust :  benevo- 
lence, experience,  and  fortitude.  I  have  long  discharged 
an  office  which  I  must  soon  quit  at  the  call  of  nature,  and 
shall  rejoice  in  the  hour  of  imbecility  and  pain  to  devolve  it 
upon  thee.' 

"I  thought  myself  honoured  by  this  testimony,  and  pro- 
tested that  whatever  could  conduce  to  his  happiness  would 
add  likewise  to  mine. 

" '  Hear,  Imlac,  what  thou  wilt  not  without  difficulty  credit. 
I  have  possessed  for  five  years  the  regulation  of  the  weather 
and  the  distribution  of  the  seasons.  The  sun  has  listened 
to  my  dictates,  and  passed  from  tropic  to  tropic  by  my 
direction ;  the  clouds  at  my  call  have  poured  their  waters, 
and  the  Nile  has  overflowed  at  my  command.  I  have  re- 
strained the  rage  of  the  dog-star,  and  mitigated  the  fervours 
of  the  crab.  The  winds  alone,  of  all  the  elemental  powers, 
have  hitherto  refused  my  authority,  and  multitudes  have 
perished  by  equinoctial  tempests  which  I  found  myself 
unable  to  prohibit  or  restrain.  I  have  administered  this 
great  office  .with  exact  justice,  and  made  to  the  different 
nations  of  the  earth  an  impartial  dividend  of  rain  and  sun- 
shine. What  must  have  been  the  misery  of  half  the  globe 


RASSELAS.  267 

if  I  had  limited  the  clouds  to  particular  regions,  or  confined 
the  sun  to  either  side  of  the  equator  ? '  " 


CHAPTER  XLII. 

T7ie  Opinion  of  the  Astronomer  is  explained  and  justified. 

"  I  SUPPOSE  he  discovered  in  me,  through  the  obscurity  of 
the  room,  some  tokens  of  amazement  and  doubt ;  for  after 
a  short  pause  he  proceeded  thus  : — 

" '  Not  to  be  easily  credited  will  neither  surprise  nor  offend 
me,  for  I  am  probably  the  first  of  human  beings  to  whom 
this  trust  has  been  imparted.  Nor  do  I  know  whether  to 
deem  this  distinction  a  reward  or  punishment.  Since  I  have 
possessed  it  I  have  been  far  less  happy  than  before,  and 
nothing  but  the  consciousness  of  good  intention  could  have 
enabled  me  to  support  the  weariness  of  unremitted  vigilance.' 

"  '  How  long,  sir/  said  I,  '  has  this  great  office  been  in 
your  hands  ? ' 

" '  About  ten  years  ago,'  said  he,  '  my  daily  observations  of 
the  changes  of  the  sky  led  me  to  consider  whether,  if  I  had 
the  power  of  the  seasons,  I  could  confer  greater  plenty  upon 
the  inhabitants  of  the  earth.  This  contemplation  fastened 
on  my  mind,  and  I  sat  days  and  nights  in  imaginary 
dominion,  pouring  upon  this  country  and  that  the  showers 
of  fertility,  and  seconding  every  fall  of  rain  with  a  due  pro- 
portion of  sunshine.  I  had  yet  only  the  will  to  do  good, 
and  did  not  imagine  that  I  should  ever  have  the  power. 

"  '  One  day  as  I  was  looking  on  the  fields  withering  with 
heat,  I  felt  in  my  mind  a  sudden  wish  that  I  could  send  rain 
on  the  southern  mountains,  and  raise  the  Nile  to  an  inunda- 
tion. In  the  hurry  of  my  imagination  I  commanded  rain 
to  fall ;  and  by  comparing  the  time  of  my  command  with 
that  of  the  inundation,  I  found  that  the  clouds  had  listened 
io  my  lips. 

" '  Might  not  some   other  cause,'  said  I,  '  produce  this 


268  RASSELAS. 

concurrence  ?  The  Nile  does  not  always  rise  on  the  same 
day.' 

" '  Do  not  believe,'  said  he  with  impatience,  '  that  such  ob- 
jections could  escape  me  :  I  reasoned  long  against  my  own 
conviction,  and  laboured  against  truth  with  the  utmost 
obstinacy.  I  sometimes  suspected  myself  of  madness,  and 
should  not  have  dared  to  impart  this  secret  but  to  a  man 
like  you,  capable  of  distinguishing  the  wonderful  from  the 
impossible,  and  the  incredible  from  the  false." 

" '  Why,  sir,'  said  I,  '  do  you  call  that  incredible  which  you 
know,  or  think  you  know,  to  be  true  ? ' 

" '  Because,'  said  he,  '  I  cannot  prove  it  by  any  external 
evidence  :  and  I  know  too  well  the  laws  of  demonstration 
to  think  that  my  conviction  ought  to  influence  another,  who 
cannot,  like  me,  be  conscious  of  its  force.  I  therefore 
shall  not  attempt  to  gain  credit  by  disputation.  It  is  suf- 
ficient that  I  feel  this  power  that  I  have  long  possessed, 
and  every  day  exerted  it.  But  the  life  of  man  is  short :  the 
infirmities  of  age  increase  upon  me,  and  the  time  will  soon 
come  when  the  regulator  of  the  year  must  mingle  with  the 
dust.  The  care  of  appointing  a  successor  has  long  disturbed 
me :  the  night  and  the  day  have  been  spent  in  comparisons 
of  all  the  characters  which  have  come  to  my  knowledge,  and 
I  have  yet  found  none  so  worthy  as  thyself.'  " 


CHAPTER    XLIII. 

The  Astronomer  leaves  Imlac  his  Directions, 

" (  HEAR,  therefore,  what  I  shall  impart  with  attention,  such 
as  the  welfare  of  a  world  requires.  If  the  task  of  a  king  be 
considered  as  difficult,  who  has  the  care  only  of  a  few 
millions,  to  whom  he  cannot  do  much  good  or  harm,  what 
must  be  the  anxiety  of  him  on  whom  depends  the  action  of 
the  elements  and  the  great  gifts  of  light  and  heat  ?  Hear 
me,  therefore,  with  attention. 


R ASS  EL  AS.  269 

t(  I  have  diligently  considered  the  position  of  the  earth 
and  sun,  and  formed  innumerable  schemes,  in  which  I 
changed  their  situation.  I  have  sometimes  turned  aside  the 
axis  of  the  earth,  and  sometimes  varied  the  ecliptic  of  the 
sun ;  but  I  have  found  it  impossible  to  make  a  disposition 
by  which  the  world  may  be  advantaged  :  what  one  region 
gains,  another  loses  by  an  imaginable  alteration,  even  with- 
out considering  the  distant  parts  of  the  solar  system  with 
which  we  are  acquainted.  Do  not,  therefore,  in  thy  ad- 
ministration of  the  year,  indulge  thy  pride  by  innovation ; 
do  not  please  thyself  with  thinking  that  thou  canst  make 
thyself  renowned  to  all  future  ages  by  disordering  the  sea- 
sons. The  memory  of  mischief  is  no  desirable  fame.  Much 
less  will  it  become  thee  to  let  kindness  or  interest  prevail. 
Never  rob  other  countries  of  rain  to  pour  it  on  thine  own. 
For  us  the  Nile  is  sufficient.' 

"  I  promised  that  when  I  possessed  the  power,  I  would 
use  it  with  inflexible  integrity ;  and  he  dismissed  me,  press^ 
ing  my  hand.  '  My  heart,'  said  he,  '  will  be  now  at  rest,  and 
my  benevolence  will  no  more  destroy  my  quiet :  I  have 
found  a  man  of  wisdom  and  virtue,  to  whom  I  can  cheer- 
fully bequeath  the  inheritance  of  the  sun.' " 

The  Prince  heard  this  narration  with  very  serious  regard  ; 
but  the  Princess  smiled,  and  Pekuah  convulsed  herself  with 
laughter.  "  Ladies,"  said  Imlac,  "  to  mock  the  heaviest  of 
human  afflictions  is  neither  charitable  nor  wise.  Few 
can  attain  this  man's  knowledge,  and  few  practise  his 
virtues ;  but  all  may  suffer  his  calamity.  Of  the  uncertainties 
of  our  present  state,  the  most  dreadful  and  alarming  is  the 
uncertain  continuance  of  reason." 

The  Princess  was  recollected,  and  the  favourite  was 
abashed.  Rasselas,  more  deeply  affected,  inquired  of  Imlac 
whether  he  thought  such  maladies  of  the  mind  frequent,  and 
how  they  were  contracted. 


270  RASSELAS. 

CHAPTER  XLIV. 

The  dangerous  Prevalence  of  Imagination. 

"  DISORDERS  of  intellect,"  answered  Imlac,  "  happen  much 
more  often  than  superficial  observers  will  easily  believe. 
Perhaps  if  we  speak  with  rigorous  exactness,  no  human  mind 
is  in  its  right  state.  There  is  no  man  whose  imagination 
does  not  sometimes  predominate  over  his  reason,  who  can 
regulate  his  attention  wholly  by  his  will,  and  whose  ideas 
will  come  and  go  at  his  command.  No  man  will  be  found 
in  whose  mind  airy  notions  do  not  sometimes  tyrannize,  and 
force  him  to  hope  or  fear  beyond  the  limits  of  sober  pro- 
bability. All  power  of  fancy  over  reason  is  a  degree  of  in- 
sanity ;  but  while  this  power  is  such  as  we  can  control  and 
repress,  it  is  not  visible  to  others,  nor  considered  as  any 
deprivation  of  the  mental  faculties :  it  is  not  pronounced 
madness  but  when  it  becomes  ungovernable,  and  apparently 
influences  speech  or  action. 

"  To  indulge  the  power  of  fiction  and  send  imagination 
out  upon  the  wing  is  often  the  sport  of  those  who  delight 
too  much  in  silent  speculation.  When  we  are  alone  we  are 
not  always  busy  ;  the  labour  of  excogitation  is  too  violent 
to  last  long;  the  ardour  of  inquiry  will  sometimes  give  way 
to  idleness  or  satiety.  He  who  has  nothing  external  that 
can  divert  him  must  find  pleasure  in  his  own  thoughts,  and 
must  conceive  himself  what  he  is  not ;  for  who  is  pleased 
with  what  he  is  ?  He  then  expatiates  in  boundless  futurity, 
and  culls  from  all  imaginable  conditions  that  which  for  the 
present  moment  he  should  most  desire,  amuses  his  desires 
with  impossible  enjoyments,  and  confers  upon  his  pride 
unattainable  dominion.  The  mind  dances  from  scene  to 
scene,  unites  all  pleasures  in  all  combinations,  and  riots  in 
delights  which  nature  and  fortune,  with  all  their  bounty, 
cannot  bestow. 


RASSELAS.  271 

"  In  time  some  particular  train  of  ideas  fixes  the  atten- 
tion ;  all  other  intellectual  gratifications  are  rejected ;  the 
mind,  in  weariness  or  leisure,  recurs  constantly  to  the 
favourite  conception,  and  feasts  on  the  luscious  falsehood 
whenever  she  is  offended  with  the  bitterness  of  truth.  By 
degrees  the  reign  of  fancy  is  confirmed ;  she  grows  first  impe- 
rious and  in  time  despotic.  Then  fictions  begin  to  operate 
as  realities,  false  opinions  fasten  upon  the  mind,  and  life 
passes  in  dreams  of  rapture  or  of  anguish. 

"  This,  sir,  is  one  of  the  dangers  of  solitude,  which  the 
hermit  has  confessed  not  always  to  promote  goodness, 
and  the  astronomer's  misery  has  proved  to  be  not  always 
propitious  to  wisdom." 

"  I  will  no  more,"  said  the  favourite,  "  imagine  myself 
the  Queen  of  Abyssinia.  I  have  often  spent  the  hours 
which  the  Princess  gave  to  my  own  disposal  in  adjusting 
ceremonies  and  regulating  the  Court ;  I  have  repressed  the 
pride  of  the  powerful  and  granted  the  petitions  of  the  poor  ; 
I  have  built  new  palaces  in  more  happy  situations,  planted 
groves  upon  the  tops  of  mountains,  and  have  exulted  in  the 
beneficence  of  royalty,  till,  when  the  Princess  entered,  I  had 
almost  forgotten  to  bow  down  before  her." 

"  And  I,"  said  the  Princess,  "  will  not  allow  myself  any 
more  to  play  the  shepherdess  in  my  waking  dreams.  I  have 
often  soothed  my  thoughts  with  the  quiet  and  innocence  of 
pastoral  employments,  till  I  have  in  my  chamber  heard  the 
winds  whistle  and  the  sheep  bleat ;  sometimes  freed  the 
lamb  entangled  in  the  thicket,  and  sometimes  with  my  crook 
encountered  the  wolf.  I  have  a  dress  like  that  of  the  village 
maids,  which  I  put  on  to  help  my  imagination,  and  a  pipe 
on  which  I  play  softly,  and  suppose  myself  followed  by  my 
flocks." 

"  I  will  confess,"  said  the  Prince,  "  an  indulgence  of 
fantastic  delight  more  dangerous  than  yours.  I  have  fre- 
quently endeavoured  to  imagine  the  possibility  of  a  perfect 
government,  by  which  all  wrong  should  be  lestrained,  all 


272  RASSELAS. 

vice  reformed,  and  all  the  subjects  preserved  in  tranquillity 
and  innocence.  This  thought  produced  innumerable  schemes 
of  reformation,  and  dictated  many  useful  regulations  and 
salutary  effects.  This  has  been  the  sport  and  sometimes 
the  labour  of  my  solitude,  and  I  start  when  I  think  with  how 
little  anguish  I  once  supposed  the  death  of  my  father  and 
my  brothers." 

".  Such,"  said  Imlac,  "  are  the  effects  of  visionary  schemes. 
When  we  first  form  them,  we  know  them  to  be  absurd,  but 
familiarize  them  by  degrees,  and  in  time  lose  sight  of  their 
folly." . 

CHAPTER  XLV. 

They  discourse  -with  an  Old  Man. 

THE  evening  was  now  far  past,  and  they  rose  to  return 
home.  As  they  walked  along  the  banks  of  the  Nile, 
delighted  with  the  beams  of  the  moon  quivering  on  the 
water,  they  saw  at  a  small  distance  an  old  man  whom  the 
Prince  had  often  heard  in  the  assembly  of  the  sages. 
"  Yonder,"  said  he,  "  is  one  whose  years  have  calmed  his 
passions,  but  not  clouded  his  reason.  Let  us  close  the 
disquisitions  of  the  night  by  inquiring  what  are  his  senti- 
ments of  his  own  state,  that  we  may  know  whether  youth 
alone  is  to  struggle  with  vexation,  and  whether  any  better 
hope  remains  for  the  latter  part  of  life." 

Here  the  sage  approached  and  saluted  them.  They  invited 
him  to  join  their  walk,  and  prattled  awhile  as  acquaintance 
that  had  unexpectedly  met  one  another.  The  old  man  was 
cheerful  and  talkative,  and  the  way  seemed  short  in  his 
company.  He  was  pleased  to  find  himself  not  disregarded, 
accompanied  them  to  their  house,  and,  at  the  Prince's 
request,  entered  with  them.  They  placed  him  in  the  seat  of 
honour,  and  set  wine  and  conserves  before  him. 

"  Sir,"  said  the  Princess,  "  an  evening  walk  must  give  to 
a  man  of  learning  like  you  pleasures  which  ignorance  and 


RASSELAS.  273 

youth  can  hardly  conceive.  You  know  the  qualities  and  the 
causes  of  all  that  you  behold — the  laws  by  which  the  river 
flows,  the  periods  in  which  the  planets  perform  their  revolu- 
tions. Everything  must  supply  you  with  contemplation, 
and  renew  the  consciousness  of  your  own  dignity." 

"  Lady,"  answered  he,  "  let  the  gay  and  the  vigorous  expect 
pleasure  in  their  excursions  :  it  is  enough  that  age  can  attain 
ease.  To  me  the  world  has  lost  its  novelty.  I  look  round,  and 
see  what  I  remember  to  have  seen  in  happier  days.  I  rest 
against  a  tree,  and  consider  that  in  the  same  shade  I  once 
disputed  upon  the  annual  overflow  of  the  Nile  with  a  friend 
who  is  now  silent  in  the  grave.  I  cast  my  eyes  upwards,  fix 
them  on  the  changing  moon,  and  think  with  pain  on  the 
vicissitudes  of  life.  I  have  ceased  to  take  much  delight  in 
physical  truth ;  for  what  have  I  to  do  with  those  things 
which  I  am  soon  to  leave  ?  " 

"  You  may  at  least  recreate  yourself,"  said  Imlac,  "  with 
the  recollection  of  an  honourable  and  useful  life,  and  enjoy 
the  praise  which  all  agree  to  give  you." 

"  Praise,"  said  the  sage  with  a  sigh  "  is  to  an  old  man  an 
empty  sound.  I  have  neither  mother  to  be  delighted  with  the 
reputation  of  her  son,  nor  wife  to  partake  the  honours  of 
her  husband.  I  have  outlived  my  friends  and  my  rivals. 
Nothing  is  now  of  much  importance ;  for  I  cannot  extend 
my  interest  beyond  myself.  Youth  is  delighted  with 
applause,  because  it  is  considered  as  the  earnest  of  some 
future  good,  and  because  the  prospect  of  life  is  far  extended; 
but  to  me,  who  am  now  declining  to  decrepitude,  there  is 
little  to  be  feared  from  the  malevolence  of  men,  and  yet  less 
to  be  hoped  from  their  affection  or  esteem.  Something 
they  may  yet  take  away,  but  they  can  give  me  nothing. 
Riches  would  now  be  useless,  and  high  employment  would 
be  pain.  My  retrospect  of  life  recalls  to  my  view  many 
opportunities  of  good  neglected,  much  time  squandered 
upon  trifles,  and  more  lost  in  idleness  and  vacancy.  I  leave 
many  great  designs  unattempted,  and  many  great  attempts 


274  RASSELAS. 

unfinished.  My  mind  is  burdened  with  no  heavy  crime, 
and  therefore  I  compose  myself  to  tranquillity ;  endeavour 
to  abstract  my  thoughts  from  hopes  and  cares  which,  though 
reason  knows  them  to  be  vain,  still  try  to  keep  their  old 
possession  of  the  heart ;  expect,  with  serene  humility,  that 
hour  which  nature  cannot  long  delay,  and  hope  to  possess 
in  a  better  state  that  happiness  which  here  I  could  not 
find,  and  that  virtue  which  here  I  have  not  attained." 

He  arose  and  went  away,  leaving  his  audience  not  much 
elated  with  the  hope  of  long  life.  The  Prince  consoled 
himself  with  remarking  that  it  was  not  reasonable  to  be 
disappointed  by  this  account ;  for  age  had  never  been  con- 
sidered as  the  season  of  felicity,  and  if  it  was  possible  to 
be  easy  in  decline  and  weakness,  it  was  likely  that  the  days 
of  vigour  and  alacrity  might  be  happy ;  that  the  noon  of 
life  might  be  bright,  if  the  evening  could  be  calm. 

The  Princess  suspected  that  age  was  querulous  and 
malignant,  and  delighted  to  repress  the  expectations  of  those 
who  had  newly  entered  the  world.  She  had  seen  the  pos- 
sessors of  estates  look  with  envy  on  their  heirs,  and  known 
many  who  enjoyed  pleasures  no  longer  than  they  could  con- 
fine it  to  themselves. 

Pekuah  conjectured  that  the  man  was  older  than  he 
appeared,  and  was  willing  to  impute  his  complaints  to 
delirious  dejection  ;  or  else  supposed  that  he  had  been 
unfortunate,  and  was  therefore  discontented.  "  For  nothing," 
said  she,  "  is  more  common  than  to  call  our  own  condition 
the  condition  of  life." 

Imlac,  who  had  no  desire  to  see  them  depressed,  smiled 
at  the  comforts  which  they  could  so  readily  procure  to 
themselves  ;  and  remembered  that  at  the  same  age  he  was 
equally  confident  of  unmingled  prosperity,  and  equally 
fertile  of  consolatory  expedients.  He  forbore  to  force  upon 
them  unwelcome  knowledge,  which  time  itself  would  too 
soon  impress.  The  Princess  and  her  lady  retired ;  the 
madness  of  the  astronomer  hung  upon  their  minds ;  and 


RASSELAS. 


275 


they  desired  Imlac  to  enter  upon  his  office,  and  delay  next 
morning  the  rising  of  the  sun. 


CHAPTER  XLVI. 

The  Princess  attd  Pekuah  visit  the  Astronomer. 

THE  Princess  and  Pekuah,  having  talked  in  private  of  Imlac's 
astronomer,  thought  his  character  at  once  so  amiable  and  so 
strange  that  they  could  not  be  satisfied  without  a  nearer 
knowledge,  and  Imlac  was  requested  to  find  the  means  of 
bringing  them  together. 

This  was  somewhat  difficult.  The  philosopher  had  never 
received  any  visits  from  women,  though  he  lived  in  a  city 
that  had  in  it  many  Europeans,  who  followed  the  manners  of 
their  own  countries,  and  many  from  other  parts  of  the  world, 
that  lived  there  with  European  liberty.  The  ladies  would 
not  be  refused,  and  several  schemes  were  proposed  for  the 
accomplishment  of  their  design.  It  was  proposed  to  intro- 
duce them  as  strangers  in  distress,  to  whom  the  sage  was 
always  accessible ;  but  after  some  deliberation  it  appeared 
that  by  this  artifice  no  acquaintance  could  be  formed,  for 
their  conversation  would  be  short,  and  they  could  not 
decently  importune  him  often.  "  This,"  said  Rasselas, 
"  is  true ;  but  I  have  yet  a  stronger  objection  against  the  mis- 
representation of  your  state.  I  have  always  considered 
it  as  treason  against  the  great  republic  of  human  nature  to 
make  any  man's  virtues  the  means  of  deceiving  him,  whether 
on  great  or  little  occasions.  All  imposture  weakens  con- 
fidence and  chills  benevolence.  When  the  sage  finds  that 
you  are  not  what  you  seemed,  he  will  feel  the  resentment 
natural  to  a  man  who,  conscious  of  great  abilities,  discovers 
that  he  has  been  tricked  by  understandings  meaner  than  his 
own,  and  perhaps  the  distrust  which  he  can  never  after- 
wards wholly  lay  aside  may  stop  the  voice  of  counsel  and 
close  the  hand  of  charity;  and  where  will  you  find  the 


276  RASSELAS. 

power  of  restoring  his   benefactions   to    mankind,    or  his 
peace  to  himself?" 

To  this  no  reply  was  attempted,  and  Imlac  began  to  hope 
that  their  curiosity  would  subside ;  but  next  day  Pekuah 
told  him  she  had  now  found  an  honest  pretence  for  a  visit  to 
the  astronomer,  for  she  would  solicit  permission  to  continue 
under  him  the  studies  in  which  she  had  been  initiated  by  the 
Arab,  and  the  Princess  might  go  with  her,  either  as  a  fellow- 
student,  or  because  a  woman  could  not  decently  come  alone. 
"  I  am  afraid,"  said  Imlac,  "  that  he  will  soon  be  weary  of 
your  company.  Men  advanced  far  in  knowledge  do  not  love 
to  repeat  the  elements  of  their  art,  and  I  am  not  certain  that 
even  of  the  elements,  as  he  will  deliver  them,  connected 
with  inferences  and  mingled  with  reflections,  you  are  a  very 
capable  auditress."  "  That,"  said  Pekuah,  "  must  be  my 
care.  I  ask  of  you  only  to  take  me  thither.  My  knowledge 
is  perhaps  more  than  you  imagine  it,  and  by  concurring 
always  with  his  opinions  I  shall  make  him  think  it  greater 
than  it  is." 

The  astronomer,  in  pursuance  of  this  resolution,  was  told 
that  a  foreign  lady,  travelling  in  search  of  knowledge,  had 
heard  of  his  reputation,  and  was  desirous  to  become  his 
scholar.  The  uncommonness  of  the  proposal  raised  at  once 
his  surprise  and  curiosity,  and  when  after  a  short  delibera- 
tion he  consented  to  admit  her,  he  could  not  stay  without 
impatience  till  the  next  day. 

The  ladies  dressed  themselves  magnificently,  and  were 
attended  by  Imlac  to  the  astronomer,  who  was  pleased  to 
see  himself  approached  with  respect  by  persons  of  so 
splendid  an  appearance.  In  the  exchange  of  the  first  civili- 
ties he  was  timorous  and  bashful ;  but  when  the  talk 
became  regular,  he  recollected  his  powers,  and  justified  the 
character  which  Imlac  had  given.  Inquiring  of  Pekuah 
what  could  have  turned  her  inclination  towards  astronomy, 
he  received  from  her  a  history  of  her  adventure  at  the 
Pyramid,  and  of  the  time  passed  in  the  Arab's  island.  She 


&ASSELAS.  477 

told  her  tale  with  ease  and  elegance,  and  her  conversation 
took  possession  of  his  heart.  The  discourse  was  then  turned 
to  astronomy.  Pekuah  displayed  what  she  knew.  He 
looked  upon  her  as  a  prodigy  of  genius,  and  entreated  her 
not  to  desist  from  a  study  which  she  had  so  happily  begun. 

They  came  again  and  again,  and  were  every  time  more 
welcome  than  before.  The  sage  endeavoured  to  amuse 
them,  that  they  might  prolong  their  visits,  for  he  found  his 
thoughts  grow  brighter  in  their  company ;  the  clouds  of 
solicitude  vanished  by  degrees  as  he  forced  himself  to 
entertain  them,  and  he  grieved  when  he  was  left,  at  their 
departure,  to  his  old  employment  of  regulating  the  seasons. 

The  Princess  and  her  favourite  had  now  watched  his  lips 
for  several  months,  and  could  not  catch  a  single  word  from 
which  they  could  judge  whether  he  continued  or  not  in  the 
opinion  of  his  preternatural  commission.  They  often  con- 
trived to  bring  him  to  an  open  declaration ;  but  he  easily 
eluded  all  their  attacks,  and,  on  which  side  soever  they 
pressed  him,  escaped  from  them  to  some  other  topic. 

As  their  familiarity  increased,  they  invited  him  often 
to  the  house  of  Imlac,  where  they  distinguished  him  by 
extraordinary  respect.  He  began  gradually  to  delight  in 
sublunary  pleasures.  He  came  early  and  departed  late ; 
laboured  to  recommend  himself  by  assiduity  and  compliance ; 
excited  their  curiosity  after  new  arts,  that  they  might  still 
want  his  assistance  ;  and  when  they  made  any  excursion  of 
pleasure  or  inquiry,  entreated  to  attend  them. 

By  long  experience  of  his  integrity  and  wisdom,  the 
Prince  and  his  sister  were  convinced  that  he  might  be 
trusted  without  danger;  and  lest  he  should  draw  any  false 
hopes  from  the  civilities  which  he  received,  discovered  to 
him  their  condition,  with  the  motives  of  their  journey,  and 
required  his  opinion  on  the  choice  of  life. 

"Of  the  various  conditions  which  the  world  spreads 
before  you  which  you  shall  prefer,"  said  the  sage,  "  I  am 
not  able  to  instruct  you.  I  can  only  tell  that  I  have  chosen 


278  RASSELAS. 

wrong.  I  have  passed  my  time  in  study  without  experience  : 
in  the  attainment  of  sciences  which  can  for  the  most  part 
be  but  remotely  useful  to  mankind.  I  have  purchased 
knowledge  at  the  expense  of  all  the  common  comforts  of 
life  :  I  have  missed  the  endearing  elegance  of  female  friend- 
ship, and  the  happy  commerce  of  domestic  tenderness.  If  I 
have  obtained  any  prerogatives  above  other  students,  they 
have  been  accompanied  with  fear,  disquiet,  and  scrupulosity ; 
but  even  of  these  prerogatives,  whatever  they  were,  I  have, 
since  my  thoughts  have  been  diversified  by  more  intercourse 
with  the  world,  begun  to  question  the  reality.  When  I  have 
been  for  a  few  days  lost  in  pleasing  dissipation,  I  am  always 
tempted  to  think  that  my  inquiries  have  ended  in  error,  and 
that  I  have  suffered  much,  and  suffered  it  in  vain." 

Imlac  was  delighted  to  find  that  the  sage's  understanding 
was  breaking  through  its  mists,  and  resolved  to  detain  him 
from  the  planets  till  he  should  forget  his  task  of  ruling 
them,  and  reason  should  recover  its  original  influence. 

From  this  time  the  astronomer  was  received  into  familiar 
friendship,  and  partook  of  all  their  projects  and  pleasures  : 
his  respect  kept  him  attentive,  and  the  activity  of  Rasselas 
did  not  leave  much  time  unengaged,  Something  was  always 
to  be  done :  the  day  was  spent  in  making  observations, 
which  furnished  talk  for  the  evening,  and  the  evening  was 
closed  with  a  scheme  for  the  morrow. 

The  sage  confessed  to  Imlac  that  since  he  had  mingled 
in  the  gay  tumults  of  life,  and  divided  his  hours  by  a  succes- 
sion of  amusements,  he  found  the  conviction  of  his  authority 
over  the  skies  fade  gradually  from  his  mind,  and  began  to 
trust  less  to  an  opinion  which  he  never  could  prove  to  others, 
and  which  he  now  found  subject  to  variation,  from  causes  in 
which  reason  had  no  part.  "  If  I  am  accidentally  left  alone 
for  a  few  hours,"  said  he,  "my  inveterate  persuasion  rushes 
upon  my  soul,  and  my  thoughts  are  chained  down  by  some 
irresistible  violence ;  but  they  are  soon  disentangled  by  the 
Prince's  conversation,  and  instantaneously  released  at  the 


RASSELAS.  279 

entrance  of  Pekuah.  I  am  like  a  man  habitually  afraid  of 
spectres,  who  is  set  at  ease  by  a  lamp,  and  wonders  at  the 
dread  which  harassed  him  in  the  dark ;  yet,  if  his  lamp  be 
extinguished,  feels  again  the  terrors  which  he  knows  that 
when  it  is  light  he  shall  feel  no  more.  But  I  am  sometimes 
afraid,  lest  I  indulge  my  quiet  by  criminal  negligence,  and 
voluntarily  forget  the  great  charge  with  which  I  am  entrusted. 
If  I  favour  myself  in  a  known  error,  or  am  determined  by 
my  own  ease  in  a  doubtful  question  of  this  importance,  how 
dreadful  is  my  crime  ! " 

"  No  disease  of  the  imagination/'  answered  Imlac,  "  is  so 
difficult  of  cure  as  that  which  is  complicated  with  the  dread 
of  guilt;  fancy  and  conscience  then  act  interchangeably 
upon  us,  and  so  often  shift  their  places  that  the  illusions  of 
one  are  not  distinguished  from  the  dictates  of  the  other.  If 
fancy  presents  images  not  moral  or  religious,  the  mind  drives 
them  away  when  they  give  it  pain ;  but  when  melancholy 
notions  take  the  form  of  duty,  they  lay  hold  on  the 
faculties  without  opposition,  because  we  are  afraid  to 
exclude  or  banish  them.  For  this  reason  the  superstitious 
are  often  melancholy,  and  the  melancholy  almost  always 
superstitious. 

"But  do  not  let  the  suggestions  of  timidity  overpower 
your  better  reason  :  the  danger  of  neglect  can  be  but  as  the 
probability  of  the  obligation,  which,  when  you  consider  it 
with  freedom,  you  find  very  little,  and  that  little  growing 
every  day  less.  Open  your  heart  to  the  influence  of  the 
light,  which  from  time  to  time  breaks  in  upon  you :  when 
scruples  importune  you,  which  you  in  your  lucid  moments 
know  to  be  vain,  do  not  stand  to  parley,  but  fly  to  business 
or  to  Pekuah ;  and  keep  this  thought  always  prevalent,  that 
you  are  only  one  atom  of  the  mass  of  humanity,  and  have 
neither  such  virtue  nor  vice  as  that  you  should  be  singled 
out  for  supernatural  favours  or  afflictions." 


28o  RASSELAS. 

CHAPTER  XLVII. 

The  Prince  enters,  and  brings  a  new  Topic, 

"ALL  this,"  said  the  astronomer,  "I  have  often  thought; 
but  my  reason  has  been  so  long  subjugated  by  an  uncon- 
trollable and  overwhelming  idea,  that  it  durst  not  confide  in 
its  own  decisions.  I  now  see  how  fatally  I  betrayed  my 
quiet,  by  suffering  chimeras  to  prey  upon  me  in  secret ;  but 
melancholy  shrinks  from  communication,  and  I  never  found 
a  man  before  to  whom  I  could  impart  my  troubles,  though 
I  had  been  certain  of  relief.  I  rejoice  to  find  my  own  senti- 
ments confirmed  by  yours,  who  are  not  easily  deceived,  and 
can  have  no  motive  or  purpose  to  deceive.  I  hope  that 
time  and  variety  will  dissipate  the  gloom  that  has  so  long 
surrounded  me,  and  the  latter  part  of  my  days  will  be  spent 
in  peace." 

"  Your  learning  and  virtue,"  said  Imlac,  "may  justly  give 
you  hopes." 

Rasselas  then  entered,  with  the  Princess  and  Pekuah,  and 
inquired  whether  they  had  contrived  any  new  diversion  for 
the  next  day.  "  Such,"  said  Nekayah,  "  is  the  state  of 
life,  that  none  are  happy  but  by  the  anticipation  of  change : 
the  change  itself  is  nothing ;  when  we  have  made  it,  the 
next  wish  is  to  change  again.  The  world  is  not  yet 
exhausted ;  let  me  see  something  to-morrow  which  I  never 
saw  before." 

"  Variety,"  said  Rasselas,  "  is  so  necessary  to  content,  that 
even  the  Happy  Valley  disgusted  me  by  the  recurrence  of  its 
luxuries ;  yet  I  could  not  forbear  to  reproach  myself  with 
impatience  when  I  saw  the  monks  of  St.  Anthony  support, 
without  complaint,  a  life,  not  of  uniform  delight,  but  uniform 
hardship." 

"  Those  men,"  answered  Imlac,  "  are  less  wretched  in 
their  silent  convent  than  the  Abyssinian  princes  in  their 
prison  of  pleasure.  Whatever  is  done  by  the  monks  is  in- 


RASSELAS.  2^1 

cited  by  an  adequate  and  reasonable  motive.  Their  labour 
supplies  them  with  necessaries ;  it  therefore  cannot  be 
omitted,  and  is  certainly  rewarded.  Their  devotion  prepares 
them  for  another  state,  and  reminds  them  of  its  approach, 
while  it  fits  them  for  it.  Their  time  is  regularly  distributed ; 
one  duty  succeeds  another ;  so  that  they  are  not  left  open 
to  the  distraction  of  unguided  choice,  nor  lost  in  the  shades 
of  listless  inactivity.  There  is  a  certain  task  to  be  per- 
formed at  an  appropriated  hour ;  and  their  toils  are  cheerful, 
because  they  consider  them  as  acts  of  piety,  by  which  they 
are  always  advancing  towards  endless  felicity." 

"  Do  you  think,"  said  Nekayah,  "  that  the  monastic  rule 
is  a  more  holy  and  less  imperfect  state  than  any  other? 
May  not  he  equally  hope  for  future  happiness  who  converses 
openly  with  mankind,  who  succours  the  distressed  by  his 
charity,  instructs  the  ignorant  by  his  learning,  and  contri- 
butes by  his  industry  to  the  general  system  of  life ;  even 
though  he  should  omit  some  of  the  mortifications  which  are 
practised  in  the  cloister,  and  allow  himself  such  harmless 
delights  as  his  condition  may  place  within  his  reach  ?  " 

"  This,"  said  Imlac,  "  is  a  question  which  has  long 
divided  the  wise  and  perplexed  the  good.  I  am  afraid  to 
decide  on  either  part.  He  that  lives  well  in  the  world  is 
better  than  he  that  lives  well  in  a  monastery.  But  perhaps 
every  one  is  not  able  to  stem  the  temptations  of  public 
life ;  and  if  he  cannot  conquer,  he  may  properly  retreat. 
Some  have  little  power  to  do  good,  and  have  likewise  little 
strength  to  resist  evil.  Many  are  weary  of  the  conflicts 
with  adversity,  and  are  willing  to  eject  those  passions  which 
have  long  busied  them  in  vain.  And  many  are  dismissed 
by  age  and  diseases  from  the  more  laborious  duties  of 
society.  In  monasteries  the  weak  and  timorous  may  be 
happily  sheltered,  the  weary  may  repose,  and  the  penitent 
may  meditate.  Those  retreats  of  prayer  and  contemplation 
have  something  so  congenial  to  the  mind  of  man,  that 
perhaps  there  is  scarcely  one  that  does  not  purpose  to 


282  RASSELAS. 

close  his  life  in  pious  abstraction,  with  a  few  associates 
serious  as  himself." 

"  Such,"  said  Pekuah,  "  has  often  been  my  wish  ;  and  I 
have  heard  the  Princess  declare  that  she  should  not  willingly 
die  in  a  crowd." 

"  The  liberty  of  using  harmless  pleasures,"  proceeded 
Imlac,  "  will  not  be  disputed  ;  but  it  is  still  to  be  examined 
what  pleasuies  are  harmless.  The  evil  of  any  pleasure  that 
Nekayah  can  image  is  not  in  the  act  itself,  but  in  its  con- 
sequences. Pleasure  in  itself  harmless  may  become 
mischievous  by  endearing  to  us  a  state  which  we  know  to 
be  transient  and  probatory,  and  withdrawing  our  thoughts 
from  that  of  which  every  hour  brings  us  nearer  to  the 
beginning,  and  of  which  no  length  of  time  will  bring  us  to 
the  end.  Mortification  is  not  virtuous  in  itself,  nor  has  any 
other  use  but  that  it  disengages  us  from  the  allurements  of 
sense.  In  the  state  of  future  perfection  to  which  we  all 
aspire  there  will  be  pleasure  without  danger,  and  security 
without  restraint" 

The  Princess  was  silent,  and  Rasselas,  turning  to  the 
astronomer,  asked  him  whether  he  could  not  delay  her  retreat 
by  showing  her  something  which  she  had  not  seen  before. 

"Your  curiosity,"  said  the  sage,  "has  been  so  general, 
and  your  pursuit  of  knowledge  so  vigorous,  that  novelties 
are  not  now  very  easily  to  be  found ;  but  what  you  can  no 
longer  procure  from  the  living  may  be  given  by  the  dead. 
Among  the  wonders  of  this  country  are  the  catacombs,  or 
the  ancient  repositories  in  which  the  bodies  of  the  earliest 
generations  were  lodged,  and  where,  by  the  virtue  of  the 
gums  which  embalmed  them,  they  yet  remain  without 
corruption." 

"  I  know  not,"  said  Rasselas,  "  what  pleasure  the  sight  of 
the  catacombs  can  afford;  but,  since  nothing  else  is 
offered,  I  am  resolved  to  view  them,  and  shall  place  this 
with  my  other  things  which  I  have  done,  because  I  would 
do  something." 


RASSELAS.  283 

They  hired  a  guard  of  horsemen,  and  the  next  day  visited 
the  catacombs.  When  they  were  about  to-  descend  into  the 
sepulchral  caves,  "Pekuah,"  said  the  Princess,  "*we  are 
now  again  invading  the  habitations  of  the  dead ;  I  know 
that  you  will  stay  behind.  Let  me  find  you  safe  when  I 
return."  "  No,  I  will  not  be  left,"  answered  Pekuah ;  "  I  will 
go  down  between  you  and  the  Prince." 

They  then  all  descended,  and  roved  with  wonder  through 
the  labyrinth  of  subterraneous  passages,  where  the  bodies 
were  laid  in  rows  on  either  side. 


CHAPTER  XLVIIL 

Inilac  discourses  on  the  Nature  of  the  Soul. 

"WHAT  reason,"  said  the  Prince,  "can  be  given  why  the 
Egyptians  should  thus  expensively  preserve  those  carcases 
which  some  nations  consume  with  fire,  others  lay  to  mingle 
with  the  earth,  and  all  agree  to  remove  from  their  sight  as 
soon  as  decent  rites  can  be  performed." 

"  The  original  of  ancient  customs,"  said  Imlac,  "  is  com- 
monly unknown,  for  the  practice  often  continues  when  the 
cause  has  ceased;  and  concerning  superstitious  ceremo- 
nies it  is  vain  to  conjecture  ;  for  what  reason  did  not  dictate, 
reason  cannot  explain.  I  have  long  believed  that  the  prac- 
tice of  embalming  arose  only  from  tenderness  to  the  remains 
of  relations  or  friends ;  and  to  this  opinion  I  am  more  in- 
clined because  it  seems  impossible  that  this  care  should 
have  been  general ;  had  all  the  dead  been  embalmed,  their 
repositories  must  in  time  have  been  more  spacious  than  the 
dwellings  of  the  living,  I  suppose  only  the  rich  or  honour- 
able were  secured  from  corruption,  and  the  rest  left  to  the 
course  of  nature. 

"  But  it  is  commonly  supposed  that  the  Egyptians  believed 
the  soul  to  live  as  long  as  the  body  continued  undissolved, 
and  therefore  tried  this  method  of  eluding  death." 


284  KASSELAS. 

"  Could  the  wise  Egyptians,"  said  Nekayah,  "  think  so 
grossly  of  the  soul?  If  the  soul  could  once  survive  its 
separation,  what  could  it  afterwards  receive  or  suffer  from 
the  body?" 

"  The  Egyptians  would  doubtless  think  erroneously,"  said 
the  astronomer,  "  in  the  darkness  of  heathenism  and  the 
first  dawn  of  philosophy.  The  nature  of  the  soul  is  still 
disputed  amidst  all  our  opportunities  of  clearer  knowledge  ; 
some  yet  say  that  it  may  be  material,  who,  nevertheless, 
believe  it  to  be  immortal." 

"  Some,"  answered  Imlac,  "  have  indeed  said  that  the 
soul  is  material,  but  I  can  scarcely  believe  that  any  man  has 
thought  it  who  knew  how  to  think ;  for  all  the  conclusions 
of  reason  enforce  the  immaterality  of  mind,  and  all  the 
notices  of  sense  and  investigations  of  science  concur  to 
prove  the  unconsciousness  of  matter. 

"  It  was  never  supposed  that  cogitation  is  inherent  in 
matter,  or  that  every  particle  is  a  thinking  being.  Yet  if 
any  part  of  matter  be  devoid  of  thought,  what  part  can  we 
suppose  to  think  ?  Matter  can  differ  from  matter  only  in 
form,  density,  bulk,  motion,  and  direction  of  motion.  To 
which  of  these,  however  varied  or  combined,  can  conscious- 
ness be  annexed  ?  To  be  round  or  square,  to  be  solid  or 
fluid,  to  be  great  or  little,  to  be  moved  slowly  or  swiftly, 
one  way  or  another,  are  modes  of  material  existence  all 
equally  alien  from  the  nature  of  cogitation.  If  matter  be 
once  without  thought,  it  can  only  be  made  to  think  by 
some  new  modification ;  but  all  the  modifications  which  it 
can  admit  are  equally  unconnected  with  cogitative  powers." 
"  But  the  materialists,"  said  the  astronomer,  "  urge  that 
matter  may  have  qualities  with  which  we  are  unacquainted." 
"  He  who  will  determine,"  returned  Imlac,  "  against  that 
which  he  knows  because  there  may  be  something  which  he 
knows  not,  he  that  can  set  hypothetical  possibility  against 
acknowledged  certainty,  is  not  to  be  admitted  among 
reasonable  beings.  All  that  we  know  of  matter  is,  that 


RASSELAS.  28- 

matter  is  inert,  senseless,  and  lifeless ;  and  if  this  conviction 
cannot  be  opposed  but  by  referring  us  to  something  that 
we  know  not,  we  have  all  the  evidence  that  human  intellect 
can  admit.  If  that  which  is  known  may  be  overruled  by  that 
which  is  unknown,  no  being,  not  omniscient,  can  arrive  at 
certainty." 

"  Yet  let  us  not,"  said  the  astronomer,  "  too  arrogantly 
limit  the  Creator's  power." 

"  It  is  no  limitation  of  Omnipotence,"  replied  the  poet, 
"to  suppose  that  one  thing  is  not  consistent  with  another, 
that  the  same  proposition  cannot  be  at  once  true  and  false, 
that  the  same  number  cannot  be  even  and  odd,  that 
cogitation  cannot  be  conferred  on  that  which  is  created  in- 
capable of  cogitation." 

"  I  know  not,"  said  Nekayah,  "  any  great  use  of  this 
question.  Does  that  immateriality,  which  in  my  opinion 
you  have  sufficiently  proved,  necessarily  include  eternal 
duration." 

"  Of  immateriality,"  said  Imlac,  "  our  ideas  are  negative, 
and  therefore  obscure.  Immateriality  seems  to  imply  a 
natural  power  of  perpetual  duration  as  a  consequence  of 
exemption  from  all  causes  of  decay :  whatever  perishes  is 
destroyed  by  the  solution  of  its  contexture  and  separation  of 
its  parts ;  nor  can  we  conceive  how  that  which  has  no  parts, 
and  therefore  admits  no  solution,  can  be  naturally  corrupted 
or  impaired." 

"  I  know  not,"  said  Rasselas,  "  how  to  conceive  anything 
without  extension :  what  is  extended  must  have  parts,  and 
you  allow  that  whatever  has  parts  may  be  destroyed." 

"  Consider  your  own  conceptions,"  replied  Imlac,  "  and 
the  difficulty  will  be  less.  You  will  find  substance  without 
extension.  An  ideal  form  is  no  less  real  than  material 
bulk ;  yet  an  ideal  form  has  no  extension.  It  is  no  less 
certain,  when  you  think  on  a  pyramid,  that  your  mind 
possesses  the  idea  of  a  pyramid,  than  that  the  pyramid  it- 
self is  standing.  What  space  does  the  idea  of  a  pyramid 


286  RASSELAS. 

occupy  more  than  the  idea  of  a  grain  of  corn  ?  or  how  can 
either  idea  suffer  laceration  ?  As  is  the  effect,  such  is  the 
cause ;  as  thought,  such  is  the  power  that  thinks,  a  power 
impassive  and  indiscerptible." 

"  But  the  Being,"  said  Nekayah,  "  whom  I  fear  to  name, 
the  Being  which  made  the  soul,  can  destroy  it." 

"He  surely  can  destroy  it,"  answered  Imlac, "  since,  how- 
ever imperishable,  it  receives  from  a  superior  nature  its 
power  of  duration.  That  it  will  not  perish  by  any  inherent 
cause  of  decay  or  principle  of  corruption,  may  be  shown  by 
philosophy  ;  but  philosophy  can  tell  no  more.  That  it  will 
not  be  annihilated  by  Him  that  made  it,  we  must  humbly 
learn  from  higher  authority." 

The  whole  assembly  stood  awhile  silent  and  collected. 
"  Let  us  return,"  said  Rasselas,  "from  this  scene  of  mor- 
tality. How  gloomy  would  be  these  mansions  of  the  dead  to 
him  who  did  not  know  that  he  should  never  die ;  that  what 
now  acts  shall  continue  its  agency,  and  what  now  thinks  shall 
think  on  for  ever.  Those  that  lie  here  stretched  before  us,  the 
wise  and  the  powerful  of  ancient  times,  warn  us  to  remember 
the  shortness  of  our  present  state;  they  were  perhaps  snatched 
away  while  they  were  busy,  like  us,  in  the  choice  of  life." 

"  To  me/'  said  the  Princess,  "  the  choice  of  life  is  become 
less  important ;  I  hope  hereafter  to  think  only  on  the  choice 
of  eternity." 

They  then  hastened  out  of  the  caverns,  and  under  the 
protection  of  their  guard  returned  to  Cairo. 


CHAPTER  XLIX. 

The  Conclusion,  in  which  frothing  is  Concluded, 

IT  was  now  the  time  of  the  inundation  of  the  Nile.     A  few 

days  after  their  visit  to  the  catacombs  the  river  began  to  rise. 

They  were  confined  to  their  house.     The  whole  region 

being  under  water,  gave  then;  r.o  invitnlicn  to  any  cxcur- 


RASSELAS.  287 

sions ;  and  being  well  supplied  with  materials  for  talk,  they 
diverted  themselves  with  comparisons  of  the  different  forms 
of  life  which  they  had  observed,  and  with  various  schemes 
of  happiness  which  each  of  them  had  formed. 

Pekuah  was  never  so  much  charmed  with  any  place  as  the 
Convent  of  St  Anthony,  where  the  Arab  restored  her  to  the 
Princess,  and  wished  only  to  fill  it  with  pious  maidens  and 
to  be  made  prioress  of  the  order.  She  was  weary  of  expec- 
tation and  disgust,  and  would  gladly  be  fixed  in  some 
unvariable  state. 

The  Princess  thought  that,  of  all  sublunary  things,  know- 
ledge was  the  best.  She  desired  first  to  learn  all  sciences, 
and  then  proposed  to  found  a  college  of  learned  women,  in 
which  she  would  preside,  that,  by  conversing  with  the  old 
and  educating  the  young,  she  might  divide  her  time  between 
the  acquisition  and  communication  of  wisdom,  and  raise  up 
for  the  next  age  models  of  prudence  and  patterns  of  pljty. 

The  Prince  desired  a  little  kingdom  in  which  "ne  might 
administer  justice  in  his  own  person  and  see  all  the  parts  of 
government  with  his  own  eyes ;  but  he  could  never  fix  the 
limits  of  his  dominion,  and  was  always,  adding  to  the  number 
of  his  subjects. 

Imlac  and  the  astronomer  were  contented  to  be  driven 
along  the  stream  of  life  without  directing  their  course  to  any 
particular  port. 

Of  those  wishes  that  they  had  formed  they  well  knew  that 
none  could  be  obtained.  They  deliberated  awhile  what  was 
to  be  done,  and  resolved,  when  the  inundation  should  cease, 
to  return  to  Abyssinia. 


BALLANTYNE    PRESS:    LONDON   AND   EDINBURGH, 


ROUTLEDGE'S  EXCELSIOR  SERIES 

OF  STANDARD  AUTHORS, 

Without  Abridgment,  Crown  8vo,  as.  each,  in  cloth. 


I  The  Wide,  Wide  World,  by  Miss  WetherelL 
a  Melbourne  House,  by  Miss  Wetherell. 

3  The  Lamplighter,  by  Miss  Cummins. 

4  Stepping  Heavenward,  and  Aunt  Jane's  Hero,  by  E.  Prentiu. 

5  Qneechy,  by  Miss  Wetherell. 

6  Ellen  Montgomery's  Bookshelf,  by  Miss  Wetherell. 

7  The  Two  School  Girls,  and  other  Tales,  illustrating  the  Beatitudes,  by 

Miss  Wetherell. 

8  Helen,  by  Maria  Edgeworth. 

9  The  Old  Helmet,  by  Miss  Wetherell. 

10  -Mabel  Vaughan,  by  Miss  Cummins. 

11  The  Glen  Luna  Family,  or  Speculation,  by  Miss  WethereU. 
la  The  Word,  or  Walks  from  Eden,  by  Miss  Wetherell. 

13  Alone,  by  Marion  Harland. 

14  The  Lofty  and  Lowly,  by  Miss  M'Intosh. 

15  Prince  of  the  House  of  David,  by  Rev.  J.  H.  Ingraham. 

10  Uncle  Tom's  Cabin,  by  Mrs.  Stowe,  with  a  Preface  by  the  Earl  of 

•  Carlisle 
I*  Longfellow's  Poetical  Works,  726  pages,  with  Portrait. 

18  Burns's  Poetical  Works,  with  Memoir  by  Willmott. 

19  Moore's  Poetical  Works,  with  Memoir  by  Howitt. 
36  Byron's  Poetical  Works,  Selections  from  Don  Juan. 

ai  Pope's  Poetical  Works,  Edited  by  the  Rev.  H.  F.  Gary,  with  a  Memoir 
33  Wise  Sayings  of  the  Great  and  Good,  with  Classified  Index  of  Subjects 

33  Lover's  Poetical  Works. 

34  Bret  Harte's  Poems. 

35  Mrs.  Hemans'  Poetical  Works. 

36  Coleridge's  Poetical  Works,  with  Memoir  by  W.  B.  Scott 

37  Dodd's  Beauties  of  Shakspeare. 

28  Hood's  Poetical  Works,  Serious  and  Comic,  456  pages. 
39  The  Book  of  Familiar  Quotations,  from  the  Best  Authors. 
33  Shelley's  Poetical  Works,  with  Memoir  ky  W.  B.  Scott. 
31  Keats'  Poetical  Works,  with  Memoir  by  W.  B.  Scott. 
33  Shakspere  Gems.     Extracts,  specially  designed  for  Vouth. 

33  The  Book  of  Humour,  Wit,  and  Wisdom,  a  Manual  of  Table  Talk. 

34  B.  A.  Poe's  Poetical  Works,  with  Memoir  by  R.  H.  Stoddard. 

3ft.  L.  B.  L.,  The  Poetical  Works  of  (Letitia  Elizabeth  Landon).     Wttb 
•    Memoir  by  W.  B.  Scott. 

37  Sir  Walter  Scott's  Poetical  Works,  with  Memoir. 

38  Shakspere,  complete,   with  Poems  and   Sonnets*  edited  by  Chailei 
.  Knigfat. 

39  Cowper>  Poetical  Works. 

40  Milton's  Poetical  Works,  from  the  Text  of  Dr.  Newton. 

41  Sacred  Poems.  Devotional  and  Moral. 

43  Sydney  Smith  ?  Essays,  from  the  Edinburgh  Rtvitw, 
43  Chdcec  Poems  and  Lyrics,  from  130  PoeU. 


University  of  California 

SOUTHERN  REGIONAL  LIBRARY  FACILITY 

Return  this  material  to  the  library 

from  which  it  was  borrowed. 


ITM 

QIOCT16  1996 
REC'D  C.L  JUN  04 '95 


ited  by  ROT. 

sdition. 

th  extensive 

y  translated, 
translated  by 
Edition,  by 
i  taken  from 
J.  G.  Wood, 

Rev.  R.  A. 
World,  by 
Sketch  of  his 


and  notes  by 
Newt,  many 

of  th«  Great 

8l  Hawker's  Morning  Portion. 
8a  Hawker's  Evening  Portion.                                           I 
83  Holmes'  (O.  W.)  Poetical  Works. 
84  Evenings  at  Home,  with  60  illustrations. 
85  Opening  a  Chestnut  Burr,  by  the  Rev.  B.  P,  Roa. 
86  "What  can  She  do  ?  by  the  Rev.  E.  P.  Roe. 
87  ^Lowell's  Poetical  Works. 
88  Sir  Edward  Seaward's  Narrative  of  his  Shipwreok,  1 
89  Robin  Hood  Ballads,  edited  by  Ritson.                                                  _- 

A     000  048  530    o 


ROUTLEDQE'8  STANDARD  LIBRARY, 

Crown  8vo,  doth,  31,  6d.  each. 


I  The  Arabian  Nights,  Unabridged, 

8  plates. 

s  Don  Quixote,  Unabridged. 
S  Oil    Bias,     Adventures    of,     Un. 

abridged. 

4  Curiosities  of  Literature,  by  Isaac 

D'  Israeli,  Complete  Edition. 

5  A  Thousand  and    One  Gems  of 

British  Poetry. 

6  The  Blackfriars  Shakspere,  edited 

by  Charles  Knight 

7  Cruden's  Concordance,  by  Carey. 

8  Boswell's  Life  of  Dr.  Johnson. 

9  The  Works  of  Oliver  Goldsmith. 
ii  The  Family  Doctor,  500  woodcuts. 
la  Sterne's  Works,  Complete. 

13  Ten  Thousand  Wonderful  Things. 

14  Extraordinary  Popular  Delusions, 

by  Dr.  Mackay. 

16  Bartlett's  Familiar  Quotation!. 

17  The  Spectator,    by  Addison,  Ac. 

Unabridged. 

18  Routledge's    Modem     Speaker- 

Comic — Serious — Dramatic. 

19  One  Thousand  and  One  Gems  of 

Prose,  edited  by  C.  Mackay. 

ao  Pope's  Homer's  Iliad  and  Odyssey. 

83  Jpsephus,  translated  by  Whiston. 

94  Book  of  Proverbs,  Phrases,  Quota- 
tions, and  Mottoes. 

85  The  Book  of  Modern  Anecdotes—- 
Theatrical, Legal,  and  American. 

a6  Book  of  Table  Talk,  W<  C.  Russell 

37  Junius,  Woodfall's  edition. 

a8  Charles  Lamb's  Works. 

39  Froissart's  Chronicles.        [mation. 

30  D'Aubigne's  Story  of  the  Refor. 

31  A  History  of  England,  by  the  Rev. 

James  White. 

33  Macaulay — Selected  Essays,  Mis- 
cellaneous Writings. 

33  Carleton's  Traits,  ist  series. 

34  •  and  series. 

35  Essays  by  Sydney  Smith. 

36  Dante.     Longfellow's  translation. 

51  Fresco tt's  Biographical  and  Critical 

Essays. 

52  Napier's  History  of  the  Peninsular 

War,  1807-10.        53—1810-13. 

54  White's    Natural  History  of  Sel 

borne,  with  many  illustrations. 

55  Dean  Milman's  History  of  the  Jews, 

56  Percy's  Reliques  of  Ancient  Poetry. 

57  Chaucer's  Poetical  Works. 

58  Longfellow's  Prose  Work* 

59  Spenser's  Poetical  Works. 

60  Asmodeus,  by  Le  Sage. 

61  Book  of  British  Ballads.  S.CHaD. 
6a  Plutarch's  Lives  (Langhorne'aed.) 


64  Book  of  Epigrams,  W.  D.  Aduai. 

65  Longfellow's  Poems  (Comp.  ed.) 

66  Lempriere's  Classical  Dictionary. 

67  Adam  Smith's  Wealth  of  Nations. 

68  Father  Prout's  Works,  edited  by 

C.  Kent. 

69  Carleton's    Traits    and    Stories. 

Complete  in  one  volume. 

70  Walker  s  Rhyming  Dictionary. 

71  Macfarlane's  Hist  of  British  India. 
79  Defoe's  Journal  of  the  Plague  and 

the  Great  Fire  of  London,  with 
illustrations  on  steel  by  George 
Cruikshank. 

73  Glimpses  of  the  Past,  by  C  Knight. 

74  Michaud's  History  of  the  Crusades, 

voL  i. 

75  — — —  voL  a.      76  — —  vol.  3. 

77  A  Thousand  and  One  Gems  of 

Song,  edited  by  C.  Mackay. 

78  Motley's  Rise  of  the  Dutch  Re- 

public. [Complete. 

79  Prescott's  Ferdinand  and  Isabella, 

80 Conquest  of  Mexico.  Comp. 

81  — —  Conquest  of  Peru.  Comp. 
8a Charles  the  Fifth. 

83 Philip  the  Second.    Vols. 

i  and  a  in  z  vol. 

84  ——VoL  3  and  Essays  in  i  voL 

85  Jeremy  Taylor's  Life  of  Christ 

86  Traditions  of  Lancashire,  by  John 

Roby,  vol.  i.        87  voL  8. 

88  "The  Breakfost  Table  Series"— 

The  Autocrat — The  Professor— 
The  Poet— by  Oliver  Wendell 
Holmes,  with  steel  portrait. 

89  Romaine's  Life,  Walk,  and  Tri- 

umph of  Faith. 

90  Napier's  History  of  the  Peninsular 

War,  1812-14.  [tlon. 

91  Hawker's  Poor  Man's  Daily  Por- 
93  Chevreul  on  Colour,  with  8  co- 
loured plates. 

93  Shakspere,  edited  by  C.  Knight, 

large  type  edition.  >yiifa  fuB-page 
illustrations,  wi.  t. 

94  •  voL  1.        95  — —  voL  3. 
96  The  Spec«uor,large  type  ed. ,  vol.  i. 
97 vol.  3.       98  voL  3. 

99  R.W.  jfimerson's  Complete  Works, 
zoo  Boswell's   Life  of  Johnson   and 

Tour  to  the  Hebrides,  vol.  z. 
jox  —  voL  a.        103  —  voL  3. 

103  S.  Knowles'  Dramatic  Works. 

104  Roscoe's  (W.)  Lorenzo  de  Medici 

105 (W.)  Life  of  Leo  X.,  voL  i. 

106  •  v»U  a. 

X07  Berington's   Literary  History  of 

the  Middle  Ages. 


Unr 

S 


