@@ 0
O my God, let me remember with thanksgiving and confess to You Your mercies toward me. Let my bones be drenched with Your love, and let them say to You, Who is like You, O Lord? You have broken my bonds apart; I will offer You the sacrifice of thanksgiving. How You broke them I will tell, and all who worship You, when they hear it, will say, "Blessed be the Lord in heaven and on earth; great and wonderful is His name." Your words had fastened deep in my heart, and I was hemmed in on every side by You. Of Your eternal life I was now sure, though I had seen it only in a riddle and as through a glass. Still, every doubt had been taken from me that there is an incorruptible substance from which all other substance comes; and what I wanted now was not to be more certain of You but more steadfast in You. As for my life in time, though, everything was unsteady, and my heart still had to be cleansed of the old leaven. The Way, the Saviour Himself, pleased me well, but I still shrank from going through its narrowness. And You put it into my mind, and it seemed good in my sight, to go to Simplicianus, who struck me as a good servant of Yours; Your grace shone in him. I had also heard that he had lived devoted to You with great devotion ever since his youth. By now he had grown old, and after so long a life spent in such earnest pursuit of Your way, he seemed to me to have gained much experience and learned a great deal; and that was true. From that store I wanted him to tell me, once I had laid my turmoil before him, what the right way was for someone in my condition to walk in Your path.

@@ 1
For I saw the church full, and one person went one way and another went another. But the worldly life I was leading displeased me, and it had become a very heavy burden, now that my desires no longer fired me, as they once had, with hopes of honour and money to make such heavy bondage bearable. Those things no longer delighted me, compared with Your sweetness and the beauty of Your house, which I loved. But I was still bound fast by my love of a woman. Nor did the Apostle forbid me to marry, though he urged me toward something better, wishing above all that all men were as he himself was. But I was weaker, and chose the softer place; and because of this one thing I was tossed about in everything else, listless and wasting away with withering cares, because in other matters too, which I did not want to put up with, I was forced to fit myself to married life, to which I had given myself and by which I was bound. I had heard from the mouth of the Truth that there are some eunuchs who have made themselves eunuchs for the kingdom of heaven's sake; but, He says, let whoever can receive it, receive it. Surely all men are vain who do not have the knowledge of God, and who could not, from the good things that are seen, find Him who is good. But I was no longer in that vanity. I had risen above it, and by the joint testimony of all Your creation I had found You, our Creator, and Your Word, God with You and one God together with You, through whom You created all things. There is also another kind of ungodly people, who knew God but did not glorify Him as God or give thanks. I had fallen into this too, but Your right hand held me up, took me out of it, and set me where I could recover. For You have said to man, Behold, the fear of the Lord is wisdom, and, Do not desire to seem wise, because those who claimed to be wise became fools. And I had now found the fine pearl, and I ought to have sold all I had to buy it; and I hesitated.

@@ 2
So I went to Simplicianus, who had been father to Ambrose, now a bishop, when Ambrose received Your grace, and whom Ambrose truly loved as a father. I told him the winding course of my wanderings. When I mentioned that I had read certain books of the Platonists, which Victorinus, once Professor of Rhetoric at Rome (who, I had heard, died a Christian), had translated into Latin, he said how glad he was that I had not stumbled on the writings of other philosophers, which are full of fallacies and deceits, after the elements of this world, whereas the Platonists in every way lead one toward belief in God and His Word. Then, to urge me toward the humility of Christ, which is hidden from the wise and revealed to little ones, he recalled Victorinus himself, whom he had known very closely while he was at Rome; and he told me a story about him that I will not keep silent. For it holds great praise of Your grace, which must be confessed to You: how that aged man, deeply learned and highly skilled in all the liberal arts, who had read and judged so many works of the philosophers; the teacher of so many noble senators; who also, as a mark of his outstanding teaching, had both earned and received a statue in the Roman Forum (something the citizens of this world count a signal honour); he who up to that age had worshipped idols and taken part in the sacrilegious rites to which almost the whole Roman nobility was then given over, and who had filled the people with love of

@@ 3
Anubis, the barking god, and every kind Of monster-god, who once took arms against Neptune and Venus and Minerva:

@@ 4
gods whom Rome had once conquered and now worshipped, all of which the aged Victorinus had defended for so many years with thunderous eloquence; he now did not blush to become the child of Your Christ and a newborn infant at Your font, bending his neck to the yoke of humility and bowing his forehead to the shame of the Cross.

@@ 5
O Lord, Lord, who bowed the heavens and came down, who touched the mountains and they smoked, by what means did You make Your way into that heart? He used to read the holy Scripture, as Simplicianus said, and he studied and searched through all the Christian writings with the greatest care. And he would say to Simplicianus, not openly but privately, as a friend, "You should know that I am already a Christian." Simplicianus would answer, "I will not believe it, nor count you among the Christians, until I see you in the Church of Christ." The other would laugh and reply, "So do walls make Christians?" He said this often, that he was already a Christian; Simplicianus gave the same answer just as often; and the joke about the "walls" was just as often repeated. For he was afraid of offending his friends, proud worshippers of demons, and he thought that from the height of their Babylonian grandeur, as from the cedars of Lebanon which the Lord had not yet broken, their hostility would come crashing down heavily on him. But after he had drawn strength from reading and eager longing, he began to fear that Christ would deny him before the holy angels if he were now afraid to confess Christ before men. He saw himself guilty of a great offence in being ashamed of the sacraments of the humility of Your Word, while not being ashamed of the sacrilegious rites of those proud demons, whose pride he had imitated and whose rites he had taken up. So he grew shameless toward vanity and ashamed before the truth, and suddenly, without warning, he said to Simplicianus (as Simplicianus himself told me), "Let us go to the Church; I want to be made a Christian." Simplicianus, beside himself with joy, went with him. He was admitted to the first sacrament and became a catechumen, and not long afterward he also gave in his name to be reborn through baptism, while Rome marvelled and the Church rejoiced. The proud saw it and were furious; they gnashed their teeth and wasted away. But the Lord God was the hope of Your servant, and he paid no attention to vanities and lying madness.

@@ 6
Finally, when the hour came for him to make his profession of faith (which at Rome those who are about to come to Your grace deliver from a raised place, in the sight of all the faithful, in a fixed form of words learned by heart), the presbyters, he said, offered Victorinus the chance to make his profession more privately, as was usually offered to those who seemed likely to be frightened by shyness. But he chose instead to profess his salvation in the presence of the holy congregation. "For what he had taught in rhetoric was not salvation, and yet he had professed it publicly; how much less, then, should he fear Your gentle flock when speaking Your word, when he had not feared crowds of madmen when speaking his own words!" So when he went up to make his profession, everyone who knew him whispered his name to one another in tones of delight. And who there did not know him? A low murmur ran through the mouths of all the rejoicing crowd: Victorinus! Victorinus! Suddenly they broke out in joy at seeing him; suddenly they fell silent so that they could hear him. He declared the true faith with splendid confidence, and all of them wanted to take him into their very hearts; and by their love and joy they did take him there. Those were the hands they took him with.
