@@ 13
And now I will tell how You set me free from the chain of desire that bound me so tightly to carnal concupiscence, and from the drudgery of worldly affairs, and I will confess it to Your name, O Lord, my helper and my redeemer. With my anxiety growing, I went about my usual business and sighed to You every day. I went to Your Church whenever I was free from the business under whose weight I groaned. Alypius was with me, released from his legal work after his third term as assessor and waiting for someone to sell his advice to, just as I sold skill in speaking, if teaching can really give it. Nebridius, out of regard for our friendship, had now agreed to teach under Verecundus, a citizen and grammarian of Milan and a very close friend of us all, who urgently wanted, and by the right of friendship claimed from our circle, the reliable help he badly needed. So Nebridius was not drawn to this by any wish for gain (he could have made far more of his learning if he had wanted to), but, being a most kind and gentle friend, he would not fail to do a good turn or brush aside our request. He handled this very wisely, though, taking care not to become known to people who are great by this world's standards, and so avoiding the distraction of mind that would follow, since he wanted to keep his mind free and at leisure for as many hours as possible to seek, read or hear something about wisdom.

@@ 14
One day, then, when Nebridius was away (I do not remember why), a man named Pontitianus came to visit Alypius and me. He was our countryman, at least in being an African, and held a high office at the Emperor's court. What he wanted with us I do not know, but we sat down to talk, and it happened that he noticed a book lying on a games table in front of us. He picked it up, opened it, and found, to his surprise, that it was the Apostle Paul; he had assumed it was one of the books I was wearing myself out teaching. At that he smiled, looked at me, and expressed his joy and surprise at suddenly finding this book, and only this one, in front of me. For he was a Christian, baptized, and he often knelt before You, our God, in the Church in frequent and lengthy prayers. When I told him that I was giving those Scriptures a great deal of attention, a conversation began, prompted by his own account, about Antony, the Egyptian monk, whose name was held in great honor among Your servants, though until that hour it was unknown to us. When he found this out, he dwelt all the longer on the subject, telling us about this great man and marvelling at our ignorance of him. We, for our part, were astonished to hear of Your wonderful works, so fully attested, done so recently, almost in our own day, in the true faith and the Catholic Church. All of us were amazed: we, that these things were so great, and he, that they had not reached us.

@@ 15
From there his talk turned to the communities in the monasteries, to their holy way of life, a sweet-smelling fragrance to You, and to the rich fruitfulness of the desert, of which we knew nothing. There was even a monastery at Milan, outside the city walls, full of good brothers and under Ambrose's care, and we had not known it. He went on talking, and we listened in rapt silence. Then he told us how, one afternoon at Triers, while the Emperor was occupied with the games in the circus, he and three companions went out for a walk in the gardens next to the city walls. As it happened, they were walking in pairs: one went off with him, and the other two wandered off on their own. In their wandering these two came upon a small house where some of Your servants lived, poor in spirit, to whom the kingdom of heaven belongs, and there they found a little book containing the life of Antony. One of them began to read it, to marvel at it and to catch fire from it; and as he read, he began to think about taking up such a life and giving up his worldly career to serve You. These two belonged to the officials known as agents for public affairs. Then, suddenly filled with holy love and sober shame, and angry with himself, he turned his eyes on his friend and said, "Tell me, please, what are we trying to achieve with all these labors of ours? What are we aiming at? What are we serving for? Can our hopes at court rise any higher than becoming the Emperor's friends? And in that position, what is not fragile and full of dangers? And through how many dangers do we reach a still greater danger? And when will we even get there? But a friend of God, if I want it, I can become right now." That is what he said. And in the pain of giving birth to a new life, he turned his eyes back to the book and read on, and he was changed within, where You saw, and his mind was stripped of the world, as soon became clear. For as he read, and the waves of his heart rolled and churned, he raged at himself for a while, then saw clearly and decided on the better course. And now, being Yours, he said to his friend, "I have now broken away from those hopes of ours, and I have resolved to serve God; and I am beginning it from this hour, in this place. If you do not want to follow me, do not stand in my way." The other replied that he would stay with him, to share so great a reward and so great a service. So both of them, now Yours, were building the tower at the proper cost, which is leaving all that they had and following You. Then Pontitianus and the man with him, who had been walking in other parts of the garden, came looking for them and arrived at the same place. Finding them, they reminded them that it was time to go back, since the day was far gone. But the two told them their decision and their purpose, and how that will had arisen and become fixed in them, and they asked the others, if they would not join them, at least not to trouble them. The other two, though not changed at all from what they had been, nevertheless wept over themselves, as he told us, congratulated their friends devoutly, and commended themselves to their prayers; and so, with their hearts still dragging along the ground, they went off to the palace. But the other two, fixing their hearts on heaven, stayed in the little house. Both of them were engaged to be married, and when their brides-to-be heard of this, they too dedicated their virginity to God.

@@ 16
This was the story Pontitianus told. But while he was speaking, You, O Lord, were turning me around to face myself. You took me from behind my own back, where I had put myself because I did not want to look at myself, and You set me in front of my own face, so that I might see how foul I was, how crooked and filthy, stained and covered with sores. I looked and was horrified, and I found nowhere to run from myself. And if I tried to turn my gaze away from myself, he went on with his story, and You set me face to face with myself again and pushed me before my own eyes, so that I would discover my wickedness and hate it. I had known it, but I pretended not to see it; I shut my eyes to it and forgot it.

@@ 17
But now, the more fiercely I loved those whose healthy feelings I was hearing about, how they had given themselves wholly to You to be healed, the more I loathed myself in comparison with them. For many years of mine, about twelve, had now slipped away since my nineteenth year, when reading Cicero's Hortensius stirred me to an eager love of wisdom; and I was still putting off turning my back on mere earthly happiness and giving myself to the search for that wisdom, of which not merely the finding but even the seeking ought to be valued above the treasures and kingdoms of the world, even if already found, and above the pleasures of the body, even if they flowed around me at my command. But I, wretched, utterly wretched young man that I was, at the very start of my youth had begged You for chastity and said, "Give me chastity and continence, but not yet." For I was afraid that You would hear me quickly and quickly cure me of the disease of concupiscence, which I wanted satisfied rather than put out. And I had gone down crooked paths in a sacrilegious superstition, not because I was really sure of it, but because I preferred it to the others, which I did not seek out in a spirit of devotion but attacked out of malice.
