@@ 18
And I had thought that the reason I was putting off, day after day, turning my back on the hopes of this world and following You alone was that I could see nothing certain to steer my course by. And now the day had come when I was to be stripped bare before myself, and my conscience was to rebuke me: "Where are you now, my tongue? You said that you would not throw off the baggage of vanity for the sake of a truth that was uncertain. Well, now it is certain, and still that burden weighs you down, while people who have not worn themselves out searching for it, and have not spent ten years and more thinking about it, have had their shoulders set free and have been given wings to fly away." So I was gnawed at inside, and utterly overwhelmed by a terrible shame, while Pontitianus was speaking. When he had finished his story and the business he had come about, he went his way, and I went into myself. What did I not say against myself? With what whips of condemnation did I not lash my soul, to make it follow me as I struggled to go after You! Yet it held back. It refused, but it offered no excuse. Every argument had been used up and refuted; all that was left was a speechless dread, and it feared, as it would fear death, being held back from the flow of that habit by which it was wasting away to death.

@@ 19
Then, in the middle of that great struggle in my inner house, which I had stirred up so violently against my soul in the private chamber of my heart, troubled in mind and face alike, I turned on Alypius. "What is wrong with us?" I cried. "What is this? What did you hear? The unlearned rise up and take heaven by force, and here we are with all our learning, and no heart, wallowing in flesh and blood! Are we ashamed to follow because others have gone ahead, and not ashamed not even to follow?" I said something like this, and my inner fever tore me away from him, while he stared at me in astonishment and said nothing. For I did not sound like myself; my forehead, cheeks, eyes, colour and tone of voice expressed my mind more than the words I spoke. There was a small garden at our lodging, which we were free to use, as we were the whole house, since the master of the house, our host, did not live there. The turmoil in my breast had driven me there, where no one could interrupt the fierce struggle I had begun with myself, until it came to the end that You knew and I did not. I was only going out of my mind in a way that would heal me, dying so as to live, knowing what an evil thing I was, and not knowing what good thing I was soon to become. So I withdrew into the garden, and Alypius followed close behind me. For his being there did not make me any less alone; and how could he leave me in such a state? We sat down as far from the house as we could. I was troubled in spirit, angry with the most violent indignation that I did not enter into Your will and covenant, O my God, which all my bones cried out to me to enter, praising it to the skies. And we do not enter there by ships or chariots or on foot; we do not even need to move as far as I had come from the house to the place where we were sitting. For not only to go there, but to arrive there, was nothing other than to will to go, but to will it strongly and completely; not to twist and toss this way and that a maimed, half-divided will, struggling, with one part rising and the other sinking.

@@ 20
In the very fever of my indecision, I made many movements with my body, the kind that people sometimes want to make but cannot, if they either lack the limbs, or have them tied with bonds, or weakened by illness, or hampered in some other way. So if I tore my hair, if I beat my forehead, if I clasped my knee with my fingers locked together, I did it because I willed it. But I could have willed it and not done it, if my limbs' power of movement had not obeyed. So I did many things where willing was not the same as being able; and I did not do the thing I longed to do incomparably more, the thing I would soon be able to do as soon as I willed it, because as soon as I willed it I would will it completely. For in this matter the ability was the same as the will, and to will was already to do; and yet it was not done. My body obeyed the faintest wish of my soul more easily, moving its limbs at a nod, than my soul obeyed itself in carrying out this great will of its own, which needed only to be willed.

@@ 21
Where does this monstrous thing come from? And why? Let Your mercy shine, so that I may ask, in case the hidden punishments of mankind and the darkest sufferings of the sons of Adam can perhaps give me an answer. Where does this monstrous thing come from? And why? The mind commands the body, and it obeys at once; the mind commands itself, and meets resistance. The mind commands the hand to move, and it does so with such readiness that you can hardly tell the command from its being carried out. And yet the mind is mind, and the hand is body. The mind commands the mind, its own self, to will, and yet it does not. Where does this monstrous thing come from? And why? It commands itself, I say, to will; it would not give the command unless it willed; and yet what it commands is not done. But it does not will fully, and so it does not command fully. For it commands only so far as it wills, and what it commands goes undone just so far as it does not will. For the will commands that there be a will, not some other will, but itself. But it does not command fully, and so what it commands does not happen. For if the will were whole, it would not even command itself to be, because it would already be. So it is not a monstrous thing partly to will and partly not to will; it is a sickness of the mind, which does not rise up wholly, lifted by the truth, because it is weighed down by habit. And so there are two wills, because neither of them is whole, and what one lacks the other has.

@@ 22
Let them perish from Your presence, O God, as empty talkers and deceivers of the mind perish, those who notice that in making a decision there are two wills and then claim that we have two minds of two different natures, one good and the other evil. They themselves are truly evil when they hold these evil views; and they themselves will become good if they hold the truth and agree with the truth, so that Your Apostle may say to them, You were once darkness, but now you are light in the Lord. But they want to be light, not in the Lord but in themselves, imagining that the nature of the soul is the same as what God is; and so they have become a thicker darkness through their terrible arrogance, because they have drawn further away from You, the true Light that enlightens every man who comes into the world. Take care what you say, and blush with shame: come to Him and be enlightened, and your faces will not be put to shame. When I was deliberating about serving the Lord my God at last, as I had long intended, it was I who willed and I who did not will; it was I, I myself. I neither willed completely nor refused completely. So I was at war with myself and torn apart by myself. And this tearing happened to me against my will, and yet it showed not the presence of another mind but the punishment of my own. So it was no longer I who did it, but the sin that dwelt in me, the punishment of a sin committed more freely, because I was a son of Adam.
