Ex  Libris 
C.  K.  OGDEN 


ill 


H 


Digitized  by  tine  Internet  Arcliive 

in  2007  witli  funding  from 

IVIicrosoft  Corporation 


it 


# 


jt 


littp://www.arcliive.org/details/aristotlespolitiOOarisiala 


ARISTOTLE'S 
POLITICS 

TRANSLATED  BY 

BENJAMIN  JOWETT 

WITH   INTRODUCTION,   ANALYSIS   AND    INDEX   BY 

H.  W.  C.  DAVIS,  M.A. 

FELLOW  OF  BALLIOL 


OXFORD 
AT  THE  CLARENDON  PRESS 
1905 


HENRY  FROWDE,  M.A. 

PUBLISHER  TO  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  OX  FOR!) 

LONDON,   EDINBURGH 

NEW  YORK   AND  TORONTO 


stack 
Annex 


3"C 


CONTENTS 


Introduction 

Analysis    . 

The  Politics. 
Book  I . 

,  11 

,  III 

,  IV 

,  V 

,  VI 

,  VII 

,      VIII 
Index 


PAGE 

I 


25 

54 
100 

145 

187 

237 
257 
300 
319 


INTRODUCTION 

The  life  of  Aristotle,  so  far  as  it  illustrates  this  treatise, 
may  be  summarized  in  a  few  words.  He  was  by  birth  a 
Greek,  but  a  native  of  the  small  city  of  Stageira  which  stood 
upon  the  fringe  of  the  Greek  world ;  he  was  therefore  well 
fitted  by  his  origin  to  be  an  impartial,  yet  sympathetic  critic, 
of  the  more  famous  city-states  of  Greece.  In  his  youth  he 
studied  philosophy  at  Athens  under  Plato,  thus  coming  at  the 
most  impressionable  period  of  his  life  into  close  relations  with 
the  profoundest  thinker  whom  Greece  had  yet  produced. 
After  the  death  of  Plato  (347),  he  quitted  Athens  to  spend 
some  years  in  the  service  of  the  new  race  of  monarchs  whose 
mission  it  was  to  diffuse  Greek  culture  through  the  East  and 
at  the  same  time  to  complete  the  destruction  of  all  that  was 
most  valuable  and  characteristic  in  the  political  life  of  Greece. 
At  the  court  of  Hermias,  the  obscure  tyrant  of  the  obscure 
city  of  Atarneus,  Aristotle  had  the  opportunity  of  observing 
the  once  great,  but  then  decadent,  despotism  of  Persia,  to 
which  he  makes  some  references  in  the  Politics.  In  343  or 
342  he  migrated  to  Macedonia,  joined  the  court  of  Philip, 
and  acted  for  three  years  or  so  as  tutor  to  the  youthful 
Alexander.  The  results  of  his  experience  in  Macedonia, 
and  the  drift  of  the  political  teaching  which  he  gave  to  his 
pupil  may  perhaps  be  inferred  from  the  comments  which,  in 
several  passages  of  the  Politics,  he  passes  on  monarchies 
and  tyrannies.  About  the  year  335,  on  the  eve  of  Alex- 
ander's great  campaigns  of  conquest,  the  philosopher  turned 
his  back  on  Macedonia ;  we  may  infer  from  what  he  says  of 
empires,  that  while  he  realized  their  possible  services  to  civili- 


2  Introduction 

zation,  he  was  still  more  alive  to  the  dangers,  moral  and 
other,  which  beset  the  path  of  a  military  and  aggressive  state. 
His  sympathies  were  with  the  past,  not  the  future ;  with 
Sparta  and  Athens  rather  than  with  Macedon;  with  Plato 
rather  than  with  Alexander.  Settling  down  at  Athens,  he 
became  the  leader  of  a  philosophic  school,  the  director  of 
a  brilliant  academy ;  but  he  incurred  the  odium  to  which  a 
friend  of  Macedon  was  naturally  exposed  in  the  city  of 
Demosthenes.  In  323,  after  the  death  of  his  pupil  and  patron, 
he  was  driven  into  exile  by  a  prosecution  for  impiety  which, 
if  he  had  faced  it,  would  probably  have  brought  upon  his  head 
the  fate  of  Socrates.  He  died  in  the  following  year  at 
Chalcis,  a  Macedonian  stronghold.  The  semi-barbarians,  of 
whose  future  he  doubted,  had  been  more  generous  to  him  than 
the  Greeks,  whose  highest  thought  it  had  been  his  life-work 
to  interpret  and  to  vindicate. 

Of  his  literary  work  in  general  this  is  not  the  place  to 
speak.  It  is  enough  to  say  that  he  aimed  at  expounding  in 
the  light  of  his  own  philosophic  principles  all  the  sciences 
which  were  then  recognized,  and  that  he  followed  consis- 
tently the  method,  of  which  the  Politics  are  a  conspicuous 
illustration,  of  combining  induction  with  deductive  reasoning 
from  first  principles,  and  of  testing  his  own  conclusions 
by  a  comparison  with  popular  opinions  and  those  of  other 
teachers.  Encyclopaedic  knowledge  has  never,  before  or 
since,  gone  hand  in  hand  with  a  logic  so  masculine  or  with 
speculation  so  profound.  But  it  is  in  dealing  with  the  moral 
rather  than  the  natural  sciences  that  he  is  greatest,  most  ade- 
quately equipped  with  facts,  and  most  interested  in  his  subject. 
Of  his  work  in  the  moral  sciences  the  final  results  are 
incorporated  in  the  Nicomachean  Ethics  and  the  Politics.  The 
two    treatises    are  intimately   connected.      In  the  Ethics  he 


Introduction 


3 


discusses  the  nature  of  individual  happiness  or  well-being ;  in 
the  Politics  he  treats  of  the  state  as  one  of  the  chief  means 
through  which  the  individual  attains  to  happiness.  The 
object  of  the  Politics  is  both  practical  and  speculative;  to 
explain  the  nature  of  the  ideal  city  in  which  the  end  of  happi- 
ness may  be  completely  realized ;  to  suggest  some  methods 
of  making  existent  states  more  useful  to  the  individual  citizen 
than  they  were  in  Aristotle's  time,  or  had  been  in  the  past. 

Aristotle  is  not,  strictly  speaking,  the  founder  of  political 
science.  In  the  age  of  Pericles,  and  earlier  still,  statesmen 
and  philosophers  had  theorized  about  the  origin  of  society, 
the  relative  merits  of  various  constitutions,  and  other  kindred 
topics.  Though  Socrates  was  more  concerned  with  ethics 
than  with  politics,  he  applied  the  powerful  solvent  of  his 
dialectic  to  many  of  the  political  ideas  which  were  fashionable 
in  his  day.  The  conceptions  of  utility  as  the  ideal  which  the 
statesman  should  pursue,  and  of  scientific  knowledge  as  the 
indispensable  equipment  of  the  statesman,  would  seem  to  have 
had  their  birth  in  the  Socratic  circle.  Plato,  the  pupil  of 
Socrates,  not  content  with  developing  the  suggestions  of  his 
master  and  with  giving  to  the  Socratic  formulae  a  deeper 
meaning,  essayed  a  more  systematic  discussion  of  the  nature 
of  the  state  and  its  right  organization.  In  the  Republic  he 
describes  the  state  as  it  would  appear  if  founded  and  governed 
by  philosophers  ;  in  the  Laius  he  offered  to  the  statesmen  of 
his  age  a  model  more  practicable  and  more  nearly  related  to 
the  experience  of  the  past ;  a  model  which  the  legislator  for 
a  new  colony  might  follow  without  undue  violence  to  Greek 
prejudices  and  opinions.  Although  the  views  of  Plato  are 
sharply,  and  not  always  justly,  criticized  by  Aristotle,  the 
influence  of  the  Republic  and  the  Laivs  is  perceptible  in  many 
places  of  the  Politics  where  they  are  not  mentioned. 

B  2 


4  Introduction 

The  Politics,  in  fact,  would  not  be  so  valuable  as  they  are 
if  they  expressed  the  views  of  an  individual  man  of  genius 
and  nothing  more.  Here  as  elsewhere  it  is  not  the  least  of 
Aristotle's  merits  that  he  epitomized  the  best  thoughts  of 
a  nation  and  of  a  stage  in  human  history.  He  respected  the 
political  thinkers  of  the  past,  both  the  statesmen  and  the 
theorists ;  he  was  loth  to  admit  that  any  institution  or  polity 
which  had  stood  the  test  of  time  could  be  altogether  bad. 
Hence  he  appears  before  us  as  a  mediator  in  the  controversies 
of  his  own  and  the  preceding  ages.  It  is  his  wish  to  lay  bare 
the  grain  of  truth  which  exists  at  the  core  of  every  political 
practice  and  belief.  He  interprets  even  those  ideals  with  which 
he  is  least  in  sympathy.  And  so  we  learn  from  him  what  the 
various  types  of  the  city-state  signified  to  the  Greek  mind ; 
we  are  admitted  under  his  guidance  to  the  penetralia  of  their 
political  thought. 

The  histoiy  of  the  Greek  city-state  we  can  study  for  our- 
selves, with  fewer  sources  of  information,  it  is  true,  than 
Aristotle  had  at  his  command,  but  also  with  a  more  critical 
appreciation  of  their  value  and  a  more  scientific  method  of 
interpretation  than  was  to  be  learned  in  Athenian  schools  of 
the  fourth  century.  We  are  too  in  a  better  position  than 
Aristotle  to  see  the  true  place  of  the  city-state  in  the  evolution 
of  society,  to  appreciate  its  limitations,  to  condemn  its  evils, 
and  to  draw  the  moral  from  its  failure.  We  know,  what  he 
does  not  appear  to  have  suspected,  that  the  careers  of  his 
Macedonian  patrons  had  sealed  the  death-warrant  of  the 
community  which  he  regarded  as  the  highest  that  human 
skill  was  capable  of  framing.  Ampler  experience  has  shown 
us  that  slavery  is  not  the  indispensable  basis  of  a  civilization, 
nor  commerce  always  degrading  to  the  individual  and  destruc- 
tive of  national  morality.     In  the  modem  world  we   have 


Introduction  j" 

before  us  communities  which,  in  defiance  of  his  prophecies, 
have  become  extensive  without  becoming  disunited.  By  his 
own  methods  of  induction  and  comparison  we  can  refute  some 
of  the  laws  which  he  regarded  as  immutable. 

Still  we  must  start  from  Aiistotle.  His  account  of  the 
city-state  may  be  supplemented  and  corrected,  but  not  super- 
seded. The  governing  ideas  of  any  polity  are  always  best 
expressed  by  those  to  whom  they  stand  for  the  absolute  and 
final  truth  ;  and  there  is  no  form  of  polity  which  the  student  of 
political  science  should  study  with  more  care  than  the  city-state. 
Just  because  it  is  comparatively  simple,  just  because  it  is  unlike 
the  states  with  which  we  are  personally  acquainted,  it  contains 
the  key  to  many  modern  problems.  Aristotle  is  the  best  inter- 
preter of  an  essential  link  in  the  chain  of  political  development. 

But  he  is  something  more  than  this,  more  than  a  Greek 
who  states  the  case  of  Greece.  He  is  also  a  philosopher 
and  a  student  of  human  nature.  His  views  as  to  the  origin 
and  ultimate  structure  of  society,  as  to  the  aims  of  civic  life, 
as  to  the  mutual  obligations  of  the  state  and  the  individual,  as 
to  the  nature  of  political  justice,  all  have  a  value  which  is 
independent  of  his  historical  position.  It  is  often  difficult  to 
follow  his  discussions  of  these  and  cognate  subjects.  His 
arguments  are  stated  with  extreme  conciseness,  and  the  train 
of  thought  which  leads  him  from  one  topic  to  another  is  often 
far  from  clear.  But  those  who  have  the  patience  to  wrestle 
with  his  text  will  find  in  it  theories  of  perennial  value,  and 
refutations  of  fallacies  which  are  always  re-emerging.  Nor  is 
it  merely  from  his  more  abstract  disquisitions  that  such  lessons 
are  to  be  extracted.  While  there  could  be  no  greater  mistake 
than  to  apply  his  criticisms  of  democracies  and  aristocracies 
to  modern  governments  which  go  by  the  same  names,  without 
stopping  to  enquire  how  far  the  names  have  changed  their 


6  Introduction 

meanings,  it  is  on  the  other  hand  often  apparent  that  these 
criticisms,  when  the  necessary  qualifications  have  been  made, 
are  as  true  of  the  present  as  they  were  of  Greece.  Of  this 
an  illustiation  may  be  found  in  the  account  of  revolutions  and 
their  causes  which  forms  the  fifth  book  of  the  Politics. 

The  Politics  should  probably  be  regarded  as  an  unfinished 
work.  There  are  not  infrequent  repetitions ;  some  subjects 
which  the  author  promises  to  treat  are  never  treated  ;  and  we 
are  sometimes  at  a  loss  for  the  connecting  link  between  suc- 
cessive books  or  parts  of  the  same  book.  The  traditional 
order  of  the  books  is  probably  not  that  which  Aristotle  con- 
templated, and  has  been  altered  by  most  editors.  The  pre- 
sent translation  follows  the  order  of  Bekker's  first  edition ; 
the  numbering  of  the  books  in  his  octavo  edition  of  1878  has 
been  given  in  brackets  wherever  it  differs  from  that  of  the 
first.  None  of  the  rearrangements  which  have  been  sug- 
gested are  completely  satisfactory.  Whichever  of  them  is 
adopted,  the  reader  will  find  that  positions  assumed  at  an 
earlier  are  only  proved  at  a  later  stage  of  the  argument.  The 
Politics  should  be  treated  as  a  quarry  of  arguments  and 
theories  rather  than  as  an  artistically  constructed  piece  of 
literature.  It  is  best  studied  by  the  collection  and  com- 
parison of  all  the  passages  which  bear  upon  the  same  topic. 
It  is  hoped  that  for  this  purpose  the  subject-headings  in  the 
Index,  which  is  abridged  from  that  of  the  translator,  may 
be  of  service.  A  brief  analysis  is  prefixed  to  the  translation 
with  the  object  of  explaining  the  thread  of  the  argument,  where 
such  a  thread  exists,  of  indicating  the  natural  divisions  of  the 
text,  and  of  enumerating  the  chief  topics  of  discussion. 

The  thanks  of  the  editor  are  due  to  the  Master  of  Balliol 
for  his  kindness  in  revising  the  proof  of  this  Introduction. 

H.  W.  C.  DAVIS. 


BOOK  I. 

cc.  I,  2.    Definition  and  structure  of  the  State. 

The  state  is  the  highest  form  of  community  and  aims  at 
the  highest  good.  How  it  differs  from  other  communities 
will  appear  if  we  examine  the  parts  of  which  it  is  composed 
(c.  i).  It  consists  of  villages  which  consist  of  households. 
The  household  is  founded  upon  the  two  relations  of  male  and 
female,  of  master  and  slave ;  it  exists  to  satisfy  man's  daily 
needs.  The  village,  a  wider  community,  satisfies  a  wider 
range  of  needs.  The  state  aims  at  satisfying  all  the  needs  of 
men.  Men  form  states  to  secure  a  bare  subsistence ;  but  the 
ultimate  object  of  the  state  is  the  good  life.  The  naturalness 
of  the  state  is  proved  by  the  faculty  of  speech  in  man.  In 
the  order  of  Nature  the  state  precedes  the  household  and  the 
individual.  It  is  founded  on  a  natural  impulse,  that  towards 
political  association  (c.  2). 

cc.  3—13.    Household  economy.      The  Slave.      Property. 
Children  and  Wives. 

Let  us  discuss  the  household,  since  the  state  is  composed 
of  households  (c.  3).  First  as  to  slavery.  The  slave  is 
a  piece  of  property  which  is  animate,  and  useful  for  action 
rather  than  for '  production  (c.  4).  Slavery  is  natural ;  in 
every  department  of  the  natural  universe  we  find  the  relation 
of  ruler  and  subject.  There  are  human  beings  who,  without 
possessing  reason,  understand  it.  These  are  natural  slaves 
(c.  5).  But  we  find  persons  in  slavery  who  are  not  natural 
slaves.  Hence  slavery  itself  is  condemned  by  some ;  but 
they  are  wrong.  The  natural  slave  benefits  by  subjection  to 
a  master  (c.  6).     The  art  of  ruling  slaves  differs  from  that  of 


8  Analysts 

ruling  free  men  but  calls  for  no  detailed  description ;  any  one 
who  is  a  natural  master  can  acquire  it  for  himself  (c.  7). 

As  to  property  and  the  modes  of  acquiring  it.  This 
subject  concerns  us  in  so  far  as  property  is  an  indispensable 
substratum  to  the  household  (c.  8).  But  we  do  not  need 
that  form  of  finance  which  accumulates  wealth  for  its  own 
sake.  This  is  unnatural  finance.  It  has  been  made  possible 
by  the  invention  of  coined  money.  It  accumulates  money  by 
means  of  exchange.  Natural  and  unnatural  finance  are  often 
treated  as  though  they  were  the  same,  but  differ  in  their  aims 
(c.  9) ;  also  in  their  subject  matter ;  for  natural  finance  is 
only  concerned  with  the  fruits  of  the  earth  and  animals 
(c.  10).  Natural  finance  is  necessary  to  the  householder; 
he  must  therefore  know  about  live  stock,  agriculture,  possibly 
about  the  exchange  of  the  products  of  the  earth,  such  as 
wood  and  minerals,  for  money.  Special  treatises  on  finance 
exist,  and  the  subject  should  be  specially  studied  by  statesmen 

(c.  II).  .    .       .        • 

Lastly,  we  must  discuss  and  distinguish  the  relations  of 
husband  to  wife,  of  father  to  child  (c.  12).  In  household 
management  persons  call  for  more  attention  than  things  ;  free 
persons  for  more  than  slaves.  Slaves  are  only  capable  of  an 
inferior  kind  of  virtue.  Socrates  was  wrong  in  denying  that 
there  are  several  kinds  of  virtue.  Still  the  slave  must  be 
trained  in  virtue.  The  education  of  the  free  man  will  be 
subsequently  discussed  (c.  1 3). 

BOOK  II. 

cc.  1-8.    Ideal  Commonivealths — Plato^  Phaleas,  H'lppodamus. 

To  ascertain  the  nature  of  the  ideal  state  we  should  start 
by  examining  both  the  best  states  of  history  and  the  best  that 


Analysis  9 

theorists  have  imagined.      Otherwise  we  might  waste    our 
time  over  problems  which  others  have  already  solved. 

Among  theorists,  Plato  in  the  Republic  raises  the  most 
fundamental  questions.  He  desires  to  abolish  private  property 
and  the  family  (c.  i).  But  the  end  which  he  has  in  view  is 
wrong.  He  wishes  to  make  all  his  citizens  absolutely  alike ; 
but  the  differentiation  of  functions  is  a  law  of  nature.  There 
can  be  too  much  unity  in  a  state  (c.  2).  And  the  means  by 
which  he  would  promote  unity  are  wrong.  The  abolition  of 
property  will  produce,  not  remove,  dissension.  Communism 
of  wives  and  children  will  destroy  natural  affection  (c.  3). 
Other  objections  can  be  raised ;  but  this  is  the  fatal  one 
(c.  4).  To  descend  to  details.  The  advantages  to  be 
expected  from  communism  of  property  would  be  better 
secured  if  private  property  were  used  in  a  liberal  spirit  to 
relieve  the  wants  of  others.  Private  property  makes  men 
happier,  and  enables  them  to  cultivate  such  virtues  as 
generosity.  The  Republic  makes  unity  the  result  of  uni- 
formity among  the  citizens,  which  is  not  the  case.  The 
good  sense  of  mankind  has  always  been  against  Plato,  and 
experiment    would    show    that    his    idea    is    impracticable 

(c.  5). 

Plato  sketched  another  ideal  state  in  tUe  Laius ;  it  was 
meant  to  be  more  practicable  than  the  other.  In  the  Laivs 
he  abandoned  communism,  but  otherwise  upheld  the  leading 
ideas  of  the  earlier  treatise,  except  that  he  made  the  new 
state  larger  and  too  large.  He  forgot  to  discuss  foreign 
relations,  and  to  fix  a  limit  of  private  property,  and  to  restrict 
the  increase  of  population,  and  to  distinguish  between  ruler 
and  subject.  The  form  of  government  which  he  proposed 
was  bad  (c.  6). 


I  o  Analysis 

Phaleas  of  Chalcedon  made  equal  distribution  of  property 
the  main  feature  of  his  scheme.  This  would  be  difficult 
to  effect,  and  would  not  meet  the  evils  which  Phaleas 
had  in  mind.  Dissensions  arise  from  deeper  causes  than 
inequality  of  wealth.  His  state  would  be  weak  against 
foreign  foes.  His  reforms  would  anger  the  rich  and  not 
satisfy  the  poor  (c.  7). 

Hippodamus,  who  was  not  a  practical  politician,  aimed 
at  symmetry.  In  his  state  there  were  to  be  three  classes, 
three  kinds  of  landed  property,  three  sorts  of  laws.  He 
also  proposed  to  (i)  create  a  Court  of  Appeal,  {2)  let  juries 
qualify  their  verdicts,  (3)  reward  those  who  made  discoveries 
of  public  utility.  His  classes  and  his  property  system  were 
badly  devised.  Qualified  verdicts  are  impossible  since  jurymen 
may  not  confer  together.  The  law  about  discoveries  would 
encourage  men  to  tamper  with  the  Constitution.  Now  laws 
when  obsolete  and  absurd  should  be  changed ;  but  needless 
changes  diminish  the  respect  for  law  (c.  8). 

cc.  9—12.    The  best  existent  states — Sparta,  Crete,  and 
Carthage — Greek  lawgivers. 

The  Spartans  cannot  manage  their  serf  population.  Their 
women  are  too  influential  and  too  luxurious.  Their  property 
system  has  concentrated  all  wealth  in  a  few  hands.  Hence 
the  citizen  body  has  decreased.  There  are  points  to  criticize 
in  the  Ephorate,  the  Senate,  the  Kingship,  the  common 
meals,  the  Admiralty.  The  Spartan  and  his  state  are  only 
fit  for  war.  Yet  even  in  war  Sparta  is  hampered  by  the  want 
of  a  financial  system  (c.  9). 

The  Cretan  cities  resemble  Sparta  in  their  constitutions, 
but   are   more  primitive.      Their  common   meals  are  better 


Analysis  1 1 

managed.  But  the  Cosmi  are  worse  than  the  Ephors.  The 
Cretan  constitution  is  a  narrow  and  factious  oligarchy ;  the 
cities  are  saved  from  destruction  only  by  their  inaccessibility 
(c.  lo). 

The  Carthaginian  polity  is  highly  praised,  and  not  without 
reason.  It  may  be  compared  with  the  Spartan ;  it  is  an 
oligarchy  with  some  democratic  features.  It  lays  stress  upon 
wealth ;  in  Carthage  all  offices  are  bought  and  sold.  Also, 
one  man  may  hold  several  offices  together.  These  are  bad. 
features.  But  the  discontent  of  the  people  is  soothed  by 
schemes  of  emigration  (c.  ii). 

Of  lawgivers,  Solon  was  the  best ;  conservative  when 
possible,  and  a  moderate  democrat.  About  Philolaus,  Cha- 
rondas,  Phaleas,  Draco,  Pittacus,  and  Androdamas  there  is 
little  to  be  said  (c.  1 2). 

BOOK   III. 

cc.  1-5-    The  Citizen,  civic  virtue,  and  t he  civic  lody. 

How  are  we  to  define  a  citizen  ?  He  is  more  than  a  mere 
denizen ;  private  rights  do  not  make  a  citizen.  He  is  ordi- 
narily one  who  possesses  political  power ;  who  sits  on  juries 
and  in  the  assembly.  But  it  is  hard  to  find  a  definition  which 
applies  to  all  so-called  citizens.  To  define  him  as  the  son  of 
citizen  parents  is  futile  (c.  i).  Some  say  that  his  civic  rights 
must  have  been  justly  acquired.  But  he  is  a  citizen  who  has 
political  power,  however  acquired  (c.  2).  Similarly  the  state 
is  defined  by  reference  to  the  distribution  of  political  power ; 
when  the  mode  of  distribution  is  changed  a  new  state  comes 
into  existence  (c.  3). 

The  good  citizen  may  not  be  a  good  man  ;  the  good  citizen 
is  one  who  does  good  service  to  his  state,  and  this  state  may 


1 2  Analysis 

be  bad  in  principle.  In  a  constitutional  state  the  good  citizen 
knows  both  how  to  rule  and  how  to  obey.  The  good  man 
is  one  who  is  fitted  to  rule.  But  the  citizen  in  a  constitu- 
tional state  learns  to  rule  by  obeying  orders.  Therefore  citizen- 
ship in  such  a  state  is  a  moral  training  (c.  4). 

Mechanics  will  not  be  citizens  in  the  best  state.  Extreme 
democracies,  and  some  oligarchies,  neglect  this  rule.  But  cir- 
cumstances oblige  them  to  do  this.  They  have  no  choice 
(c.  5). 

cc.  6-13.    The  Classification  of  Constitutions  \  Democracy 
and  Oligarchy  ;  Kingship. 

The  aims  of  the  state  are  two;  to  satisfy  man's  social 
instinct,  and  to  fit  him  for  the  good  life.  Political  rule 
differs  from  that  over  slaves  in  aiming  primarily  at  the  good 
of  those  who  are  ruled  (c.  6).  Constitutions  are  bad  or  good 
according  as  the  common  welfare  is,  or  is  not,  their  aim. 
Of  good  Constitutions  there  are  three :  Monarchy,  Aris- 
tocracy, and  Polity.  Of  bad  there  are  also  three  :  Tyranny, 
Oligarchy,  Extreme  Democracy.  The  bad  are  perversions 
of  the  good  (c.  7). 

Democracies  and  Oligarchies  are  not  made  by  the  numeri- 
cal proportion  of  the  rulers  to  the  ruled.  Democracy  is  the 
rule  of  the  poor;  oligarchy  is  that  of  the  rich  (c.  8). 
Democrats  take  Equality  for  their  motto ;  oligarchs  believe 
that  political  rights  should  be  unequal  and  proportionate  to 
wealth.  But  both  sides  miss  the  true  object  of  the  state, 
which  is  virtue.-  Those  who  do  most  to  promote  virtue 
deserve  the  greatest  share  of  power  (c.  9).  On  the  same 
principle,  Justice  is  not  the  will  of  the  majority  or  of  the 
wealthier,  but  that  course  of  action  which  the  moral  aim  of 


Analysis  1 3 

the  state  requires  (c.  lo).  But  are  the  Many  or  the  Few 
likely  to  be  the  better  nilers  ?  It  would  be  unreasonable  to 
give  the  highest  offices  to  the  Many.  But  they  have  a 
faculty  of  criticism  which  fits  them  for  deliberative  and 
judicial  power.  The  good  critic  need  not  be  an  expert ; 
experts  are  sometimes  bad  judges.  Moreover,  the  Many  have 
a  greater  stake  in  the  city  than  the  Few.  But  the  governing 
body,  whether  Few  or  Many,  must  be  held  in  check  by  the 
laws  (c.  1 1).  On  what  principle  should  political  power  be 
distributed  ?  Granted  that  equals  deserve  equal  shares  ;  who 
are  these  equals  ?  Obviously  those  who  are  equally  able  to 
be  of  service  to  the  state  (c.  12).  Hence  there  is  something 
in  the  claims  advanced  by  the  wealthy,  the  free  born,  the 
noble,  the  highly  gifted.  But  no  one  of  these  classes  should 
be  allowed  to  rule  the  rest.  A  state  should  consist  of  men 
who  are  equal,  or  nearly  so,  in  wealth,  in  birth,  in  moral  and 
intellectual  excellence.  The  principle  which  underlies  Ostra- 
cism is  plausible.  But  in  the  ideal  state,  if  a  pre-eminent 
individual  be  found,  he  should  be  made  a  king  (c.  13). 

cc.  14—18.  The  Forms  of  Monarchy. 
Of  Monarchy  there  are  five  kinds,  (i)  the  Spartan,  (2)  the 
Barbarian,  (3)  the  elective  dictatorship,  (4)  the  Heroic,  (5) 
Absolute  Kingship  (c.  14).  The  last  of  these  forms  might 
appear  the  best  polity  to  some ;  that  is,  if  the  king  acts  as  the 
embodiment  of  law.  For  he  will  dispense  from  the  law  in 
the  spirit  of  the  law.  But  this  power  would  be  less  abused  if 
reserved  for  the  Many.  Monarchy  arose  to  meet  the  needs 
of  primitive  society  ;  it  is  now  obsolete  and  on  various  grounds 
objectionable  (c.  15).  It  tends  to  become  hereditary;  it 
subjects  equals  to   the   rule  of  an  equal.      The   individual 


14  Analysis 

monarch  may  be  misled  by  his  passions,  and  no  single  man 
can  attend  to  all  the  duties  of  government  (c.  i6).  One  case 
alone  can  be  imagined  in  which  Absolute  Kingship  would  be 
just(c.  17). 

Let  us  consider  the  origin  and  nature  of  the  best  polity, 
now  that  we  have  agreed  not  to  call  Absolute  Kingship  the 
best  (c.  18). 

BOOK    IV  (VI). 

cc.  I— 10.    Variations  of  the  main  types  of  Constitutions. 

Political  science  should  study  (i)  the  ideal  state,  (2)  those 
states  which  may  be  the  best  obtainable  under  special  circum- 
stances, and  even  (3)  those  which  are  essentially  bad.  For 
the  statesman  must  sometimes  make  the  best  of  a  bad  Con- 
stitution (c.  i).  Of  our  six  main  types  of  state,  Kingship 
and  Aristocracy  have  been  discussed  (cf.  Bk.  Ill,  c.  14  fol.). 
Let  us  begin  by  dealing  with  the  other  four  and  their  divisions, 
enquiring  also  when  and  why  they  may  be  desirable  (c?  2). 

First  as  to  Democracy  and  Oligarchy.  The  common 
view  that  Democracy  and  Oligarchy  should  be  taken  as  the 
main  types  of  Constitution  is  at  variance  with  our  own  view 
and  wrong  (c.  3).  So  is  the  view  that  the  numerical  propor- 
tion of  rulers  to  ruled  makes  the  difference  between  these  two 
t5^es;  in  a  Democracy  the  Many  are  also  the  poor,  in  an 
Oligarchy  the  Few  are  also  the  wealthy.  In  every  state 
the  distinction  between  rich  and  poor  is  the  most  funda- 
mental of  class-divisions.  Still  Oligarchy  and  Democracy 
are  important  types ;  and  their  variations  arise  from  differences 
in  the  character  of  the  rich  and  the  poor  by  whom  they  are 
ruled. 

Of  Democracies  there  are  four  kinds.     The  worst,  ex- 


Analysis  i  f 

treme  Democracy,  is  that  in  which  all  offices  are  open  to 
all,  and  the  will  of  the  people  overrides  all  law  (c.  4).  Of 
Oligarchies  too  there  are  four  kinds ;  the  worst  is  that  in 
which  offices  are  hereditary  and  the  magistrates  uncontrolled 
by  law  (c.  5).  These  variations  arise  under  circumstances 
which  may  be  briefly  described  (c.  6). 

Of  Aristocracy  in  the  strict  sense  there  is  but  one  form, 
that  in  which  the  best  men  alone  are  citizens  (c.  7). 

Polity  is  a  compromise  between  Democracy  and  Oligarchy, 
but  inclines  to  the  Democratic  side.  Many  so-called  Aris- 
tocracies are  really  Polities  (c.  8).  There  are  different 
ways  of  effecting  the  compromise  which  makes  a  Polity.  The 
Laconian  Constitution  is  an  example  of  a  successful  com- 
promise (c.  9). 

Tyranny  is  of  three  kinds:  (i)  the  barbarian  despotism, 
and  (2)  the  elective  dictatorship  have  already  been  discussed  ; 
in  both  there  is  rule  according  to  law  over  willing  subjects. 
But  in  (3)  the  strict  form  of  tyranny,  there  is  the  lawless  rule 
of  one  man  over  unwilling  subjects  (c.  10). 

cc.  1 1-13.  Of  the  Best  State  both  in  general  and  under  special 
circumstances. 
For  the  average  city-state  the  best  constitution  will  be  a 
mean  between  the  rule  of  rich  and  poor ;  the  middle-class 
will  be  supreme.  No  state  will  be  well  administered  unless 
the  middle-class  holds  sway.  The  middle-class  is  stronger 
in  large  than  in  small  states.  Hence  in  Greece  it  has  rarely 
attained  to  power ;  especially  as  democracy  and  oligarchy 
were  aided  by  the  influence  of  the  leading  states  (c.  li). 
No  constitution  can  dispense  with  the  support  of  the  strongest 
class  in  the  state.      Hence  Democracy  and  Oligarchy  are  the 


1 6  Analysis 

only  constitutions  possible  in  some  states.  But  in  these  cases 
the  legislator  shoiJd  conciliate  the  middle-class  (c.  12). 
Whatever  form  of  constitution  be  adopted  there  are  expedients 
to  be  noted  which  may  help  in  preserving  it  (c.  1 3). 

cc.  14—16.  Hoiv  to  proceed  in  framing  a  Constitution. 
The  legislator  must  pay  attention  to  three  subjects  in  par- 
ticular ;  (a)  The  Deliberative  Assembly  which  is  different  in 
each  form  of  constitution  (c.  14).  [b)  The  Executive. 
Here  he  must  know  what  offices  are  indispensable  and  which 
of  them  may  be  conveniently  combined  in  the  person  of  one 
magistrate ;  also  whether  the  same  offices  should  be  supreme 
in  every  state ;  also  which  of  the  twelve  or  more  methods  of 
making  appointments  should  be  adopted  in  each  case  (c.  15). 
(c)  The  Courts  of  Law.  Here  he  must  consider  the  kinds 
of  law-courts,  their  spheres  of  action,  their  methods  of 
procedure  (c.  16). 

BOOK   V  (VIII). 
cc.  1—4.    Of  Revolutions^  and  their  causes  in  general. 

Ordinary  states  are  founded  on  erroneous  ideas  of  justice, 
which  lead  to  discontent  and  revolution.  Of  revolutions 
some  are  made  to  introduce  a  new  Constitution,  others  to 
modify  the  old,  others  to  put  the  working  of  the  Constitution 
in  new  hands.  Both  Democracy  and  Oligarchy  contain 
inherent  flaws  which  lead  to  revolution,  but  Democracy  is  the 
more  stable  of  the  two  types  (c.  I ). 

We  may  distinguish  between  the  frame  of  mind  which 
fosters  revolution,  the  objects  for  which  it  is  started,  and  the 
provocative  causes  (c.  2).  The  latter  deserve  a  more  detailed 
account  (c.  3).     Trifles  may  be  the  occasion  but  are  never 


Analysis  1 7 

the  true  cause  of  a  sedition.  One  common  cause  is  the 
aggrandizement  of  a  particular  class;  another  is  a  feud  be- 
tween rich  and  poor  when  they  are  evenly  balanced  and 
there  is  no  middle-class  to  mediate.  As  to  the  manner  of 
effecting  a  revolution  :  it  may  be  carried  through  by  force  or 
fraud  (c.  4). 

cc.  5~I2.      Revolutions  in  particular  States^  and  hoiu 
revolutions  may  be  avoided. 

(a)  In  Democracies  revolutions  may  arise  from  a  persecu- 
tion of  the  rich ;  or  when  a  demagogue  becomes  a  general,  or 
when  politicians  compete  for  the  favour  of  the  mob  (c.  5). 
{}))  In  Oligarchies  the  people  may  rebel  against  oppression  ; 
ambitious  oligarchs  may  conspire,  or  appeal  to  the  people, 
or  set  up  a  tyrant.  Oligarchies  are  seldom  destroyed  except 
by  the  feuds  of  their  own  members ;  unless  they  employ 
a  mercenary  captain,  who  may  become  a  tyrant  (c.  6).  (c) 
In  Aristocracies  and  Polities  the  injustice  of  the  ruling  class 
may  lead  to  revolution,  but  less  often  in  Polities.  Aristo- 
cracies may  also  be  ruined  by  an  unprivileged  class,  or  an 
ambitious  man  of  talent.  Aristocracies  tend  to  become 
oligarchies.  Also  they  are  liable  to  gradual  dissolution ; 
which  is  true  of  Polities  as  well  (c.  7). 

The  best  precautions  against  sedition  are  these  :  to  avoid 
illegality  and  frauds  upon  the  unprivileged ;  to  maintain  good 
feeling  between  rulers  and  ruled ;  to  watch  destructive  agen- 
cies ;  to  alter  property  qualifications  from  time  to  time ;  to  let 
no  individual  or  class  become  too  powerful ;  not  to  let  magis- 
tracies be  a  source  of  gain  ;  to  beware  of  class-oppression  (c.  8). 
In  all  magistrates  we  should  require  loyalty,  ability,  and  jus- 
tice ;  we  should  not  carry  the  principle  of  the  constitution 


1 8  Analysis 

to  extremes ;  we  should  educate  the  citizens  in  the  spirit  of 
a  constitution  (c.  9). 

{d)  The  causes  which  destroy  and  the  means  which  pre- 
serve a  Monarchy  must  be  considered  separately.  Let  us 
first  distinguish  between  Tyranny  and  Kingship.  Tyranny 
combines  the  vices  of  Democracy  and  Oligarchy.  Kingship 
is  exposed  to  the  same  defects  as  Aristocracy.  But  both 
these  kinds  of  Monarchy  are  especially  endangered  by  the 
insolence  of  their  representatives  and  by  the  fear  or  contempt 
which  they  inspire  in  others.  Tyranny  is  weak  against  both 
external  and  domestic  foes  ;  Kingship  is  strong  against  inva- 
sion, weak  against  sedition  (c.  10).  Moderation  is  the  best 
preservative  of  Kingship.  Tyranny  may  rely  on  the  traditional 
expedients  of  demoralizing  and  dividing  its  subjects,  or  it  may 
imitate  Kingship  by  showing  moderation  in  expenditure,  and 
courtesy  and  temperance  in  social  relations,  by  the  wise 
use  of  ministers,  by  holding  the  balance  evenly  between  the 
rich  and  poor  (c.  1 1),  But  the  Tyrannies  of  the  past  have 
been  short-lived. 

Plato's  discussion  of  revolutions  in  the  Republic  is  inade- 
quate; e.g.  he  does  not  explain  the  results  of  a  revolution 
against  a  tyranny,  and  could  not  do  so  on  his  theory ;  nor  is 
he  correct  about  the  cause  of  revolution  in  an  Oligarchy ; 
nor  does  he  distinguish  between  the  different  varieties  of 
Oligarchy  and  Democracy  (c.  12). 

BOOK   VI  (VII). 

cc.  1-8.     Concerning  the  proper  organisation  of  Democracies 

and  Oligarchies. 

(A)  Democracies  differ  inter  se  (i)  according  to  the  character 

of  the  citizen  body,  (2)  according  to  the  mode  in  which  the 


Analysis  1 9 

characteristic  features  of  democracy  are  combined  (c.  i). 
Liberty  is  the  first  principle  of  democracy.  The  results  of 
liberty  are  that  the  numerical  majority  is  supreme,  and  that 
each  man  lives  as  he  likes.  From  these  characteristics  we 
may  easily  infer  the  other  features  of  democracy  (c.  2).  In 
oligarchies  it  is  not  the  numerical  majority,  but  the  wealthier 
men,  who  are  supreme.  Both  these  principles  are  unjust  if 
the  supreme  authority  is  to  be  absolute  and  above  the  law. 
Both  numbers  and  wealth  should  have  their  share  of 
influence.  But  it  is  hard  to  find  the  true  principles  of  political 
justice,  and  harder  still  to  make  men  act  upon  them  (c.  3). 
Democracy  has  four  species  (cf.  Bk.  IV,  c.  4).  The  best 
is  (i)  an  Agricultural  Democracy,  in  which  the  magistrates 
are  elected  by,  and  responsible  to,  the  citizen  body,  while 
each  office  has  a  property  qualification  proportionate  to  its 
importance.  These  democracies  should  encourage  agriculture 
by  legislation.  The  next  best  is  (2)  the  Pastoral  Democracy. 
Next  comes  (3)  the  Commercial  Democracy.  Worst  of  all  is 
(4)  the  Extreme  Democracy  with  manhood  suffrage  (c.  4). 

It  is  harder  to  preserve  than  to  found  a  Democracy.  To 
preserve  it  we  must  prevent  the  poor  from  plundering  the 
rich ;  we  must  not  exhaust  the  public  revenues  by  giving  pay 
for  the  performance  of  public  duties ;  we  must  prevent  the 
growth  of  a  pauper  class  (c.  5). 

(B)  The  modes  of  founding  Oligarchies  call  for  little  ex- 
planation. Careful  organization  is  the  best  way  of  preserving 
these  governments  (c.  6).  Much  depends  on  the  military 
arrangements ;  oligarchs  must  not  make  their  subjects  too 
powerful  an  element  in  the  army.  Admission  to  the  governing 
body  should  be  granted  on  easy  conditions.  Office  should  be 
made  a  burden,  not  a  source  of  profit  (c.  7). 
c  2 


2  o  Analysis 

Both  in  oligarchies  and  democracies  the  right  arrangement 
of  offices  is  important.  Some  kinds  of  office  are  necessary  in 
every  state ;  others  are  peculiar  to  special  types  of  state 
(c.  8). 

BOOK  VII  (IV). 

cc.  1—3.     The  Sumtnutn  Bonumfor  ind'ti)iduals  and  states. 

Before  constructing  the  ideal  state  we  must  know  what 
is  the  most  desirable  life  for  states  and  individuals.  Trae 
happiness  flows  from  the  possession  of  wisdom  and  virtue, 
and  not  from  the  possession  of  external  goods.  But  a 
virtuous  life  must  be  equipped  with  external  goods  as 
instruments.  These  laws  hold  good  of  both  states  and 
individuals  (c.  i).  But  does  the  highest  virtue  consist  in 
contemplation  or  in  action  ?  The  states  of  the  past  have 
lived  for  action  in  the  shape  of  war  and  conquest.  But  war 
cannot  be  regarded  as  a  reasonable  object  for  a  state  (c.  2). 
A  virtuous  life  implies  activity,  but  activity  may  be  speculative 
as  well  as  practical.  Those  are  wrong  who  regard  the  life  of 
a  practical  politician  as  degrading.  But  again  they  are  wrong 
who  treat  political  power  as  the  highest  good  (c.  3). 

cc.  4-1 2.     A  picture  of  the  Ideal  State. 

We  must  begin  by  considering  the  population  and  the 
territory.  The  former  should  be  as  small  as  we  can 
make  it  without  sacrificing  independence  and  the  capacity 
for  a  moral  life.  The  smaller  the  population  the  more 
manageable  it  will  be  (c.  4).  The  territory  must  be  large 
enough  to  supply  the  citizens  with  the  means  of  living 
liberally    and    temperately,    with    an    abundance   of   leisure. 


Analysis  2  r 


The  city  should  be  in  a  central  position  (c.  5).  Communica- 
tion with  the  sea  is  desirable  for  economic  and  military 
reasons ;  but  the  moral  effects  of  sea-trade  are  bad.  If  the 
state  has  a  marine,  the  port  town  should  be  at  some  distance 
from  the  city  (c.  6). 

The  character  of  the  citizens  should  be  a  mean  between  that 
of  Asiatics  and  that  of  the  northern  races ;  intelligence  and 
high  spirit  should  be  harmoniously  blended  as  they  are  in 
some  Greek  races  (c.  7).  We  must  distinguish  the  members 
of  the  state  from  those  who  are  necessary  as  its  servants, 
but  no  part  of  it.  There  must  be  men  who  are  able  to 
provide  food,  to  practise  the  arts,  to  bear  arms,  to  carry 
on  the  work  of  exchange,  to  supervise  the  state  religion, 
to  exercise  political  and  judicial  functions  (c.  8).  But  of 
these  classes  we  should  exclude  from  the  citizen  body  (i)  the 
mechanics,  (2)  the  traders,  (3)  the  husbandmen.  Warriors, 
rulers,  priests  remain  as  eligible  for  citizenship.  The  same 
persons  should  exercise  these  three  professions,  but  at 
different  periods  of  life.  Ownership  of  land  should  be 
confined  to  them  (c.  9).  Such  a  distinction  between  a  ruling 
and  a  subject  class,  based  on  a  difference  of  occupation,  is 
nothing  new.  It  still  exists  in  Egypt,  and  the  custom 
of  common  meals  in  Crete  and  Italy  proves  that  it  formerly 
existed  there.  Most  of  the  valuable  rules  of  politics  have 
been  discovered  over  and  over  again  in  the  course  of  history. 

In  dealing  with  the  land  of  the  state  we  must  distinguish 
between  public  demesnes  and  private  estates.  Both  kinds 
of  land  should  be  tilled  by  slaves  or  barbarians  of  a  servile 
disposition  (c.  10).  The  site  of  the  city  should  be  chosen 
with  regard  (i)  to  public  health,  (2)  to  political  convenience, 
(3)  to  strategic  requirements.     The  ground-plan  of  the  city 


2  2  Analysis 

should  be  regular  enough  for  beauty,  not  so  regular  as  to 
make  defensive  warfare  difficult.  Walls  are  a  practical  neces- 
sity (c.  1 1).  It  is  well  that  the  arrangement  of  the  buildings 
in  the  city  should  be  carefully  thought  out  (c.  12). 

cc.  13-17.    The  Educational  System  of  the  Ideal  State,  its  aim, 
and  early  stages. 

The  nature  and  character  of  the  citizens  must  be  determined 
with  reference  to  the  kind  of  happiness  which  we  desire  them 
to  pursue.  Happiness  was  defined  in  the  Ethics  as  the  perfect 
exercise  of  virtue,  the  latter  term  being  understood  not  in  the 
conditional,  but  in  the  absolute  sense.  Now  a  man  acquires 
virtue  of  this  kind  by  the  help  of  nature,  habit,  and  reason 
(c.  1 3).  Habit  and  reason  are  the  fruits  of  education,  which 
must  therefore  be  discussed. 

The  citizens  should  be  educated  to  obey  when  young 
and  to  rule  when  they  are  older.  Rule  is  their  ultimate 
and  highest  function.  Since  the  good  ruler  is  the  same  as 
the  good  man,  our  education  must  be  so  framed  as  to  produce 
the  good  man.  It  should  develope  all  man's  powers  and 
fit  him  for  all  the  activities  of  life ;  but  the  highest  powers 
and  the  highest  activities  must  be  the  supreme  care  of 
education.  An  education  which  is  purely  military,  like  the 
Laconian,  neglects  this  principle  (c.  14).  The  virtues  of 
peace  (intellectual  culture,  temperance,  justice)  are  the  most 
necessary  for  states  and  individuals ;  war  is  nothing  but 
a  means  towards  securing  peace.  But  education  must  follow 
the  natural  order  of  human  development,  beginning  with  the 
body,  dealing  next  with  the  appetites,  and  training  the 
intellect  last  of  all  (c.  15). 

To  produce   a   healthy  physique  the    legislator  must  fix 


Analysis  2  3 

the  age  of  marriage,  regulate  the  physical  condition  of  the 
parents,  provide  for  the  exposure  of  infants,  and  settle  the 
duration  of  marriage  (c.  16).  He  must  also  prescribe  a 
physical  training  for  infants  and  young  children.  For  their 
moral  education  the  very  young  should  be  committed  to 
overseers ;  these  should  select  the  tales  which  they  are  told, 
their  associates,  the  pictures,  plays,  and  statues  which  they 
see.  From  five  to  seven  years  of  age  should  be  the  period 
of  preparation  for  intellectual  training  (c.  1 7). 

BOOK  VIII  (V). 

cc.  1—7.      The  Ideal  Education  continued.     Its  Music  and 
Gymnastic. 

Education  should  be  under  state-control  and  the  same  for 
all  the  citizens  (c.  i).  It  should  comprise  those  useful  studies 
which  every  one  must  master,  but  none  which  degrade  the 
mind  or  body  (c.  2).  Reading,  writing,  and  drawing  have 
always  been  taught  on  the  score  of  their  utility ;  gymnastic  as 
producing  valour.  Music  is  taught  as  a  recreation,  but  it 
serves  a  higher  purpose.  The  noble  employment  of  leisure 
is  the  highest  aim  which  a  man  can  pursue ;  and  music  is 
valuable  for  this  purpose.  The  same  may  be  said  of  drawing, 
and  other  subjects  of  education  have  the  same  kind  of  value 

(c.3). 

Gymnastic  is  the  first  stage  of  education ;  but  we  must  not 

develope    the   valour   and    physique  of  our   children   at  the 

expense  of  the  mind,  as  they  do  in  Sparta.     Until  puberty, 

and  for  three  years  after,   bodily  exercise   should  be  light 

(c.    4).     Music,   if  it  were  a  mere  amusement,  should  not 

be  taught  to  children  ;    they   would  do  better   by  listening 


2  4  Analysis 

to  professionals.  But  music  is  a  moral  discipline  and  a 
rational  enjoyment  (c.  5).  By  learning  music  children  become 
better  critics  and  are  given  a  suitable  occupation.  When  of 
riper  age  they  should  abandon  music ;  professional  skill  is  not 
for  them ;  nor  should  they  be  taught  difficult  instruments 
(c.  6).  The  various  musical  harmonies  should  be  used  for 
different  purposes.  Some  inspire  virtue,  others  valour,  others 
enthusiasm.  The  ethical  harmonies  are  those  which  children 
should  learn.  The  others  may  be  left  to  professionals.  The 
Dorian  harmony  is  the  best  for  education.  The  Phrygian  is 
bad ;  but  the  Lydian  may  be  beneficial  to  children. 

Cetera  desunt. 


THE  POLITICS 

BOOK  I 

Every  state  is  a  community    of  some    kind,   and  every  I.  1 
community  is  established  with   a  view   to  some  good;    for    TV 
mankind   always  act   in   order   to   obtain   that    which    they  1252  a 
think    good.      But,   if  all   communities  aim  at    some  good, 
the  state  or  political  community,  which  is  the  highest  of  all, 
and   which  embraces  all    the    rest,   aims,   and   in    a   greater 
degree  than  any  other,  at  the  highest  good. 

Now  there  is  an  erroneous  opinion  ^  that  a  statesman,  king,  2 
householder,  and  master  are  the  same,  and  that  they  differ, 
not  in  kind,  but  only  in  the  number  of  their  subjects.  For 
example,  the  ruler  over  a  few  is  called  a  master ;  over  more, 
the  manager  of  a  household;  over  a  still  larger  number, 
a  statesman  or  king,  as  if  there  were  no  difference  between 
a  great  household  and  a  small  state.  The  distinction  which 
is  made  between  the  king  and  the  statesman  is  as  follows : 
When  the  government  is  personal,  the  ruler  is  a  king  ;  when, 
according  to  the  principles  of  the  political  science,  the  citizens 
rule  and  are  ruled  in  turn,  then  he  is  called  a  statesman. 

But  all  this  is  a  mistake ;  for  governments  differ  in  kind,  3 
as  will  be  evident  to  any  one  who  considers  the  matter 
according  to  the  method^  which  has  hitherto  guided  us. 
As  in  other  departments  of  science,  so  in  politics,  the  com- 
pound should  always  be  resolved  into  the  simple  elements  or 
least  parts  of  the  whole.  We  must  therefore  look  at  the 
^  Cp.  Plato,  Politicus,  258  e  foil.  '  Cp.  c.  8.  §  i. 


2<5        Logical  Analysis  of  the  State 

I.  1  elements  of  which  the  state  is  composed,  in  order  that  we 
may  see  ^  in  what  they  differ  from  one  another,  and  whether 
any  scientific  distinction  can  be  drawn  between  the  different 
kinds  of  rule  ^. 
2  He  who  thus  considers  things  in  their  first  growth  and 
origin,    whether  a    state   or  anything    else,    will    obtain    the 

2  clearest  view  of  them.  In  the  first  place  (i)  there  must  be 
a  union  of  those  who  cannot  exist  without  each  other ;  for 
example,  of  male  and  female,  that  the  race  may  continue  ;  and 
this  is  a  union  which  is  formed,  not  of  deliberate  purpose,  but 
because,  in  common  with  other  animals  and  with  plants,  man- 
kind have  a  natural  desire  to  leave  behind  them  an  image  of 
themselves.  And  (2)  there  must  be  a  union  of  natural  ruler 
and  subject,  that  both  may  be  preserved.  For  he  who  can 
foresee  with  his  mind  is  by  nature  intended  to  be  lord  and 
master,  and  he  who  can  work  with   his  body  is  a  subject, 

3  and  by  nature  a  slave  ;  hence  master  and  slave  have  the  same 
1252  b  interest.     Nature,    however,    has    distinguished  between   the 

female  and  the  slave.  For  she  is  not  niggardly,  like  the 
smith  who  fashions  the  Delphian  knife  for  many  uses ;  she 
makes  each  thing  for  a  single  use,  and  every  instrument  is 
best  made  when  intended  for  one  and  not  for  many  uses. 

4  But  among  barbarians  no  distinction  is  made  between  women 
and  slaves,  because  there  is  no  natural  ruler  among  them  : 
they  are  a  community  of  slaves,  male  and  female.  Wherefore 
the  poets  say, — 

*  It  is  meet  that  Hellenes  should  rule  over  barbarians  * ; ' 

^  Or,  with  Bernays,  'how  the  different  kinds  of  rule  differ  from  one 
another,  and  generally  whether  any  scientific  result  can  be  attained  about 
each  one  of  them.' 

*  Eurip.  Iphig.  in  Aulid.  1400. 


Growth  of  the  State  27 

as  if  they   thought  that  the  barbarian  and  the   slave   were  i.  2 
by  nature  one. 

Out  of  these  two  relationships  between  man  and  woman,  5 
master  and  slave,  the  family  first  arises,  and  Hesiod  is  right 
when  he  says, — 

'  First  house  and  wife  and  an  ox  for  the  plough*,' 
for  the  ox  is  the  poor  man's  slave.  The  family  is  the  associa- 
tion established  by  nature  for  the  supply  of  men's  every-day 
wants,  and  the  members  of  it  are  called  by  Charondas  '  com- 
panions of  the  cupboard'  \oyiOcrmvovs\  and  by  Epimenides 
the  Cretan,  '  ^  companions  of  the  manger  ^ '  [ojuoxaTrovs]. 
But  when  several  families  are  united,  and  the  association 
aims  at  something  more  than  the  supply  of  daily  needs, 
then  comes  into  existence  the  village.  And  the  most  natural  6 
form  of  the  village  appears  to  be  that  of  a  colony  from  the 
family,  composed  of  the  children  and  grandchildren,  who  are 
said  to  be  '  suckled  with  the  same  milk.'  And  this  is  the 
reason  why  Hellenic  states  were  originally  governed  by 
kings  ;  because  the  Hellenes  were  under  royal  rule  before 
they  came  together,  as  the  barbarians  still  are.  Every  family 
is  ruled  by  the  eldest,  and  therefore  in  the  colonies  of 
the  family  the  kingly  form  of  government  prevailed  because 
they  were  of  the  same  blood.  As  Homer  says  [of  the  7 
Cyclopes]  :  — 

'  Each  one  gives  law  to  his  children  and  to  his  wives '.' 
For  they  lived  dispersedly,  as  was   the   manner  in  ancient 

'  Op.  et  Di.  405. 

2  Or,   reading  with   the   old  translator   (William  of  Moerbek)   ono- 
Kanvovs,  '  companions  of  the  hearth.' 

^  Od.  ix.  1 14,  quoted  by  Plato,  Laws,  iii.  680,  and  in  N.  Eth.  x.  9.  §  1 3. 


2  8  Man  a  Political  Animal 

I,  2  times.  Wherefore  men  say  that  the  Gods  have  a  king, 
because  they  themselves  either  are  or  were  in  ancient  times 
under  the  rule  of  a  king.  For  they  imagine,  not  only  the 
forms  of  the  Gods,  but  their  ways  of  life  to  be  hke  their 
own. 

8  When  several  villages  are  united  in  a  single  community, 
))erfect  and  large  enough  to  be  nearly  or  quite  self-sufficing, 
the  state  comes  into  existence,  originating  in  the  bare  needs 
of  life,  and  continuing  in  existence  for  the  sake  of  a  good 
life.  And  therefore,  if  the  earlier  forms  of  society  are 
natural,  so  is  the  state,  for  it  is  the  end  of  them,  and  the 
[completed]  nature  is  the  end.  For  what  each  thing  is  when 
fully  developed,  we  call  its  nature,  whether  we  are  speaking 

9  of  a  man,  a  horse,  or  a  family.  Besides,  the  final  cause  and 
end  of  a  thing  is  the  best,  and  to  be  self-sufficing  is  the  end 

1263  a  and  the  best. 

Hence  it  is  evident  that  the  state  is  a  creation  of  nature, 
and  that  man  is  by  nature  a  political  animal.  And  he  who  by 
nature  and  not  by  mere  accident  is  without  a  state,  is  either 
above  humanity,  or  below  it ;  he  is  the 

'  Tribeless,  lawless,  hearthless  one,' 

10  whom  Homer'  denounces — the  outcast  who  is  a  lover  of 
war ;  he  may  be  compared  to  an  unprotected  piece  in  the 
game  of  draughts. 

Now  the  reason  why  man  is  more  of  a  political  animal 
than  bees  or  any  other  gregarious  animals  is  evident.  Nature, 
as  we  often  say,  makes  nothing  in  vain  '^,  and  man  is  the 
only    animal    whom    she    has    endowed    with    the    gift   of 

1 1  speech  ^.      And  whereas   mere  sound  is   but  an   indication 

»  II.  ix.  63.  '  Cp.  c.  8.  §  12.  ^  Cp.  vii.  13.  §  12. 


Aian  a  Political  Animal  29 

of  pleasure  or  pain,  and  is  therefore  found  in  other  animals  I.  2 
(for  their  nature  attains  to  the  perception  of  pleasure  and 
pain  and  the  intimation  of  them  to  one  another,  and  no 
further),  the  power  of  speech  is  intended  to  set  forth  the 
expedient  and  inexpedient,  and  likewise  the  just  and  the 
unjust.  And  it  is  a  characteristic  of  man  that  he  alone  12 
has  any  sense  of  good  and  evil,  of  just  and  unjust,  and  the 
association  of  living  beings  who  have  this  sense  makes  a 
family  and  a  state. 

Thus  the  state  is  by  nature  clearly  prior  to  the  family 
and  to  the  individual,  since  the  whole  is  of  necessity  13 
prior  to  the  part ;  for  example,  if  the  whole  body  be 
destroyed,  there  will  be  no  foot  or  hand,  except  in  an 
equivocal  sense,  as  we  might  speak  of  a  stone  hand ;  for 
when  destroyed  the  hand  will  be  no  better.  But  things  are 
defined  by  their  working  and  power ;  and  we  ought  not 
to  say  that  they  are  the  same  when  they  are  no  longer 
the  same,  but  only  that  they  have  the  same  name.  The  14 
proof  that  the  state  is  a  creation  of  nature  and  prior  to  the 
individual  is  that  the  individual,  when  isolated,  is  not  self- 
sufficing  ;  and  therefore  he  is  like  a  part  in  relation  to  the 
whole.  But  he  who  is  unable  to  live  in  society,  or  who  has 
no  need  because  he  is  sufficient  for  himself,  must  be  either  a 
beast  or  a  god :  he  is  no  part  of  a  state.  A  social  instinct  is  15 
implanted  in  all  men  by  nature,  and  yet  he  who  first  founded 
the  state  was  the  greatest  of  benefactors.  For  man,  when 
perfected,  is  the  best  of  animals,  but,  when  separated  from 
law  and  justice,  he  is  the  worst  of  all ;  since  armed  injustice  16 
is  the  more  dangerous,  and  he  is  equipped  at  birth  with  the 
arms  of  intelligence  and  with  moral  qualities  which  he  may 
use  for  the  worst  ends.     Wherefore,  if  he  have  not  virtue,  he 


3  0  The  Parts  of  the  Household 

I.  2  is  the  most  unholy  and  the  most  savage  of  animals,  and  the  most 
full  of  lust  and  gluttony.  But  justice  is  the  bond  of  men  in 
states,  and  the  administration  of  justice,  which  is  the  determina- 
tion of  what  is  just  \  is  the  principle  of  order  in  political  society. 
3  Seeing  then  that  the  state  is  made  up  of  households,  before 
speaking  of  the  state  we  must  speak  of  the  ^  management 
1253  b  of  the  household  ^.  The  parts  of  the  household  are  the 
persons  who  compose  it,  and  a  complete  household  consists 
of  slaves  and  freemen.  Now  we  should  begin  by  examining 
everything  in  its  least  elements  ;  and  the  first  and  least  parts 
of  a  family  are  master  and  slave,  husband  and  wife,  father 
and    children.     We    have    therefore  to    consider  what  each 

2  of  these  three  relations  is  and  ought  to  be  : — I  mean  the 
relation  of  master  and  servant,  of  husband  and  wife,  and 
thirdly  of  parent  and  child.  [I  say  yafiiKf]  and  TeKvonoirjriKfi, 
there  being  no  words  for  the  two  latter  notions  which  ade- 

3  quately  represent  them.]  And  there  is  another  element 
of  a  household,  the  so-called  art  of  money-making,  which, 
according  to  some,  is  identical  with  household  management, 
according  to  others,  a  principal  part  of  it ;  the  nature  of 
this  art  will  also  have  to  be  considered  by  us. 

Let  us  first  speak  of  master  and  slave,   looking   to  the 
needs  of  practical  life  and  also  seeking  to  attain  some  better 

4  theory  of  their  relation  than  exists  at  present.  For  some  are 
of  opinion  that  the  rule  of  a  master  is  a  science,  and  that  the 
management  of  a  household,  and  the  mastership  of  slaves, 
and  the  political  and  royal  rule,  as  I  was  saying  at  the  out- 
set ^,  are  all  the  same.   Others  affirm  that  the  rule  of  a  master 

1  Cp.  N.  Eth.  V.  6.  §  4. 

*  Reading  with  the  MSS.  olKovofuas. 

"  Plato  in  Pol.  258  E  foil.,  referred  to  already  in  c.  I.  §  2. 


Slavery — Necessary  3 1 

over  slaves    is  contrary    to  nature,  and  that  the   distinction  I.  3 
between  slave   and    freeman    exists    by    law   only,  and    not 
by  nature ;  and  being  an  interference  with  nature  is  therefore 
unjust. 

Property  is  a  part  of  the  household,  and  therefore  the  art  4 
of  acquiring  property  is  a  part  of  the  art  of  managing  the 
household ;  for  no  man  can  live  well,  or  indeed  live  at  all, 
unless  he  be  provided  with  necessaries.  And  as  in  the  arts 
which  have  a  definite  sphere  the  workers  must  have  their  own 
proper  instruments  for  the  accomplishment  of  their  work,  so 
it  is  in  the  management  of  a  household.  Now,  instruments  3 
are  of  various  sorts ;  some  are  living,  others  lifeless ;  in  the 
rudder,  the  pilot  of  a  ship  has  a  lifeless,  in  the  look-out  man, 
a  living  instrument ;  for  in  the  arts  the  servant  is  a  kind 
of  instrument.  Thus,  too,  a  possession  is  an  instrument 
for  maintaining  life.  And  so,  in  the  arrangement  of  the 
family,  a  slave  is  a  living  possession,  and  property  a  number 
of  such  instruments  ;  and  the  servant  is  himself  an  instrument, 
which  takes  precedence  of  all  other  instruments.  For  if  3 
every  instrument  could  accomplish  its  own  work,  obeying  or 
anticipating  the  will  of  others,  like  the  statues  of  Daedalus, 
or  the  tripods  of  Hephaestus,  which,  says  the  poet ', 

'  of  their  own  accord  entered  the  assembly  of  the  Gods ' ; 

if,  in  like  manner,  the  shuttle  would  weave  and  the  plectrum 
touch  the  lyre  without  a  hand  to  guide  them,  chief  workmen 
would  not  want  servants,  nor   masters  slaves.     Here,  how-  1254  a 
ever,    another   distinction    must  be    drawn :  the  instruments  ^ 
commonly  so  called  are  instnunents   of  production,    whilst 
a  possession  is  an  instrument  of  action.     The  shuttle,  for 

'  Horn.  II.  xviii.  376. 


3  2         Slavery — //  it  also  Natural^ 

I.  4  example,  is  not  only  of  use,  but  something  else  is  made  by 
it,  whereas  of  a  garment  or  of  a  bed  there  is  only  the  use. 
Further,  as  production  and  action  are  different  in  kind, 
and  both    require    instruments,  the   instruments  which    they 

5  employ  must  likewise  differ  in  kind.  But  life  is  action 
and  not  production,  and  therefore  the  slave  is  the  minister  of 
action  [for  he  ministers  to  his  master's  life].  Again,  a 
possession  is  spoken  of  as  a  part  is  spoken  of;  for  the  part 
is  not  only  a  part  of  something  else,  but  wholly  belongs 
to  it ;  and  this  is  also  true  of  a  possession.  The  master 
is  only  the  master  of  the  slave ;  he  does  not  belong  to 
him,  whereas  the  slave  is  not  only  the  slave  of  his  master, 

6  but  wholly  belongs  to  him.  Hence  we  see  what  is  the 
nature  and  office  of  a  slave ;  he  who  is  by  nature  not  his 
own  but  another's  and  yet  a  man,  is  by  nature  a  slave;  and 
he  may  be  said  to  belong  to  another  who,  being  a  human 
being,  is  also  a  possession.  And  a  possession  may  be 
defined  as  an  instrument  of  action,  separable  from  the 
possessor. 

5  But  is  there  any  one  thus  intended  by  nature  to  be  a  slave, 
and  for  whom  such  a  condition  is  expedient  and  right,  or 
rather  is  not  all  slavery  a  violation  of  nature  ? 

There    is   no    difficulty    in    answering   this    question,    on 

2  grounds  both  of  reason  and  of  fact.  For  that  some  should 
rule  and  others  be  ruled  is  a  thing,  not  only  necessary,  but 
expedient ;  from  the  hour  of  their  birth,  some  are  marked 
out  for  subjection,  others  for  rule. 

And  whereas  there  are  many  kinds  both  of  rulers  and 
subjects,  that  rule  is  the  better  which  is  exercised  over  better 
subjects — for  example,  to  rule  over  men  is  better  than  to 
rule  over  wild  beasts.     The  work  is  better  which  is  executed 


Slavery — Justified  3  3 

by  better  workmen ;  and  where  one  man  rules  and  another  is  I.  5 
ruled,  they  may  be  said  to  have  a  work.  In  all  things 
which  form  a  composite  whole  and  which  are  made  up  of 
parts,  whether  continuous  or  discrete,  a  distinction  between 
the  ruling  and  the  subject  element  comes  to  light.  Such  a  4 
duality  exists  in  living  creatures,  but  not  in  them  only ; 
it  originates  in  the  constitution  of  the  universe ;  even  in 
things  which  have  no  life,  there  is  a  ruling  principle,  as 
^  in  musical  harmony  \  But  we  are  wandering  from  the 
subject.  We  will,  therefore,  restrict  ourselves  to  the  living 
creature  which,  in  the  first  place,  consists  of  soul  and  body  : 
and  of  these  two,  the  one  is  by  nature  the  ruler,  and  the 
other  the  subject.  But  then  we  must  look  for  the  intentions  5 
of  nature  in  things  which  retain  their  nature,  and  not  in 
things  which  are  corrupted.  And  therefore  we  must  study 
the  man  who  is  in  the  most  perfect  state  both  of  body  and 
soul,  for  in  him  we  shall  see  the  true  relation  of  the  two  ; 
although  in  bad  or  corrupted  natures  the  body  will  often  1254  b 
appear  to  rule  over  the  soul,  because  they  are  in  an  evil 
and  unnatural  condition.  First  then  we  may  observe  in  living  ( 
creatures  both  a  despotical  and  a  constitutional  rule ;  for  the 
soul  rules  the  body  with  a  despotical  rule,  whereas  the  intel- 
lect rules  the  appetites  with  a  constitutional  and  royal  rule. 
And  it  is  clear  that  the  rule  of  the  soul  over  the  body,  and 
of  the  mind  and  the  rational  element  over  the  passionate  is 
natural  and  expedient ;  whereas  the  equality  of  the  two  or  the 
rule  of  the  inferior  is  always  hurtful.  The  same  holds  good  y 
of  animals  as  well  as  of  men  ;  for  tame  animals  have  a  better 
nature  than  wild^  and  all  tame  animals  are  better  off  when 
they  are  ruled  by  man  ;  for  then  they  are  preserved.  Again, 
^  Or,  '  of  harmony  [in  music].' 

DAVIS  D 


34  Slavery — Both  Sides  of  the  §^estion 

I.  5  the  male  is  by  nature  superior,  and  the  female  inferior ;  and 
the   one  rules,  and   the   other    is    ruled ;    this   principle,  of 

8  necessity,  extends  to  all  mankind.  Where  then  there  is  such 
a  difference  as  that  between  soul  and  body,  or  between  men 
and  animals  (as  in  the  case  of  those  whose  business  is  to  use 
their  body,  and  who  can  do  nothing  better),  the  lower  sort 
are   by   nature  slaves,   and  it   is  better   for  them  as  for  all 

9  inferiors  that  they  should  be  under  the  rule  of  a  master.  For 
he  who  can  be,  and  therefore  is  another's,  and  he  who 
participates  in  reason  enough  to  apprehend,  but  not  to  have, 
reason,  is  a  slave  by  nature.  Whereas  the  lower  animals 
cannot  even  apprehend  reason ;  they  obey  their  instincts. 
And  indeed  the  use  made  of  slaves  and  of  tame  animals 
is  not  very  different ;  for  both  with  their  bodies  minister  to 

10  the  needs  of  life.  J^ature  would  like  to  distinguish  between 
the  bodies  of  freemen  and  slaves,  making  the  one  strong 
for  servile  labour,  the  other  upright,  and  although  useless 
for  such  services,  useful  for  political  life  in  the  arts  both 
of  war  and  peace.  But  this  does  not  hold  universally :  for 
some  slaves  have  the  souls  and  others  have  the  bodies  of 
freemen.  And  doubtless  if  men  differed  from  one  another  in 
the  mere  forms  of  their  bodies  as  much  as  the  statues  of  the 
Gods  do  from  men,  all  would  acknowledge  that  the  inferior  class 

1 1  should  be  slaves  of  the  superior.  And  if  there  is  a  difference 
in  the  body,  how  much  more  in  the  soul !   But  the  beauty  of  the 

1255  a  body  is  seen,  whereas  the  beauty  of  the  soul  is  not  seen.  It  is 
clear,  then,  that  some  men  are  by  nature  free,  and  others  slaves, 
and  that  for  these  latter  slavery  is  both  expedient  and  right. 
6  But  that  those  who  take  the  opposite  view  have  in  a  certain 
way  right  on  their  side,  may  be  easily  seen.  For  the  words 
slavery  and  slave  are  used  in  two  senses.     There  is  a  slave 


Slavery — Both  Sides  of  the  §luestion  is 

or  slavery  by  law  as  well  as  by  nature.      The  law  of  which  i,  q 
I  speak  is  a  sort  of  convention,  according  to  which  whatever 
is  taken  in  war  is  supposed  to  belong  to  the  victors.     But  2 
this  right  many  jurists  impeach,  as  they  would  an  orator  who 
brought  forward  an  unconstitutional  measure :  they  detest  the 
notion  that,  because  one  man  has  the  power  of  doing  violence 
and  is  superior  in  brute  strength,  another  shall  be  his  slave 
and  subject.     Even  among  philosophers  there  is  a  difference 
of  opinion.     The  origin  of  the  dispute,  and  the  reason  why  3 
the  arguments  cross,  is  as  follows  :   Virtue,  when  furnished 
with  means,  may  be  deemed  to  have  the  greatest  power  of 
doing  violence :  and  as  superior  power  is  only  found  where 
there  is  superior  excellence  of  some  kind,  power  is  thought  to 
imply  virtue.     But  does  it  likewise  imply  justice  ? — that  is  the 
question.     And,  in  order  to  make  a  distinction  between  them,  4 
some  assert  that  justice  is  benevolence :  to  which  others  reply 
that  justice  is  nothing  more  than  the  rule  of  a  superior.     If 
the  two  views  are  regarded  as  antagonistic  and  exclusive  [i.  e. 
if  the  notion  that  justice  is  benevolence  excludes  the  idea  of 
a  just  rule  of  a  superior],  the  alternative  [viz.  that  no  one 
should  rule  over  others  ^]  has  no  force  or  plausibility,  because 
it  implies  that  not  even  the  superior  in  virtue  ought  to  rule,  or 
be  master.     Some,  clinging,  as  they  think,  to  a  principle  of  5 
justice  (for  law  and  custom  are  a  sort  of  justice),  assume  that 
slavery  in  war  is  justified  by  law,  but  they  are  not  consistent. 
For  what  if  the  cause  of  the  war  be  unjust  ?     No  one  would 
ever  say  that  he  is  a  slave  who  is  unworthy  to  be  a  slave. 
Were  this  the  case,  men  of  the  highest  rank  would  be  slaves 
and  the  children  of  slaves  if  they  or  their  parents  chance  to 
have  been  taken  captive  and  sold.     Wherefore  Hellenes  do  6 

»  Cp.  §  2. 


^6     When  Natural^  when  ^Unnatural 

I.  6  not  like  to  call  themselves  slaves,  but  confine  the  term  to 
barbarians.  Yet,  in  using  this  language,  they  really  mean  the 
natural  slave  of  whom  we  spoke  at  first ;  for  it  must  be 
admitted  that  some  are  slaves ,  everywhere,  others  nowhere. 

7  The  same  principle  applies  to  nobility.  Hellenes  regard  them- 
selves as  noble  everywhere,  and  not  only  in  their  own  country, 
but  they  deem  the  barbarians  noble  only  when  at  home, 
thereby  implying  that  there  are  two  sorts  of  nobility  and 
freedom,  the  one  absolute,  the  other  relative.  The  Helen 
of  Theodectes  says  : — 

'  Who  would  presume  to  call  me  servant  who  am  on  both 
sides  sprung  from  the  stem  of  the  Gods  ? ' 

8  What  does  this  mean  but  that  they  distinguish  freedom  and 
slavery,   noble  and  humble  birth,    by  the  two  principles  of 

1256  b  good  and  evil  ?  They  think  that  as  men  and  animals  beget 
men  and  animals,  so  from  good  men  a  good  man  springs. 
But  this  is  what  nature,  though  she  may  intend  it,  often  fails 
to  accomplish. 

9  We  see  then  that  there  is  some  foundation  for  this  differ- 
ence of  opinion,  and  that  some  actual  slaves  and  freemen  are 
not  so  by  nature,  and  also  that  there  is  in  some  cases  a  marked 
distinction  between  the  two  classes,  rendering  it  expedient  and 
right  for  the  one  to  be  slaves  and  the  others  to  be  masters : 
the  one  practising  obedience,  the  others  exercising  the  autho- 

lo  rity  which  nature  intended  them  to  have.  The  abuse  of  this 
authority  is  injurious  to  both ;  for  the  interests  of  part  and 
whole  *,  of  body  and  soul,  are  the  same,  and  the  slave  is  a  part 
of  the  master,  a  living  but  separated  part  of  his  bodily  frame. 
Where  the  relation  between  them  is  natural  they  are  friends 

'  Cp.  c.:4.  §  5. 


The  l^ile  of  the  Household  37 

and  have  a  common  interest,  but  where  it  rests  merely  on  law  I.  6 
and  force  the  reverse  is  true. 

The  previous  remarks  are  quite  enough  to  show  that  the  7 
rule  of  a  master  is  not  a  constitutional  rule,  and  therefore  that 
all  the  different  kinds  of  rule  are  not,  as  some  affirm,  the 
same  with  each  other  ^.     For  there  is  one  rule  exercised  over 
subjects  who  are  by  nature  free,  another  over  subjects  who 
are  by  nature  slaves.    The  rule  of  a  household  is  a  monarchy, 
for  every  house  is  under  one  head  :  whereas  constitutional  rule 
is  a  government  of  freemen  and  equals.     The  master  is  not  2 
called  a  master  because  he  has  science,  but  because  he  is  of 
a  certain  character,  and  the  same  remark  applies  to  the  slave 
and  the  freeman.     Still  there  may  be  a  science  for  the  master 
and  a  science  for  the  slave.     The  science  of  the  slave  would 
be  such  as  the  man  of  Syracuse  taught,  who  made  money  by 
instructing  slaves  in  their  ordinary  duties.     And  such  a  know-  3 
ledge  may  be  carried  further,  so  as  to  include  cookery  and 
similar  menial  arts.      For  some  duties  are  of  the  more  neces- 
sary, others  of  the  more  honourable  sort ;  as  the  proverb  says, 
'  slave    before   slave,   master  before  master,'      But  all   such  4 
branches  of  knowledge  are  servile.    There  is  likewise  a  science 
of  the  master,  which  teaches  the  use  of  slaves  ;  for  the  master 
as  such  is  concerned,  not  with  the  acquisition,  but  with  the  use 
of  them.     Yet  this  so-called  science  is  not  anything  great  or 
wonderful ;  for  the  master  need  only  know  how  to  order  that 
which  the  slave  must  know  how  to  execute.     Hence  those  5 
who  are  in  a  position   which   places  them  above  toil,   have 
stewards  who  attend  to  their  households  while  they  occupy 
themselves  with  philosophy  or  with  politics.     But  the  art  of 
acquiring  slaves,  I  mean  of  justly  acquiring  them,  differs  both 
'  Plato  Pol.  258  £  foil.,  referred  to  already  in  c.  I.  §  2. 


3  8    Property — What  Place  in  the  Household 

I.  7  from  the  art  of  the  master  and  the  art  of  the  slave,  being 
a  species  of  hunting  or  war  \  Enough  of  the  distinction 
between  master  and  slave. 
1256  a  Let  us  now  enquire  into  property  generally,  and  into  the 
art  of  money-making,  in  accordance  with  our  usual  method 
[of  resolving  a  whole  into  its  parts  ^],  for  a  slave  has  been 
shown  to  be  a  part  of  property.  The  first  question  is  whether 
the  art  of  money-making  is  the  same  with  the  art  of  managing 
a  household  or  a  part  of  it,  or  instrumental  to  it ;  and  if  the 
last,  whether  in  the  way  that  the  art  of  making  shuttles  is 
instrumental  to  the  art  of  weaving,  or  in  the  way  that  the 
casting  of  bronze  is  instrumental  to  the  art  of  the  statuary,  for 
they  are  not  instrumental  in  the  same  way,  but  the  one  pro- 

2  vides  tools  and  the  other  material ;  and  by  material  I  mean 
the  substratum  out  of  which  any  work  is  made ;  thus  wool  is 
the  material  of  the  weaver,  bronze  of  the  statuary.  Now  it 
is  easy  to  see  that  the  art  of  household  management  is  not 
identical  with  the  art  of  money-making,  for  the  one  uses  the 
material  which  the  other  provides.  And  the  art  which  uses 
household  stores  can  be  no  other  than  the  art  of  household 
management.  There  is,  however,  a  doubt  whether  the  art  of 
money-making  is  a  part  of  household  management  or  a  distinct 

3  art.  [They  appear  to  be  connected]  ;  for  the  money-maker 
has  to  consider  whence  money  and  property  can  be  procured ; 
but  there  are  many  sorts  of  property  and  wealth  : — there  is 
husbandry  and  the  caYe  and  provision  of  food  in  general ;  are 

4  these  parts  of  the  money-making  art  or  distinct  arts  ?  Again, 
there  are  many  sorts  of  food,  and  therefore  there  are  many 
kinds  of  lives  both  of  animals  and  men ;  they  must  all  have 
food,  and  the  differences  in  their  food  have  made  differences 

^  Cp.  vii.  14.  §  21.  *  Cp.c.  I.  §  3. 


Property — T{ests  on  a  Physical  Basis  i<) 

in  their  ways  of  life.     For  of  beasts,  some  are  gregarious,  I.  8 
others  are  solitary ;  they  live  in  the  way  which  is  best  adapted  5 
to  sustain  them,  accordingly  as  they  are  carnivorous  or  her- 
bivorous or  omnivorous :  and  their  habits  are  determined  for 
them  by  nature  in  such  a  manner  that  they  may  obtain  with 
greater  facility  the  food  of  their  choice.     But,  as  different 
individuals    have    different  tastes,    the   same   things    are   not 
naturally  pleasant  to  all  of  them ;  and  therefore  the  lives  of 
carnivorous  or  herbivorous  animals  further  differ  among  them- 
selves.    In  the  lives  of  men  too  there  is  a  great  difference.  6 
The  laziest  are   shepherds,   who  lead  an   idle  life,   and  get 
their  subsistence  without  trouble  from   tame  animals;    their 
flocks  having  to  wander  from  place  to  place  in  search  of  pas- 
ture, they  are  compelled  to  follow  them,  cultivating  a  sort  of 
living  farm.     Others  support  themselves  by  hunting,  which  is  7 
of  different  kinds.     Some,   for  example,  are  pirates,  others, 
who  dwell  near  lakes  or  marshes  or  rivers  or  a  sea  in  which 
there  are  fish,  are  fishermen,  and  others  live  by  the  pursuit  of 
birds  or  wild  beasts.    The  greater  number  obtain  a  living  from 
the  fruits  of  the  soil.     Such  are  the  modes  of  subsistence  8 
which    prevail    among    those  ^  whose  industry    is  employed 
immediately  upon  the  products  of  nature  \  and  whose  food  is 
not  acquired  by  exchange  and  retail  trade — there  is  the  shep-  1266  b 
herd,  the  husbandman,  the  pirate,  the  fisherman,  the  hunter. 
Some  gain  a   comfortable  maintenance  out  of  two  employ- 
ments, eking  out  the  deficiencies  of  one  of  them  by  another : 
thus  the  life  of  a    shepherd  may  be  combined  with  that  of 
a  brigand,  the  life  of  a  farmer  with  that  of  a  hunter.     Other  9 
modes  of  life  are  similarly  combined  in  any  way  which  the 
needs  of  men  may  require.     Property,  in  the  sense  of  a  bare 
*  Or,  *  whose  labour  is  personal.' 


40       Property — 'Natural  Acquisition 

I.  8  livelihood,  seems  to  be  given  by  nature  herself  to  all,  both 

10  when  they  are  first  born,  and  when  they  are  grown  up.  For 
some  animals  bring  forth,  together  with  their  offspring,  so 
much  food  as  will  last  until  they  are  able  to  supply  themselves  ; 
of  this  the  venniparous  or  oviparous  animals  are  an  instance ; 
and  the  viviparous  animals  have  up  to  a  certain  time  a  supply 
of  food  for  their  young  in  themselves,  which  is  called  milk. 

1 1  In  like  manner  we  may  infer  that,  after  the  birth  of  animals, 
plants  exist  for  their  sake,  and  that  the  other  animals  exist 
for  the  sake  of  man,  the  tame  for  use  and  food,  the  wild,  if 
not  all,  at  least  the  greater  part  of  them,  for  food,  and  for  the 

1 2  provision  of  clothing  and  various  instruments.  Now  if  nature 
makes  nothing  incomplete,  and  nothing  in  vain,  the  inference 
must  be  that  she  has  made  all  animals  and  plants  for  the  sake 
of  man.  And  so,  in  one  point  of  view,  the  art  of  war  is 
a  natural  art  of  acquisition,  for  it  includes  hunting,  an  art 
which  we  ought  to  practise  against  wild  beasts,  and  against 
men  who,  though  intended  by  nature  to  be  governed,  will  not 
submit ;  for  war  of  such  a  kind  is  naturally  just  ^. 

13  Of  the  art  of  acquisition  then  there  is  one  kind  ^  which  is 
natural  and  is  a  part  of  the  management  of  a  household*. 
Either  we  must  suppose  the  necessaries  of  life  to  exist  pre- 
viously, or  the  art  of  household  management  must  provide 
a  store  of  them  for  the  common  use  of  the  family  or  state. 

14  They  are  the  elements  of  true  wealth ;  for  the  amount  of 
property  which  is  needed  for  a  good  life  is  not  unlimited, 
although  Solon  in  one  of  his  poems  says  that, 

'  No  bound  to  riches  has  been  fixed  for  man '.' 

^  Cp.  c.  7.  §  5,  and  vii.  14.  §  21. 

^  Or,  with  Beniays,  '  which  by  nature  is  a  part  of  the  management 
of  a  household.'  '  Bergk,  Poet.  Lyr.  Solon,  13.  v.  71. 


Property —  Money-maJiing  4 1 

But  there  is  a  boundary  fixed,  just  as  there  is  in  the  arts  ;  for  I.  8 
the  instruments  of  any  art  are  never  unlimited,  either  in  ^5 
number  or  size,  and  wealth  may  be  defined  as  a  number  of 
instruments  to  be  used  in  a  household  or  in  a  state.  And  so 
we  see  that  there  is  a  natural  art  of  acquisition  which  is  prac- 
tised by  managers  of  households  and  by  statesmen,  and  what 
is  the  reason  of  this. 

There  is  another  variety  of  the  art  of  acquisition  which  is  9 
commonly  and  rightly  called  the  art  of  making  money,  and  1257  a 
has  in  fact  suggested  the  notion  that  wealth  and  property  have 
no  limit.  Being  nearly  connected  with  the  preceding,  it  is 
often  identified  with  it.  But  though  they  are  not  very  different, 
neither  are  they  the  same.  The  kind  already  described  is 
given  by  nature,  the  other  is  gained  by  experience  and  art. 

Let  us  begin  our  discussion  of  the  question  with  the  fol-  2 
lowing  considerations : — 

Of  eveiything  which  we  possess  there  are  two  uses :  both 
belong  to  the  thing  as  such,  but  not  in  the  same  manner,  for 
one  is  the  proper,  and  the  other  the  improper  or  secondary 
use  of  it.     For  example,  a  shoe  is  used  for  wear,  and  is  used 
for  exchange ;    both  are  uses  of  the  shoe.     He  who  gives  3 
a  shoe  in   exchange  for  money  or  food  to  him  who  wants 
one,  does  indeed  use  the  shoe  as  a  shoe,  but  this  is  not  its 
proper  or  primary  purpose,  for  a  shoe  is  not  made  to  be  an 
object  of  barter.     The  same  may  be  said  of  all  possessions, 
for  the    art  of  exchange   extends   to  all    of  them,   and    it  4 
arises  at  first  in  a   natural   manner  from    the    circumstance 
that  some  have  too  little,  others  too  much.     Hence  we  may 
infer  that  retail  trade  is  not  a  natural  part  of  the  art  of  money-   • 
making ;  had  it  been  so,  men  would  have  ceased  to  exchange 
when  they  had  enough.     And  in  the  first  community,  which  5 


42  Property — Coined  l^loney 

I.  9  is  the  family,  this  art  is  obviously  of  no  use,  but  only  begins 
to  be  useful  when  the  society  increases.  For  the  members 
of  the  family  originally  had  all  things  in  common  ;  in  a  more 
divided  state  of  society  they  '  still  shared  in  many  things,  but 
they  were  different  things  ^  which  they  had  to  give  in  ex- 
change for  what  they  wanted,  a  kind  of  barter  which  is  still 

6  practised  among  barbarous  nations  who  exchange  with  one 
another  the  necessaries  of  life  and  nothing  more ;  giving  and 
receiving  wine,  for  example,  in  exchange  for  com  and  the 
like.  This  sort  of  barter  is  not  part  of  the  money-making 
art  and  is  not  contrary  to  nature,  but  is  needed  for  the  satis- 

7  faction  of  men's  natural  wants.  The  other  or  more  complex 
form  of  exchange  grew  out  of  the  simpler.  When  the  in- 
habitants of  one  country  became  more  dependent  on  those  of 
another,  and  they  imported  what  they  needed,  and  exported 

8  the  surplus,  money  necessarily  came  into  use.  For  the  various 
necessaries  of  life  are  not  easily  carried  about,  and  hence  men 
agreed  to  employ  in  their  dealings  with  each  other  something 
which  was  intrinsically  useful  and  easily  applicable  to  the 
purposes  of  life,  for  example,  iron,  silver,  and  the  like.  Of 
this  the  value  was  at  first  measured  by  size  and  weight,  but  in 
process  of  time  they  put  a  stamp  upon  it,  to  save  the  trouble 
of  weighing  and  to  mark  the  value. 

1267  b      When  the  use  of  coin  had  once  been  discovered,  out  of  the 
"  barter  of  necessary  articles  arose  the  other  art  of  money- 
making,   namely,   retail   trade ;    which  was  at   first  probably 
a  simple  matter,  but  became  more  complicated  as  soon  as  men 
learned  by  experience   whence  and  by  what  exchanges  the 
lo  greatest  profit  might  be  made.     Originating  in  the  use  of  coin, 
the  art  of  money-making  is  generally  thought  to  be  chiefly 
'  Or,  more  simply, '  share4  in  many  more  things.' 


Property:  True  Notion  of  Wealth     43 

concerned  with  it,  and  to  be  the  art  which  produces  wealth  I.  9 
and  money  ;  having  to  consider  how  they  may  be  accumulated. 
Indeed,  wealth  is  assumed  by  many  to  be  only  a  quantity  of 
coin,  because  the  art  of  money-making  and  retail  trade  are 
concerned  with  coin.  Others  maintain  that  coined  money  is  1 1 
a  mere  sham,  a  thing  not  natural,  but  conventional  only, 
which  would  have  no  value  or  use  for  any  of  the  purposes  of 
daily  life  if  another  commodity  were  substituted  by  the  users. 
And,  indeed,  he  who  is  rich  in  coin  may  often  be  in  want  of 
necessary  food.  But  how  can  that  be  wealth  of  which  a  man 
may  have  a  great  abundance  and  yet  perish  with  hunger,  like 
Midas  in  the  fable,  whose  insatiable  prayer  turned  everything 
that  was  set  before  him  into  gold  ? 

Men  seek  after  a  better  notion  of  wealth  and  of  the  art  of  1 2 
making  money  than  the  mere  acquisition  of  coin,  and  they 
are  right.  For  natural  wealth  and  the  natural  art  of  money- 
making  are  a  different  thing ;  in  their  true  form  they  are  part 
of  the  management  of  a  household ;  whereas  retail  trade  is 
the  art  of  producing  wealth,  not  in  every  way,  but  by 
exchange.  And  it  seems  to  be  concerned  with  coin ;  for 
coin  is  the  starting-point  and  the  goal  of  exchange.  And  13 
there  is  no  bound  to  the  wealth  which  springs  from  this  art 
of  money-making  ^  As  in  the  art  of  medicine  there  is  no 
limit  to  the  pursuit  of  health,  and  as  in  the  other  arts  there  is 
no  limit  to  the  pursuit  of  their  several  ends,  for  they  aim 
.at  accomplishing  their  ends  to  the  uttermost;  (but  of  the 
means  there  is  a  limit,  for  the  end  is  always  the  limit),  so, 
too,  in  this  art  of  money -making  there  is  no  limit  of  the  end, 
which  is  wealth  of  the  spurious  kind,  and  the  acquisition  of 
money.  But  the  art  of  household  management  has  a  limit ;  i-i 
'  Cp.  c.  8.  §  14. 


X' 


44    ^S^oney -making  in  Excess  %)nnatural 

I.  9  the  unlimited  acquisition  of  money  is  not  its  business.  And, 
therefore,  in  one  point  of  view,  all  wealth  must  have  a  limit ; 
nevertheless,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  we  find  the  opposite  to  be 
the  case ;  for  all  money-makers  increase  their  hoard  of  coin 
without   limit.     The  source  of  the  confusion   is  the  near 

15  connexion  between  the  two  kinds  of  money-making;  in  either, 
the  instrument  [i.  e.  wealth]  is  the  same,  although  the  use  is 
different,  and  so  they  pass  into  one  another ;  for  each  is  a  use 
of  the  same  property  *,  but  with  a  difference :  accumulation  is 
the  end  in  the  one  case,  but  there  is  a  further  end  in  the  other. 
Hence  some  persons  are  led  to  believe  that  making  money  is 
the  object  of  household  management,  and  the  whole  idea  of 
their  lives  is  that  they  ought  either  to  increase  their  money 

16  without  limit,  or  at  any  rate  not  to  lose  it.     The  origin  of 
1258  a  this  disposition  in  men  is  that  they  are  intent  upon  living  only, 

and  not  upon  living  well ;  and,  as  their  desires  are  unlimited, 
they  also  desire  that  the  means  of  gratifying  them  should  be 
without  limit.  Even  those  who  aim  at  a  good  life  seek  the 
means  of  obtaining  bodily  pleasures  ;  and,  since  the  enjoyment 
of  these  appears  to  depend  on  property,  they  are  absorbed  in 
making  money :   and  so  there  arises  the   second  species  of 

17  money-making.  For,  as  their  enjoyment  is  in  excess,  they 
seek  an  art  which  produces  the  excess  of  enjoyment ;  and,  if 
they  are  not  able  to  supply  their  pleasures  by  the  art  of 
money-making,  they  try  other  arts,  using  in  turn  every  faculty 
in  a  manner  contrary  to  nature.  The  quality  of  courage,  for 
example,  is  not  intended  to  make  money,  but  to  inspire  con- 
fidence ;  neither  is  this  the  aim  of  the  general's  or  of  the 
physician's  art ;  but  the  one  aims  at  victory  and  the  other  at 

18  health.     Nevertheless,    some  men   turn   every  quality  or  art 

*  Reading  «T^<T<«y  xpfjats. 


'M.oney -making:  the  True  IQnd       45" 

into  a   means  of  making  money ;   this  they  conceive  to  be  I.  9 
the  end,  and  to  the  promotion  of  the  end  all  things  must 
contribute. 

Thus,  then,  we  have  considered  the  art  of  money-making, 
which  is  unnecessary,  and  why  men  want  it;  and  also  the 
necessary  art  of  money- making,  which  we  have  seen  to  be 
different  from  the  other,  and  to  be  a  natural  part  of  the  art  of 
managing  a  household,  concerned  with  the  provision  of  food, 
not,  however,  like  the  former  kind,  unlimited,  but  having 
a  limil. 

And  we  have  found  the  answer  to  our  original  question  ^,- 10 
Whether  the  art  of  money-making  is  the  business  of  the 
manager  of  a  household  and  of  the  statesman  or  not  their 
business  ? — viz.  that  it  is  an  art  which  is  presupposed  by  them. 
For  political  science  does  not  make  men,  but  takes  them  from 
nature  and  uses  them ;  and  nature  provides-  them  with  food 
from  the  element  of  earth,  air,  or  sea.  At  this  stage  begins 
the  duty  of  the  manager  of  a  household,  who  has  to  order  the 
things  which  nature  supplies ; — he  may  be  compared  to  the  2 
weaver  who  has  not  to  make  but  to  use  wool,  and  to  know 
what  sort  of  wool  is  good  and  serviceable  or  bad  and  un- 
serviceable. Were  this  otherwise,  it  would  be  difficult  to  see 
why  the  art  of  money-making  is  a  part  of  the  management 
of  a  household  and  the  art  of  medicine  not ;  for  surely  the 
members  of  a  household  must  have  health  just  as  they  must 
have  life  or  any  other  necessary.  And  as  from  one  point  3 
of  view  the  master  of  the  house  and  the  ruler  of  the  state 
have  to  consider  about  health,  from  another  point  of  view  not 
they  but  the  physician ;  so  in  one  way  the  art  of  household 
management,  in  another  way  the  subordinate  art,  has  to 
'  Cp.  c.  8.  §  I. 


4<^  Kjnds  of  Money-making 

I.  10  consider  about  money.  But,  strictly  speaking,  as  I  have 
already  said,  the  means  of  life  must  be  provided  beforehand 
by  nature ;  for  the  business  of  nature  is  to  furnish  food  to 
that  which   is   born,    and  the  food   of  the  offspring   always 

4  remains  over  in  the  parent  \  Wherefore  the  art  of  making 
money  out  of  fruits  and  animals  is  always  natural. 

Of  the  two  sorts  of  money-making  one,  as  I  have  just 
said,  is  a  part  of  household  management,  the  other  is  retail 
trade :  the  former  necessary  and  honourable,  the  latter  a  kind 
1258  b  of  exchange  which  is  justly  censured ;  for  it  is  unnatural, 
and  a  mode  by  which  men  gain  from  one  another.  The  most 
hated  sort,  and  with  the  greatest  reason,  is  usury,  which 
makes  a  gain  out  of  money  itself,  and  not  from  the  natural  use 

5  of  it.  For  money  was  intended  to  be  used  in  exchange,  but 
not  to  increase  at  interest.  And  this  term  usury  [tiJ/kos], 
which  means  the  birth  of  money  from  money,  is  applied 
to  the  breeding  of  money  because  the  offspring  resembles  the 
parent.  Wherefore  of  all  modes  of  making  money  this  is 
the  most  unnatural. 

11  Enough  has  been  said  about  the  theory  of  money-making ; 
we  will  now  proceed  to  the  practical  part.  *  The  discussion 
of  such  matters  is  not  unworthy  of  philosophy,  but  to  be 
engaged  in  them  practically  is  illiberal  and  irksome'.  The 
useful  parts  of  money-making  are,  first,  the  knowledge  of 
live-stock, — which  are  most  profitable,  and  where,  and 
how, — as,  for  example,  what  sort  of  horses  or  sheep  or 
oxen  or  any  other  animals  are  most  likely  to  give  a  return. 
2  A  man  ought  to  know  which  of  these  pay  better  than  others, 

»  Cp.  c.  8.  §  lo, 

'  Or,  '  We  are  free  to  speculate  about  them,  but  in  practice  we  arc 
limited  by  circumstances.'  (Bemays.) 


IQnds  of  Mo7iey'making  47 

and  which  pay  best  in  particular  places,  for  some  do  better  in  1. 11 
one  place  and  some  in  another.     Secondly,  husbandry,  which  2. 
may  be  either  tillage  or  planting,  and  the  keeping  of  bees  and 
of  fish,  or  fowl,  or  of  any  animals  which  may  be  useful  to 
man.     These  are  the  divisions  of  the  true  or  proper  art  of  3 
money- making  and  come  first.     Of  the  other,  which  consists 
in  exchange,  the  first  and  most  important  division  is  commerce 
(of  which  there  are  three  kinds — commerce  by  sea,  commerce 
by  land,  selling  in  shops — these  again  differing  as  they  are 
safer  or    more   profitable),    the   second   is   usury,    the   third, 
service    for   hire — of   this,    one    kind   is    employed    in    the  4 
mechanical  arts,    the   other  in  unskilled  and   bodily  labour. 
There  is   still   a  third    sort  of  money-making    intermediate 
between  this  and  the  first  or  natural  mode  which  is  partly 
natural,  but  is  also  concerned  with  exchange  of  the  fruits  and 
other  products  of  the  earth.     Some  of  these  latter,  although 
they  bear  no  fruit,  are  nevertheless  profitable ;  for  example, 
wood  and  minerals.     The  art  of  mining,  by  which  minerals  5 
are  obtained,  has  many  branches,  for  there  are  various  kinds 
of  things  dug  out  of  the  earth.     Of  the  several  divisions  of 
money-making   I   now   speak  generally;  a  minute  considera- 
tion of  them  might  be  useful  in  practice,   but  it  would   be 
tiresome  to  dwell  upon  them  at  greater  length  now. 

Those  occupations  are  most  truly  arts  in  which  there  is  6 
the  least  element  of  chance ;  they  are  the  meanest  in  which 
the  body  is  most  deteriorated,  the  most  servile  in  which  there 
is   the  greatest  use  of  the  body,  and  the  illiberal  in  which 
there  is  the  least  need  of  excellence. 

Works  have  been  written  upon  these  subjects  by  various  7 
persons;  for  example,  by  Chares  the  Parian,  and  Apollodorus 
the   Lemnian,   who  have   treated  of  Tillage  and   Planting, 


48  Economic  Tales 

1. 11  while  others  have  treated  of  other  branches ;  any  one  who 

1259  a  cares    for   such    matters   may  refer  to  their   writings.      It 

would  be  well  also  to  collect  the  scattered  stories  of  the  ways 

in  which  individuals  have  succeeded  in  amassing  a  fortune ; 

8  for  all  this  is  useful  to  persons  who  value  the  art  of  making 
money.  There  is  the  anecdote  of  Thales  the  Milesian  and 
his  financial  device,  which  involves  a  principle  of  universal 
application,  but  is  attributed  to  him  on  account  of  his  reputa- 

9  tion  for  wisdom.  He  was  reproached  for  his  poverty, 
which  was  supposed  to  show  that  philosophy  was  of  no  use. 
According  to  the  story,  he  knew  by  his  skill  in  the  stars 
while  it  was  yet  winter  that  there  would  be  a  great  harvest  of 
olives  in  the  coming  year ;  so,  having  a  little  capital,  he  gave 
earnest-money  for  the  use  of  all  the  olive-presses  in  Chios  and 
Miletus,  which  he  hired  at  a  low  price  because  no  one  bid 
against  him.  When  the  harvest-time  came,  and  many  wanted 
them  all  at  once  and  of  a  sudden,  he  let  them  out  at  any  rate 
which  he  pleased,  and  made  a  quantity  of  money.  Thus  he 
showed  the  world  that  philosophers   can   easily  be  rich  if 

10  they  like,  but  that  their  ambition  is  of  another  sort.  He  is 
supposed  to  have  given  a  striking  proof  of  his  wisdom,  but,  as 
I  was  saying,  his  device  for  getting  money  is  of  universal 
application,  and  is  nothing  but  the  creation  of  a  monopoly. 
It  is  an  art  often  practised  by  cities  when  they  are  in  want  of 
money ;  they  make  a  monopoly  of  provisions. 

11  There  was  a  man  of  Sicily,  who,  having  money  deposited 
with  him,  bought  up  all  the  iron  from  the  iron  mines ;  after- 
wards, when  the  merchants  from  their  various  markets  came 
to  buy,  he  was  the  only  seller,  and  without  much  increasing 

12  the  price  he  gained  200  per  cent.  Which  when  Dionysius 
heard,  he  told  him  that  he  might  take  away  his  money,  but 


Household  Government  49 

that  he  must  not  remain  at  Syracuse,  for  he  thought  that  the  I.  11 
man  had  discovered  a  way  of  making  money  which  was 
injurious  to  his  own  interests.  He  had  the  same  idea'  as 
Thales ;  they  both  contrived  to  create  a  monopoly  for  them- 
selves. And  statesmen  ought  to  know  these  things ;  for  a  13 
state  is  often  as  much  in  want  of  money  and  of  such  devices 
for  obtaining  it  as  a  household,  or  even  more  so ;  hence  some 
public  men  devote  themselves  entirely  to  finance. 

Of  household  management  we  have  seen  ^  that  there  are  12 
three  parts — one  is  the  rule  of  a  master  over  slaves,  which 
has   been  discussed  already  ^,  another  of  a  father,   and  the 
third  of  a  husband.     A  husband  and  father  rules  over  wife 
and  children,   both   free,  but  the  rule  differs,  the  rule  over 
his  children  being  a  royal,  over  his  wife  a  constitutional  rule.  1259  b 
For  although  there  may  be  exceptions  to  the  order  of  nature, 
the  male  is  by  nature  fitter  for  command  than  the  female,  just 
as  the  elder  and  full-grown  is  superior  to  the  younger  and 
more  immature.     But  in  most  constitutional  states  the  citizens  2 
rule  and  are  ruled  by  turns,  for  the  idea  of  a  constitutional 
state  implies  that  the  natures  of  the  citizens  are  equal,  and 
do  not  differ  at  all  *.     Nevertheless,  when  one  rules  and  the 
other  is  ruled  we  endeavour  to  create  a  difference  of  outward 
forms  and  modes  of  address  and  titles  of  respect,  which  may 
be  illustrated  by  the  saying  of  Amasis  about  his  foot-pan  ^. 
The  relation  of  the  male  to  the  female  is  of  this  kind,  but  3 
there  the  inequality  is  permanent.     The  rule  of  a  father  over 
his  children  is  royal,  for  he  receives  both  love  and  the  respect 
due  to  age,  exercising  a  kind  of  royal  power.     And  therefore 

*  Reading  fvprjfxa  with  Bernays.  ^  Cp.  c.  3.  §  1. 
^  Cp.  c.  3-7.                                          *  Cp.  ii.  2.  §  6;  iii.  17.  §  4. 

*  Herod,  ii.  172,  and  note  on  this  passage. 

DAVIS  E 


fo         Firtiie  in  the  Subject  Classes 

1. 12  Homer  has  appropriately  called  Zeus  '  father  of  Gods  and 
men,'  because  he  is  the  king  of  them  all.  For  a  king  is  the 
natural  superior  of  his  subjects,  but  he  should  be  of  the  same 
kin  or  kind  with  them,  and  such  is  the  relation  of  elder  and 
younger,  of  father  and  son. 
13  Thus  it  is  clear  that  household  management  attends  more 
to  men  than  to  the  acquisition  of  inanimate  things,  and  to 
human  excellence  more  than  to  the  excellence  of  property 
which  we  call  wealth,  and  to  the  virtue  of  freemen  more  than 
3  to  the  virtue  of  slaves.  A  question  may  indeed  be  raised, 
whether  there  is  any  excellence  at  all  in  a  slave  beyond  merely 
instrumental  and  ministerial  qualities — whether  he  can  have 
the  virtues  of  temperance,  courage,  justice,  and  the  like ;  or 
whether  slaves  possess  only  bodily  and  ministerial  qualities. 
And,>  whichever  way  we  answer  the   question,  a  difficulty 

3  arises ;  for,  if  they  have  virtue,  in  what  will  they  differ  from 
freemen  ?  On  the  other  hand,  since  they  are  men  and  share 
in  reason,  it  seems  absurd  to  say  that  they  have  no  virtue. 
A  similar  question  may  be  raised  about  women  and  children, 
whether  they  too  have  virtues :  ought  a  woman  to  be  tem- 
perate and  brave  and  just,  and  is  a  child  to  be  called  temperate, 

4  and  intemperate,  or  not  ?  So  in  general  we  may  ask  about 
the  natural  ruler,  and  the  natural  subject,  whether  they  have 
the  same  or  different  virtues.  For  a  noble  nature  is  equally 
required  in  both,  but  if  so,  why  should  one  of  them  always 
rule,  and  the  other  always  be  ruled  ?  Nor  can  we  say  that 
this  is  a  question  of  degree,  for  the  difference  between  ruler 
and  subject  is  a  difference  of  kind,  and  therefore  not  of 
degree ;    yet  how   strange   is  the   supposition   that   the  one 

5  ought,  and  that  the  other  ought  not,  to  have  virtue !  For  if 
the  ruler  is  intemperate  and  unjust,  how  can  he  rule  well  ? 


Virtues  not  the  same  for  All         s;i 

if  the  subject,  how  can  he  obey  well  ?     If  he  be  licentious  I.  13 
and  cowardly,  he  will  certainly  not  do  his  duty.    It  is  evident,  -^^  "  * 
therefore,  that  both  of  them  must  have  a  share  of  virtue,  but 
varying  according  to  their  various  natures.     And  this  is  at  6 
once  indicated  by  the  soul,  in  which  one  part  naturally  rules, 
and  the  other  is  subject,  and  the  virtue  of  the  ruler  we  main- 
tain to  be  different  from  that  of  the  subject ; — the  one  being 
the  virtue  of  the  rational,  and  the  other  of  the  irrational  part. 
Now,  it  is  obvious  that  the  same  principle  applies  generally, 
and  therefore  almost  all  things  rule  and  are  ruled  according  to 
nature.     But  the  kind  of  rule  differs  ; — the  freeman  rules  over  7 
the  slave  after  another  manner  from  that  in  which  the  male 
rules  over  the  female,  or  the  man  over  the  child ;  although 
the  parts  of  the  soul  are  present  in  all  of  them,  they  are  pre- 
sent in  different  degrees.     For  the  slave  has  no  deliberative 
faculty  at  all ;  the  woman  has,  but  it  is  *  without  authority^, 
and  the  child  has,  but  it  is  immature.     So  it  must  necessarily  8 
be  with  the  moral  virtues  also  ;  all  may  be  supposed  to  partake 
of  them,  but  only  in  such  manner  and  degree  as  is  required  by 
each  for  the  fulfilment  of  his  duty.      Hence  the  ruler  ought 
to  have  moral  virtue  in  perfection,  for  his  duty  is  entirely 
that  of  a  master  artificer,  and  the  master  artificer  is  reason ; 
the  subjects,  on  the  other  hand,  require  only  that  measure  of 
virtue  which  is  proper  to  each  of  them.      Clearly,  then,  moral  9 
virtue  belongs  to  all  of  them ;  but  the  temperance  of  a  man 
and  of  a  woman,  or  the  courage  and  justice  of  a  man  and  of 
a  woman,  are  not,  as  Socrates  maintained'^,  the  same;    the 
courage  of  a  man  is  shown  in  commanding,  of  a  woman  in 
obeying.     And  this  holds  of  all  other  virtues,  as  will  be  more  10 
clearly  seen  if  we  look  at  them  in  detail,  for  those  who  say 
^  Or,  with  Beriiays,  '  inconclusive.'  ^  Plato  Meiio,  71-73. 

K  2 


yz  The  Slave  and  the  Artisan 

I.  13  generally  that  virtue  consists  in  a  good  disposition  of  the 
soul,  or  in  doing  rightly,  or  the  like,  only  deceive  themselves. 
Far  better  than  such  definitions  is  their  mode  of  speaking, 

1 1  who,  like  Georgias  \  enumerate  the  virtues.  All  classes 
must  be  deemed  to  have  their  special  attributes ;  as  the  poet 
says  of  women, 

'Silence  is  a  woman's  glory '^j' 

but  this  is  not  equally  the  glory  of  man.    The  child  is  imper- 
fect, and  therefore  obviously  his  virtue  is  not  relative  to  him- 

1 2  self  alone,  but  to  the  perfect  man  and  to  his  teacher ',  and  in 
like  manner  the  virtue  of  the  slave  is  relative  to  a  master. 
Now  we  determined  that  a  slave  is  useful  for  the  wants  of 
life,  and  therefore  he  will  obviously  require  only  so  much 
virtue  as  will  prevent  him  from  failing  in  his  duty  through 
cowardice  and  intemperance.  Some  one  will  ask  whether,  if 
what  we  are  saying  is  true,  virtue  will  not  be  required  also  in 
the  artisans,  for  they  often  fail  in  their  work  through  miscon- 

13  duct.  But  is  there  not  a  great  difference  in  the  two  cases? 
For  the  slave  shares  in  his  master's  life ;  the  artisan  is  less 
closely  connected  with  him,  and  only  attains  excellence  in 
proportion  as  he  becomes  a  slave,  [i.  e.  is  under  the  direction 
of  a  master].     The  meaner  sort  of  mechanic  has  a  special 

1260  b  and  separate  slavery ;  and  whereas  the  slave  exists  by  nature, 

14  not  so  the  shoemaker  or  other  artisan.  It  is  manifest,  then^ 
that  the  master  ought  to  be  the  source  of  excellence  in  the 
slave ;  but  not  merely  because  he  possesses  the  art  which  trains 
him  in  his  duties  *.  Wherefore  they  are  mistaken  who  forbid 
us  to  converse  with  slaves  and  say  that  we  should  employ 

^  Plato  Meno,  71-73.  '"'  Soph.  Aj.  293. 

^  '  His  father  who  guides  him '  (Bernays),  *  Cp.  c,  7.  §  4. 


End  of  'Preliminary  Enquiry  5-3 

command  only  \  for  slaves  stand  even  more  in  need  of  admoni-  I.  13 
tion  than  children. 

The  relations  of  husband  and  wife,  parent  and  child,  their  15 
several  virtues,  what  in  their  intercourse  with  one  another  is 
good,  and  what  is  evil,  and  how  we  may  pursue  the  good  and 
escape  the  evil,  will  have  to  be  discussed  when  we  speak  of 
the  different  forms  of  government.  For,  inasmuch  as  every 
family  is  a  part  of  a  state,  and  these  relationships  are  the 
parts  of  a  family,  the  virtue  of  the  part  must  have  regard  to 
the  virtue  of  the  whole.  And  therefore  women  and  children 
must  be  trained  by  education  with  an  eye  to  the  state  ^,  if  the 
virtues  of  either  of  them  are  supposed  to  make  any  difference 
in  the  virtues  of  the  state.  And  they  must  make  a  difference  :  16 
for  the  children  grow  up  to  be  citizens,  and  half  the  free 
persons  in  a  state  are  women  ^. 

Of  these  matters,  enough  has  been  said  ;  of  what  remains,  14 
let  us  speak  at  another  time.     Regarding,  then,  our  present 
enquiry  as  complete,  we  wUl  make  a  new  beginning.     And, 
first,  let  us  examine  the  various  theories  of  a  perfect  state. 

1  Plato  Laws,  vi.  777.  ^  Cp.  v.  9.  §§  I1-15  ;  viii.  i.  §  I, 

^  Plato  Laws,  vi.  781  b. 


BOOK    II 

II.  1  Our  purpose  is  to  consider  what  form  of  political  commu- 
nity is  best  of  all  for  those  who  are  most  able  to  realize  their 
ideal  of  life.  We  must  therefore  examine  not  only  this  but 
other  constitutions,  both  such  as  actually  exist  in  well-governed 
states,  and  any  theoretical  forms  which  are  held  in  esteem ; 
that  what  is  good  and  useful  may  be  brought  to  light.  And 
let  no  one  suppose  that  in  seeking  for  something  beyond  them 
^  we  at  all  want  to  philosophize  at  the  expense  of  truth  * ;  we 
only  undertake  this  enquiry  because  all  the  constitutions  with 
which  we  are  acquainted  are  faulty. 

2  We  will  begin  with  the  natural  beginning  of  the  subject. 
Three  alternatives  are  conceivable :  The  members  of  a  state 
must  either  have  (i)  all  things  or  (2)  nothing  in  common,  or 
(3)  some  things  in  common  and  some  not.  That  they  should 
have  nothing  in  common  is  clearly  impossible,  for  the  state  is 
a  community,  and  must  at  any  rate  have  a  common  place — 

1261  a  one  city  will  be  in  one  place,  and  the  citizens  are  those  who 

3  share  in  that  one  city.  But  should  a  well-ordered  state  have 
all  things,  as  far  as  may  be,  in  common,  or  some  only  and 
not  others  ?  For  the  citizens  might  conceivably  have  wives 
and  children  and  property  in  common,  as  Socrates  proposes 
in  the  Republic  of  Plato*.  Which  is  better,  our  present 
condition,  or  the  proposed  new  order  of  society  ? 

^  Or,  as  Bemays,  taking  it&vroK  with  ao<l)t((a0ai  fiovkoniva/v,  *  we 
are  anxious  to  make  a  sophistical  display  at  any  cost.' 
2  Rep.  V.  457  c. 


False  Conceptio7i  of  ^nity  fy 

There  are  many  difficulties  in  the  community  of  women.  II.  2 
The  principle  on  which  Socrates  rests  the  necessity  of  such 
an  institution  does  not  appear  to  be  established  by  his  argu- 
ments ;  and  then  again  as  a  means  to  the  end  which  he  ascribes 
to  the  state,  taken  literally,  it  is  impossible,  and  how  we  are  to 
limit  and  qualify  it  is  nowhere  precisely  stated.  I  am  speak-  2 
ing  of  the  premiss  from  which  the  argument  of  Socrates  pro- 
ceeds, '  that  the  greater  the  unity  of  the  state  the  better.'  Is 
it  not  obvious  that  a  state  may  at  length  attain  such  a  degree 
of  unity  as  to  be  no  longer  a  state  ? — since  the  nature  of  a 
state  is  to  be  a  plurality,  and  in  tending  to  greater  unity,  from 
being  a  state,  it  becomes  a  family,  and  from  being  a  family, 
an  individual ;  for  the  family  may  be  said  to  be  mere  one 
than  the  state,  and  the  individual  than  the  family.  So  that 
we  ought  not  to  attain  this  greatest  unity  even  if  we  could,  for 
it  would  be  the  destruction  of  the  state.  Again,  a  state  is  3 
not  made  up  only  of  so  many  men,  but  of  different  kinds  of 
men ;  for  similars  do  not  constitute  a  state.  It  is  not  like 
a  military  alliance,  of  which  the  usefulness  depends  upon 
its  quantity  even  where  there  is  no  difference  in  quality. 
For  in  that  mutual  protection  is  the  end  aimed  at ;  and  the 
question  is  the  same  as  about  the  scales  of  a  balance :  which 
is  the  heavier  ? 

In  like  manner,  a  state  differs  from  a  nation,  whenever  in 
a  nation  the  people  are  not  dispersed  in  villages,  but  are  in 
the  condition  of  the  Arcadians  ;  in  a  state  the  elements  out  of 
which  the  unity  is  to  be  formed  differ  in  kind.  Wherefore  4 
the  principle  of  reciprocity  \  as  I  have  already  remarked  in 
the  Ethics  ^,  is  the  salvation  of  states.  And  among  freemen 
and  equals  this  is  a  principle  which  must  be  maintained,  for 
'  Or,  '  reciprocal  proportion.'  "  N.  Eth.  v.  8.  §  6. 


f6  Plato's  T{epublic: 

II.  2  they  cannot  all  rule  together,  but  must  change  at  the  end  of 
a  year  or  some  other  period  of  time  or  in  some  order  of  suc- 

5  cession.  The  result  is  that  upon  this  plan  they  all  govern ; 
[but  the  manner  of  government  is]  just  as  if  shoemakers  and 
carpenters  were  to  exchange  their  occupations,  and  the  same 
persons  did  not  always  continue  shoemakers  and  carpenters. 

6  And  it  is  clearly  better  that,  as  in  business,  so  also  in  politics 
there  should  be  continuance  of  the  same  persons  where  this 

1261  b  is  possible.  But  where  this  is  not  possible  by  reason  of  the 
natural  equality  of  the  citizens,  and  it  would  be  unjust  that 
any  one  should  be  excluded  from  the  government  (whether 
to  govern  be  a  good  thing  or  a  bad  ^),  then  it  is  better, 
instead  of  all  holding  power,  to  adopt  a  principle  of  rotation, 
equals  giving  place  to  equals,  as  the  original  rulers  gave  place 

7  to  them  ^.  Thus  the  one  party  rule  and  the  others  are  ruled 
in  turn,  as  if  they  were  no  longer  the  same  persons.  In  like 
manner  there  is  a  variety  in  the  offices  held  by  them.  Hence 
it  is  evident  that  a  city  is  not  by  nature  one  in  that  sense 
which  some  persons  affirm ;  and  that  what  is  said  to  be  the 
greatest  good  of  cities  is  in  reality  their  destruction;  but 
surely  the  good  of  things  must  be  that  which  preserves  them  ^. 

*8  Again,  in  another  point  of  view,  this  extreme  unification 
of  the  state  is  clearly  not  good ;  for  a  family  is  more  self- 
sufficing  than  an  individual,  and  a  city  than  a  family,  and 
a  city  only  comes  into  being  when  the  community  is  large 
enough  to  be  self-sufficing.  If  then  self-sufficiency  is  to  be 
desired,  the  lesser  degree  of  unity  is  more  desirable  than  the 
greater. 

3       But,  even  supposing  that  it  were  best  for  the  community  to 

*  Cp.  PI.  Rep.  i.  345-6.  *  Cp.  i.  12.  §  2 ;  iii.  17.  §  4. 

'  Cp.  PI.  Rep.  i.  352. 


False  Conception  of  IJnity  f  7 

have  the  greatest  degree  of  unity,  this  unity  is  by  no  means  II.  3 
indicated  by  the  fact  'of  all  men  saying  "mine"  and  "not 
mine"  at  the  same  instant  of  time,'  which,  according  to 
Socrates  ^,  is  the  sign  of  perfect  unity  in  a  state.  For  the  2 
word  '  all '  is  ambiguous.  If  the  meaning  be  that  every  indi- 
vidual says  '  mine '  and  '  not  mine '  at  the  same  time,  then 
perhaps  the  result  at  which  Socrates  aims  may  be  in  some 
degree  accomplished ;  each  man  will  call  the  same  person  his 
own  son  and  his  own  wife,  and  so  of  his  property  and  of  all 
that  belongs  to  him.  This,  however,  is  not  the  way  in  which 
people  would  speak  who  had  their  wives  and  children  in 
common  ;  they  would  say  '  all '  but  not  '  each.'  In  like  man-  3 
ner  their  property  would  be  described  as  belonging  to  them, 
not  severally  but  collectively.  There  is  an  obvious  fallacy  in 
the  term  '  all ' :  like  some  other  words,  '  both,'  '  odd,'  '  even,' 
it  is  ambiguous,  and  in  argument  becomes  a  source  of  logical 
puzzles.  That  all  persons  call  the  same  thing  mine  in  the 
sense  in  which  each  does  so  may  be  a  fine  thing,  but  it  is 
impracticable ;  or  if  the  words  are  taken  in  the  other  sense 
[i.  e.  the  sense  which  distinguishes  '  all '  from  '  each  '],  such 
a  unity  in  no  way  conduces  to  harmony.  And  there  is  4 
another  objection  to  the  proposal.  For  that  which  is  common 
to  the  greatest  number  has  the  least  care  bestowed  upon  it. 
Every  one  thinks  chiefly  of  his  own,  hardly  at  all  of  the 
common  interest ;  and  only  when  he  is  himself  concerned  as 
an  individual.  For  besides  other  considerations,  everybody  is 
more  inclined  to  neglect  the  duty  which  he  expects  another  tp 
fulfil ;  as  in  families  many  attendants  are  often  less  useful  than 
a  few.  Each  citizen  will  have  a  thousand  sons  who  will  not  5 
be  his  sons  individually,  but  anybody  will  be  equally  the  son 
*  PI.  Rep.  V.  462  c. 


5*8  Plato's  J^eptihlic: 

II.  3  of  anybody,  and  will  therefore  be  neglected  by  all  alike. 
"  *  Further,  upon  this  principle,  every  one  will  call  another 
'  mine '  or  '  not  mine '  according  as  he  is  prosperous  or  the 
reverse  ; — however  small  a  fraction  he  may  be  of  the  whole 
number,  he  will  say  of  every  individual  of  the  thousand,  or 
whatever  be  the  number  of  the  city,  '  such  a  one  is  mine,' 
'  such  a  one  his ' ;  and  even  about  this  he  will  not  be  posi- 
tive ;  for  it  is  impossible  to  know  who  chanced  to  have  a 
child,  or  whether,  if  one  came  into  existence,  it  has  survived. 

6  But  which  is  better — to  be  able  to  say  '  mine '  about  every 
one  of  the  two  thousand  or  the  ten  thousand  citizens,  or  to 
use  the  word   '  mine '   in  the  ordinary  and  more  restricted 

7  sense  ?  For  usually  the  same  person  is  called  by  one  man 
his  son  whom  another  calls  his  brother  or  cousin  or  kinsman 
or  blood-relation  or  connexion  by  marriage  either  of  himself 
or  of  some  relation  of  his,  and  these  relationships  he  distin- 
guishes from  the  tie  which  binds  him  to  his  tribe  or  ward ; 
and  how  much  better  is  it  to  be  the  real  cousin  of  somebody 

8  than  to  be  a  son  after  Plato's  fashion  !  Nor  is  there  any 
way  of  preventing  brothers  and  children  and  fathers  and 
mothers  from  sometimes  recognizing  one  another;  for  chil- 
dren are  born  like  their  parents,  and  they  will  necessarily  be 

9  finding  indications  of  their  relationship  to  one  another.  Geo- 
graphers declare  such  to  be  the  fact ;  they  say  that  in  Upper 
Libya,  where  the  women  are  common,  nevertheless  the  chil- 
dren who  are  bom  are  assigned  to  their  respective  fathers  on 
the  ground  of  their  likeness'.  And  some  women,  like  the 
females  of  other  animals — for  example  mares  and  cows — 
have  a  strong  tendency  to  produce  offspring  resembling  their 

»  Cp.  Herod,  iv.  i8o. 


Community  of  Women  and  Children    S9 

parents,   as   was  the  case   with  the  Pharsalian   mare  called  II.  3 
Dicaea  (the  Just)\ 

Other  evils,  against  which  it  is  not  easy  for  the  authors  of  4 
such  a  community  to  guard,  will  be  assaults  and  homicides, 
voluntary  as  well  as  involuntary,  quarrels  and  slanders,  all 
which  are  most  unholy  acts  when  committed  against  fathers 
and  mothers  and  near  relations,  but  not  equally  unholy  when 
there  is  no  relationship.  Moreover,  they  are  much  more 
likely  to  occur  if  the  relationship  is  unknown,  and,  when  they 
have  occurred,  the  customary  expiations  of  them  cannot 
be  made.  Again,  how  strange  it  is  that  Socrates,  after  2 
having  made  the  children  common,  should  hinder  lovers 
from  carnal  intercourse  only,  but  should  permit  familiarities 
between  father  and  son  or  between  brother  and  brother, 
than  which  nothing  can  be  more  unseemly,  since  even 
without  them,  love  of  this  sort  is  improper.  How  strange,  3 
too,  to  forbid  intercourse  for  no  other  reason  than  the  violence 
of  the  pleasure,  as  though  the  relationship  of  father  and  son 
or  of  brothers  with  one  another  made  no  difference. 

This    community    of  wives   and     children    seems    better  4 
suited  to  the  husbandmen  than  to  the  guardians,  for  if  they 
have  wives   and   children   in  common,  they  will   be  bound  1262  b 
to  one  another  by  weaker  ties,  as  a  subject  class  should  be, 
and  they  will  remain  obedient  and  not  rebel  ^.    In  a  word,  the  5 
result  of  such  a  law  would  be  just  the  opposite  of  that  which 
good    laws    ought   to    have,   and    the    intention    of  Socrates 
in  making  these  regulations  about  women  and  children  would 
defeat  itself.  For  friendship  we  believe  to  be  the  greatest  good 
of  states  ^  and  the  preservative  of  them  against  revolutions ; 

*  Cp.  Hist.  Anim.  vii.  6,  p.  586  a.  13. 
^  Cp.  vii.  10,  §  13.  ^  Cp.  N.  Eth.  viii.  I.  §  4. 


6o  Plato's  J^epublic: 

II.  4  neither  is  there  anything  which  Socrates  so  greatly  lauds  as 
the  unity  of  the  state  which  he  and  all  the  world  declare 
to  be  created  by  friendship.  But  the  unity  which  he  com- 
mends ^  would  be  like  that  of  the  lovers  in  the  Sympo- 
sium*, who,  as  Aristophanes  says,  desire  to  grow  together 
in  the  excess  of  their  affection,  and  from  being  two  to 
>j  become  one,  in  which  case  one  or  both  would  certainly 
perish.  Whereas  [the  very  opposite  will  really  happen ;]  in 
a  state  having  women  and  children  common,  love  will  be 
watery ;  and  the  father  will  certainly  not  say  '  my  son,'  or 

8  the  son  '  my  father  '.'  As  a  little  sweet  wine  mingled  with 
a  great  deal  of  water  is  imperceptible  in  the  mixture,  so, 
in  this  sort  of  community,  the  idea  of  relationship  which 
is  based  upon  these  names  will  be  lost ;  there  is  no  reason 
why  the  so-called  father  should  care  about  the  son,  or 
the    son   about    the  father,  or  brothers   about    one  another. 

9  Of  the  two  qualities  which  chiefly  inspire  regard  and  affection 
— that  a  thing  is  your  own  and  that  you  love  it — neither 
can  exist  in  such  a  state  as  this. 

Again,  the  transfer  of  children  as  soon  as  they  are  bom 
from  the  rank  of  husbandmen  or  of  artisans  to  that  of 
guardians,  and  from  the  rank  of  guardians  into  a  lower  rank  *, 
will  be  very  difficult  to  arrange;  the  givers  or  transferrers 
cannot  but  know  whom  they  are  giving  and  transferring,  and 
lo  to  whom.  And  the  previously  mentioned  evils,  such  as 
assaults,  unlawful  loves,  homicides,  will  happen  more  often 
amongst  those  who  are  transferred  to  the  lower  classes, 
or  who  have  a  place  assigned  to  them  among  the  guardians ; 
for  they  will  no  longer  call  the  members  of  any  other  class 

^  Cp.  c.  2.  ^  Symp.  189-193.  *  Cp.  c.  3. 

*  Rep.  iii.  415. 


Community  of  Property  61 

brothers,  and  children,  and  fathers,  and  mothers,  and  will  II.  4 
not,  therefore,  be  afraid  of  committing  any  crimes  by  reason 
of  consanguinity.     Touching  the   community  of  wives  and 
children,  let  this  be  our  conclusion. 

Next  let  us  consider  what  should  be  our  arrangements  5 
about  property  :  should  the  citizens  of  the  perfect  state  have 
their  possessions  in  common  or  not  ?  This  question  may  2 
be  discussed  separately  from  the  enactments  about  women 
and  children.  Even  supposing  that  the  women  and  children  1268  a 
belong  to  individuals,  according  to  the  custom  which  is  at 
present  universal,  may  there  not  be  an  advantage  in  having  and 
using  possessions  in  common  ?  Three  cases  are  possible : 
(i)  the  soil  may  be  appropriated,  but  the  produce  may  be 
thrown  for  consumption  into  the  common  stock ;  and  this  is 
the  practice  of  some  nations.  Or  (2),  the  soil  may  be 
common,  and  may  be  cultivated  in  common,  but  the  produce 
divided  among  individuals  for  their  private  use  ;  this  is  a  form 
of  common  property  which  is  said  to  exist  among  certain 
barbarians.  Or  (3),  the  soil  and  the  produce  may  be  alike 
common. 

When  the  husbandmen  are  not  the  citizens,  the  case  will  3 
be  different  and  easier  to  deal  with ;  but  when  the  citizens  till 
the  ground  themselves  the  question  of  ownership  will  give  a 
world  of  trouble.  If  they  do  not  share  equally  in  enjoyments 
and  toils,  those  who  labour  much  and  get  little  will  necessarily 
complain  of  those  who  labour  little  and  receive  or  consume 
much.  There  is  always  a  difficulty  in  men  living  together  and  4 
having  things  in  common,  but  especially  in  their  having 
common  property.  The  partnerships  of  fellow-travellers  are 
an  example  to  the  point ;  for  they  generally  fall  out  by 
the  way  and   quarrel  about  any  trifle  which   turns  up.     So 


62  Plato's  l{eptiblic: 


II.  5  with  servants :  we  are  most  liable  to  take  offence  at  those 
with  whom  we  most  frequently  come  into  contact  in  daily 
life. 

5  These  are  only  some  of  the  disadvantages  which  attend 
the  community  of  property ;  the  present  arrangement,  if  im- 
proved as  it  might  be  by  good  customs  and  laws,  would  be 
far  better,  and  would  have  the  advantages  of  both  systems. 
Property   should  be  in   a  certain   sense  common,  but,  as  a 

6  general  rule,  private ;  for,  when  every  one  has  a  distinct 
interest ',  men  will  not  complain  of  one  another,  and  they 
will  make  more  progress,  because  every  one  will  be  attending 
to  his  own  business.  And  yet  among  the  good,  and  in 
respect  of  use,  '  Friends,'  as  the  proverb  says,  '  will  have  all 
things  common  '^.'  Even  now  there  are  traces  of  such  a 
principle,  showing  that  it  is  not  impracticable,  but,  in  well- 
ordered    states,  exists   already  to  a  certain  extent  and  may 

7  be  carried  further.  For,  although  every  man  has  his  own 
property,  some  things  he  will  place  at  the  disposal  of  his 
friends,  while  of  others  he  shares  the  use  with  them.  The 
Lacedaemonians,  for  example,  use  one  another's  slaves,  and 
horses  and  dogs,  as  if  they  were  their  own  ;  and  when  they 
happen  to  be  in  the  country,   they  appropriate  in  the  fields 

8  whatever  provisions  they  want.  It  is  clearly  better  that  property 
should  be  private,  but  the  use  of  it  common  ;  and  the  special 
business  of  the  legislator  is  to  create  in  men  this  benevolent 
disposition.   Again,  how  immeasurably  greater  is  the  pleasure, 

1203  b  when  a  man  feels  a  thing  to  be  his  own ;  for  the  love  of  self  ^ 
is   a    feeling    implanted   by    nature    and    not  given    in   vain, 

9  although  selfishness  is  rightly  censured ;  this,  however,  is  not 

*  Cp.  Rep.  ii.  374.  "  Cp.  Rep.  iv.  424  a. 

*  Cp.  N.  Eth.  ix.  8.  §  6. 


Community  of  Property  6i 

the  mere  love  of  self,  but  the  love  of  self  in  excess,  like  II.  5 
the  miser's  love  of  money ;  for  all,  or  almost  all,  men  love 
money,  and  other  such  objects  in  a  measure.  And  further, 
there  is  the  greatest  pleasure  in  doing  a  kindness  or  service  to 
friends  or  guests  or  companions,  which  can  only  be  rendered 
when  a  man  has  private  property.  The  advantage  is  lost  by  lo 
the  excessive  unification  of  the  state.  Two  virtues  are 
annihilated  in  such  a  state  :  first,  temperance  towards  women 
(for  it  is  an  honourable  action  to  abstain  from  another's  wife 
for  temperance  sake) ;  secondly,  liberality  in  the  matter  of 
property.  No  one,  when  men  have  all  things  in  common, 
will  any  longer  set  an  example  of  liberality  or  do  any 
liberal  action  ;  for  liberality  consists  in  the  use  which  is  made 
of  property  ^ 

Such  legislation  may  have  a  specious  appearance  of  ii 
benevolence ;  men  readily  listen  to  it,  and  are  easily  induced 
to  believe  that  in  some  wonderful  manner  everybody  will 
become  everybody's  friend,  especially  when  some  one  ^  is 
heard  denouncing  the  evils  now  existing  in  states,  suits 
about  contracts,  convictions  for  perjury,  flatteries  of  rich  men 
and  the  like,  which  are  said  to  arise  out  of  the  possession  of 
private  property.  These  evils,  however,  are  due  to  a  very  13 
different  cause — the  wickedness  of  human  nature.  Indeed, 
we  see  that  there  is  much  more  quarrelling  among  those 
who  have  all  things  in  common,  though  there  are  not  many 
of  them  when  compared  with  the  vast  numbers  who  have 
private  property. 

Again,  we    ought   to    reckon,    not    only    the    evils  from  i; 
which   the  citizens   will  be  saved,   but  also  the  advantages 
which  they  will  lose.  The  life  which  they  are  to  lead  appears 
»  Cp.  N.  Eth.  iv.  i.§  I.  '■*  Rep.  v.  464,  465. 


6/\.  Plato* s  Republic: 

II.  5  to  be  quite  impracticable.  The  error  of  Socrates  must  be 
attributed  to  the  false  notion  of  unity  from  which  he  starts. 
14  Unity  there  should  be,  both  of  the  family  and  of  the  state, 
but  in  some  respects  only.  For  there  is  a  point  at  which 
a  state  may  attain  such  a  degree  of  unity  as  to  be  no  longer  a 
state,  or  at  which,  without  actually  ceasing  to  exist,  it  will 
become  an  inferior  state,  like  harmony  passing  into  unison, 

115  or  rhythm  which  has  been  reduced  to  a  single  foot.  The 
state,  as  I  was  saying,  is  a  plurality  ^,  which  should  be 
united  and  made  into  a  community  by  education  ;  and  it 
is  strange  that  the  author  of  a  system  of  education,  which 
he  thinks  will  make  the  state  virtuous,  should  expect  to 
improve  his  citizens  by  regulations  of  this  sort,  and  not 
by  philosophy  or  by  customs  and  laws,  like  those  which 
prevail  at  Sparta  and  Crete  respecting  common  meals,  where- 
1264  a  by  the  legislator  has  [to  a  certain  degree]  made  property 
16  common.  Let  us  remember  that  we  should  not  disregard  the 
experience  of  ages ;  in  the  multitude  of  years  these  things,  if 
they  were  good,  would  certainly  not  have  been  unknown  ;  for 
almost  everything  has  been  found  out,  although  sometimes 
they  are  not  put  together ;  in  other  cases  men  do  not  use  the 
7  knowledge  which  they  have.  Great  light  would  be  thrown  on 
this  subject  if  we  could  see  such  a  form  of  government  in  the 
actual  process  of  construction ;  for  the  legislator  could  not 
form  a  state  at  all  without  distributing  and  dividing  the  citizens 
into  associations  for  common  meals,  and  into  phratries  and 
tribes.  But  all  this  legislation  ends  only  in  forbidding 
agriculture  to  the  guardians,  a  prohibition  which  the  Lace- 
daemonians try  to  enforce  already. 
iS  Again,  Socrates  has  not  said,  nor  is  it  easy  to  decide, 
^  Cp.  c.  3.  §  2. 


Miscellaneous  Criticisms  6f 

what  in  such  a  community  will  be  the  general  form  of  the  II. 
state.  The  citizens  who  are  not  guardians  are  the  majority, 
and  about  them  nothing  has  been  determined :  are  the 
husbandmen,  too,  to  have  their  property  in  common  ?  Or, 
besides  the  common  land  which  he  tills,  is  each  individual 
to  have  his  own  ?  and  are  their  wives  and  children  to 
be  individual  or  common  ?  If,  like  the  guardians,  they  are  to  19 
have  all  things  in  common,  in  what  do  they  differ  from  them, 
or  what  will  they  gain  by  submitting  to  their  government  ? 
Or,  upon  what  principle  would  they  submit,  unless  indeed 
the  governing  class  adopt  the  ingenious  policy  of  the  Cretans, 
who  give  their  slaves  the  same  institutions  as  their  own, 
but  forbid  them  gymnastic  exercises  and  the  possession  of 
arms.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  the  inferior  classes  are  too  20 
like  other  cities  in  respect  of  marriage  and  property,  what  will 
be  the  form  of  the  community  ?  Must  it  not  contain  two 
states  in  one  ^,  each  hostile  to  the  other  ?  ^  One  class  will 
consist  of  the  guardians,  who  are  a  sort  of  watchmen ; 
another,  of  the  husbandmen,  and  there  will  be  the  artisans  and 
the  other  citizens  ^.  But  [if  so]  the  suits  and  quarrels,  and  all  21 
the  evils  which  Socrates  affirms  '  to  exist  in  other  states,  will 
exist  equally  among  them.  He  says  indeed  that,  having  so 
good  an  education,  the  citizens  will  not  need  many  laws,  for 
example,  laws  about  the  city  or  about  the  markets  * ;  but  then 
he  confines  his  education  to  the  guardians.  Again,  he  makes  22 
the  husbandmen  owners  of  the  land  upon  condition  of  their 
paying  a  tribute  ■'.  But  in  that  case  they  are  likely  to  be  much 

1  Cp.  Rep.  iv.  422  E. 

*  Or  (with  Bernays),  '  He  makes  the  guardians  into  a  mere  occupying 
garrison,  while  the  husbandmen  and  artisan?  and  the  rest  are  the  real 
citizens ; '  see  note. 

^  Rep.  V.  464,  465.  *  Rep.  17.  425  d.  »  Rep.  v.  464  c. 


66  P/ato's  J^epublic : 

II.  6  more  unmanageable  and  conceited  than  the  Helots,  or 
23  Penestae,  or  slaves  in  general  \  And  whether  community 
of  wives  and  property  be  necessary  for  the  lower  equally 
with  the  higher  class  or  not,  and  the  questions  akin  to  this, 
what  will  be  the  education,  form  of  government,  laws  of 
the  lower  class,  Socrates  has  nowhere  determined:  neither 
is  it  easy,  though  very  important,  to  discover  what  should 
be  the  character  of  the  inferior  classes,  if  the  common  life  of 
the  guardians  is  to  be  maintained. 

1264  b  Again,  if  Socrates  makes  the  women  common,  and  retains 
^4  private  property,  the  men  will  see  to  the  fields,  but  who 
wUl  see  to  the  house  ?  ^  And  what  will  happen  if  the 
agricultural  class  have  both  their  property  and  their  wives 
in  common  ^  ?  Once  more ;  it  is  absurd  to  argue,  from 
the  analogy  of  the  animals,  that  men  and  women  should 
follow  the  same  pursuits  ^ ;  for  animals  have  not  to  manage 

25  a  household.  The  government,  too,  as  constituted  by 
Socrates,  contains  elements  of  danger  ;  for  he  makes  the  same 
persons  always  rule.  And  if  this  is  often  a  cause  of  dis- 
turbance among  the  meaner  sort,  how  much  more  among  high- 

26  spirited  warriors  ?  But  that  the  persons  whom  he  makes 
rulers  must  be  the  same  is  evident ;  for  the  gold  which  the 
God  mingles  in  the  souls  of  men  is  not  at  one  time  given  to 
one,  at  another  time  to  another,  but  always  to  the  same :  as 
he  says,  *  God  mingles  gold  in  some,  and  silver  in  others, 
from  their  very  birth ;  but  brass  and  iron  in  those  who  are 

27  meant  to  be  artisans  and  husbandmen  *.'  Again,  he  deprives 
the  guardians  of  happiness,  and  says  that  the  legislator  ought 
to  make  the  whole  state  happy'.       But  the  whole  cannot 

'  Cp.  c.  9.  §  2,  *  These  words  are  bracketed  by  Bekker. 

'  Cp.  Rep.  V.  451  D.      *  Cp.  Rep.  Hi,  415  a.      *  Rep,  iv.  419,  420. 


Criticisms  67 

be  happy  unless  most,  or  all,  or  some  of  its  parts  enjoy  II.  5 
happiness^.  In  this  respect  happiness  is  not  like  the  even 
principle  in  numbers,  which  may  exist  only  in  the  whole, 
but  in  none  of  the  parts  ;  not  so  happiness.  And  if  the  28 
guardians  are  not  happy,  who  are  ?  Surely  not  the  artisans, 
or  the  common  people.  The  Republic  of  which  Socrates 
discourses  has  all  these  difficulties,  and  others  quite  as 
great. 

The  same,  or  nearly  the  same,  objections  apply  to  Plato's  6 
later  work,  the  Laws,  and  therefore  we  had  better  examine 
briefly  the  constitution  which  is  therein  described.     In  the 
Republic,  Socrates  has  definitely  settled  in  all  a  few  questions 
only;  such  as  the  community  of  women  and  children,   the 
community  of  property,  and   the  constitution    of  the   state. 
The  population  is  divided  into  two  classes — one  of  husband-  2 
men,  and  the  other  of  warriors  ;  from   this   latter  is  taken 
a   third  class  of  counsellors  and  rulers  of  the   state.     But  3 
Socrates   has  not  determined  whether  the   husbandmen  and 
artisans  are  to  have  a  share  in  the  government,  and  whether 
they,  too,   are  to  carry  arms  and  share  in  military  service, 
or  not.     He  certainly  thinks  that  the  women  ought  to  share 
in  the  education  of  the  guardians,  and  to  fight  by  their  side. 
The  remainder   of  the  work  is   filled  up    with    digressions 
foreign  to  the  main  subject,  and  with  discussions  about   the 
education  of  the  guardians.       In   the  Laws  there  is  hardly  1266  a 
anything  but  laws ;  not  much  is  said  about  the  constitution.  ^ 
This,  which  he  had  intended  to  make  more  of  the  ordinary 
type,  he  gradually   brings  round  te  the  other  or  ideal  form. 
For  with   the   exception   of  the  community  of  women  and  5 
property,    he  supposes   everything  to   be  the    same  in    both 

'  Cp.  vii.  9.  §  7. 
F  3 


6%  Plato's  Lams: 

II.  e  states ;  there  is  to  be  the  same  education ;  the  citizens  of 
both  are  to  live  free  from  servile  occupations,  and  there  are  to 
be  common  meals  in  both.  The  only  difference  is  that  in  the 
Laws,  the  common  meals  are  extended  to  women  *,  and 
the  warriors  number  about  5000  ^,  but  in  the  Republic  only 
1 000  ^. 

6  The  discourses  of  Socrates  are  never  commonplace ;  they 
always  exhibit  grace  and  originality  and  thought ;  but  perfec- 
tion in  everything  can  hardly  be  expected.  We  must  not 
overlook  the  fact  that  the  number  of  5000  citizens,  just  now 
mentioned,  will  require  a  territory  as  large  as  Babylonia,  or 
some  other  huge  country,  if  so  many  persons  are  to  be  sup- 
ported in  idleness,  together  with  their  women  and  attendants, 

7  who  will  be  a  multitude  many  times  as  great.  [In  framing 
an  ideal]  we  may  assume  what  we  wish,  but  should  avoid 
impossibilities  *. 

It  is  said  [in  the  Laws]  that  the  legislator  ought  to  have 
his  eye  directed  to  two  points, — the  people  and  the  country  ". 
But  neighbouring  countries  also  must  not  be  forgotten  by 
him®,  if  the  state  for  which  he  legislates  is  to  have  a  true 
political  life ''.  For  a  state  must  have  such  a  military  force 
as  will  be  serviceable  against  her  neighbours,  and  not  merely 

8  useful  at  home.  Even  if  the  life  of  action  is  not  admitted  to 
be  the  best,  either  for  individuals  or  states  *,  still  a  city  should 
be  formidable  to  enemies,  whether  invading  or  retreating. 

There  is  another  point ;  Should  not  the  amount  of  pro- 
perty be  defined  in  some  clearer  way  ?     For  Socrates  says 

^  Laws,  vi.  781.  *  Laws,  v.  737  e. 

•'  Rep.  iv.  423  A  (but  see  note  on  this  passage). 

*  Cp.  vii.  4.  §  2.  '  Perhaps  Laws,  703-707  and  747  D  (?). 

*  Cp.  c.  7.  §  14.  '  Cp.  vii.  6.  §  7.         *  Cp.  vii.  c.  2  and  3. 


Criticisms  dp 

that  a  man  should  have  so  much  property  as  will  enable  him  II.  6 
to  live  temperately  ^,  which  is  only  a  way  of  saying  '  to  live 
well ' ;  this  would  be  the  higher  or  more  general  conception. 
But  a  man  may  livejemperately  and  yet  miserably.     A  better  9 
definition  would  be  that  a  man  must  have  so  much  property 
as  will  enable  him  to  live  not  only  temperately  but  liberally  ^ ; 
if  the  two  are  parted,  liberality  will  combine  with  luxury  ;  toil 
will  be  associated  with  temperance.     For  liberality  and  tem- 
perance are  the  only  vh-tues  ^  which  have  to  do  with  the  use 
of  property.     A  man  cannot  use  property  with  mildness  or 
courage,  but  temperately  and  liberally  he  may ;  and  therefore 
the  practice  of  these  virtues  is   inseparable  from   property. 
There  is  an  inconsistency,  too,  in  equalizing  the  property  and  10 
not  regulating  the  number  of  the  citizens  *  ;  the  population  is 
to  remain  unlimited,  and  he  thinks  that  it  will  be  sufficiently 
equalized  by  a  certain  number  of  marriages  being  unfruitful, 
however  many  are  born  to  others,  because  he  finds  this  to  be  1265  1> 
the  case  in  existing  states.      But  [in  Plato's  imaginary  state]  1 1 
greater  care  will  be  required  than  now ;   for  among  ourselves, 
whatever  may  be  the  number  of  citizens,  the  property  is  always 
distributed  among  them,  and  therefore  no  one  is  in  want ;  but, 
if  the  property  were  incapable  of  division  [as  in  the  Laws], 
the  supernumeraries,  whether  few  or  many,  would  get  nothing. 
One  would  have  thought  that  it  was  even  more  necessaiy  to  12 
limit  population  than  property ;  and  that  the  limit  should  be 
fixed  by  calculating  the  chances  of  mortality  in  the  children, 
and  of  sterility  in  married  persons.     The  neglect  of  this  sub-  13 
ject,  which  in  existing  states  is  so  common,  is  a  never-failing 

'  Laws,  V.  737  D.  *  Cp.  vii.  5.  §  I. 

*  Omitting  'i^tis  and  reading  aptrai  with  the  MSS.,  or,  reading  with 
Bekk.  i'f  tjy  auptToi, '  eligible  qualities.'  *  But  see  Laws,  v.  740- 


70  Plato^s  Laws: 

II.  6  cause  of  poverty  among  the  citizens ;  and  poverty  is  the  parent 
of  revohjtion  and  crime.  Pheidon  the  Corinthian,  who  was 
one  of  the  most  ancient  legislators,  thought  that  the  families 
and  the  number  of  citizens  ought  to  remain  the  same,  although 
originally  all  the  lots  may  have  been  of  different  sizes ;  but  in 

14  the  Laws,  the  opposite  principle  is  maintained.  What  in  our 
opinion  is  the  right  arrangement  will  have  to  be  explained 
hereafter '. 

There  is  another  omission  in  the  Laws ;  Socrates  does  not 
tell  us  how  the  rulers  differ  from  their  subjects ;  he  only  says 
that  they  should  be  related  as  the  warp  and  the  woof,  which 

15  are  made  out  of  different  wools  *.  He  allows  that  a  man's 
whole  property  may  be  increased  fivefold ',  but  why  should  not 
his  land  also  increase  to  a  certain  extent  ?  Again,  will  the 
good  management  of  a  household  be  promoted  by  his  arrange- 
ment of  homesteads  ?  for  he  assigns  to  each  individual  two 

16  homesteads  in  separate  places  *,  and  it  is  difficult  to  live  in  two 
houses. 

The  whole  system  of  government  tends  to  be  neither  demo- 
cracy nor  oligarchy,  but  something  in  a  mean  between  them, 
which  is  usually  called  a  polity,  and  is  composed  of  the  heavy 
armed  soldiers.  Now,  if  he  intended  to  frame  a  constitution 
which  would  suit  the  greatest  number  of  states,  he  was  very 
likely  right,  but  not  if  he  meant  to  say  that  this  constitutional 
form  came  nearest  to  his  first  or  ideal  state ;  for  many  would 

1 7  prefer  the  Lacedaemonian,  or,  possibly,  some  other  more  aris- 
tocratic government.     Some,  indeed,  say  that  the  best  consti- 

•  Cp.  vii.  5.  §  I ;  10.  §  II  ;  16.  §  15  ;  but  the  promise  is  hardly 
fulfilled. 

»  Laws,  V.  734  E,  735  A.  ^  Laws,  v.  744  e. 

'  Laws,  V.  745,  but  cp.  infra,  vii.  10.  §  II. 


The  Form  of  Government  71 

tution  is  a  combination  of  all  existing  forms ,  and  they  praise  the  II.  6 
Lacedaemonian  ^  because  it  is  made  up  of  oligarchy,  monarchy, 
democracy,  the  king  forming  the  monarchy,  and  the  council 
of  elders  the  oligarchy,  while  the  democratic  element  is 
represented  by  the  Ephors ;  for  the  Ephors  are  selected  from 
the  people.  Others,  however,  declare  the  Ephoralty  to  be 
a  tyranny,  and  find  the  element  of  democracy  in  the  common 
meals  and  in  the  habits  of  daily  life.  In  the  Law*,  it  is  ^ 
maintained  that  the  best  state  is  made  up  of  democracy  and 
tyranny,  which  are  either  not  constitutions  at  all,  or  are  the 
worst  of  all.  But  they  are  nearer  the  truth  who  combine 
many  forms ;  for  the  state  is  better  which  is  made  up  of 
more  numerous  elements.  The  constitution  proposed  in  the 
Laws  has  no  element  of  monarchy  at  all ;  it  is  nothing  but 
oligarchy  and  democracy,  leaning  rather  to  oligarchy.  This  19 
is  seen  in  the  mode  of  appointing  magistrates ' ;  for  although 
the  appointment  of  them  by  lot  from  among  those  who  have 
been  already  selected  combines  both  elements,  the  way  in 
which  the  rich  are  compelled  by  law  to  attend  the  assembly  * 
and  vote  for  magistrates  or  discharge  other  political  duties, 
while  the  rest  may  do  as  they  like,  and  the  endeavour  to  have 
the  greater  number  of  the  magistrates  appointed  out  of  the 
richest  classes  and  the  highest  officers  selected  from  those 
who  have  the  greatest  incomes,  both  these  are  oligarchical  20 
features.  The  oligarchical  principle  prevails  also  in  the 
choice  of  the  council  ^ ;  for  all  are  compelled  to  choose,  but 
the  compulsion  extends  only  to  the  choice  out  of  the  first 

1  Cp.  iv,  §  7;   7.  §  4;  9.  §§  7-9-  ''  vi.  756  e;  cp.  iv.  710. 

»  Laws,  vi.  755,  763  E,  765. 

*  Laws,  vi.  764  A  ;  and  Pol.  iv.  9.  §  2  ;  14.  §  12. 

^  Laws,  vi.  756  B-E. 


7  2  Plato^s  Laws: 

II.  6  class,  and  of  an  equal  number  out  of  the  second  class  and  out 
of  the  third  class,  but  not  in  this  latter  case  to  all  the  voters 
of  the  third  and  forth  class ;  and  the  selection  of  candidates 
out  of  the  fourth  class '  is  only  compulsory  on  the  first  and 

21  second.  Then,  he  says  that  there  ought  to  be  an  equal 
number  of  each  class  selected.  Thus  a  preponderance  will 
be  given  to  the  better  sort  of  people,  who  have  the  larger 
incomes,  because  many  of  the  lower  classes,  not  being  com- 

22  pelled,  will  not  vote.  These  considerations,  and  others  which 
will  be  adduced  when  the  time  comes  for  examining  similar 
polities,  tend  to  show  that  states  like  Plato's  should  not  be 
composed  of  democracy  and  monarchy.  There  is  also  a 
danger  in  electing  the  magistrates  out  of  a  body  who  are 
themselves  elected  ;  for,  if  but  a  small  number  choose  to  com- 
bine, the  elections  will  always  go  as  they  desire.  Such  is  the 
constitution  which  is  described  in  the  Laws. 

7  Other  constitutions  have  been  proposed ;  some  by  private 
persons,  others  by  philosophers  and  statesmen,  which  all 
come  nearer  to  established  or  existing  ones  than  either  of 
Plato's.  No  one  else  has  introduced  such  novelties  as  the 
community  of  women  and  children,  or  public  tables  for  women  : 

2  other  legislators  begin  with  what  is  necessary.  In  the 
opinion  of  some,  the  regulation  of  property  is  the  chief  point 
of  all,  that  being  the  question  upon  which  all  revolutions  turn. 
This  danger  was  recognized  by  Phaleas  of  Chalcedon,  who 
was  the  first  to  affirm  that  the  citizens  of  a  state  ought  to  have 

3  equal  possessions.      He  thought  that  in  a  new  colony  the 
1266  b  equalization  might  be  accomplished  without  difficulty,  not  so 

easily  when  a  state  was  already  established ;  and  that  then 
the  shortest  way  of  compassing  the  desired  end  would  be  for 
*  Omitting  either  tov  rtraprov  or  tSiv  Tfrdprafv. 


Phaleas — Equality  of  Property        7  3 

the  rich  to  give  and  not  to  receive  marriage  portions,  and  for  II.  7 
the  poor  not  to  give  but  to  receive  them. 

Plato  in  the  Laws  was  of  opinion  that,  to  a  certain  extent,  4 
accumulation  should  be  allowed,  forbidding,  as  I  have  already 
observed  \  any  citizen  to  possess  more  than  five  times  the 
minimum  qualification.  But  those  who  make  such  laws  should  5 
remember  what  they  are  apt  to  forget — that  the  legislator 
who  fixes  the  amount  of  property  should  also  fix  the  number 
of  children  ;  for,  if  the  children  are  too  many  for  the  property, 
the  law  must  be  broken.  And,  besides  the  violation  of  the 
law,  it  is  a  bad  thing  that  many  from  being  rich  should 
become  poor ;  for  men  of  ruined  fortunes  are  sure  to  stir  up 
revolutions.  That  the  equalization  of  property  exercises  an  6 
influence  on  political  society  was  clearly  understood  even  by 
some  of  the  old  legislators.  Laws  were  made  by  Solon  and 
otliers  prohibiting  an  individual  from  possessing  as  much  land 
as  he  pleased  ;  and  there  are  other  laws  in  states  which  forbid 
the  sale  of  property :  among  the  Locrians,  for  example,  there 
is  a  law  that  a  man  is  not  to  sell  his  property  unless  he  can 
prove  unmistakably  that  some  misfortune  has  befallen  him.  7 
Again,  there  have  been  laws  which  enjoin  the  preservation  of 
the  original  lots.  Such  a  law  existed  in  the  island  of  Leucas, 
and  the  abrogation  of  it  made  the  constitution  too  democratic, 
for  the  rulers  no  longer  had  the  prescribed  qualification. 
Again,  where  there  is  equality  of  property,  the  amount  may 
be  either  too  large  or  too  small,  and  the  possessor  may  be 
living  either  in  luxury  or  penury.  Clearly,  then,  the  legis- 
lator ought  not  only  to  aim  at  the  equalization  of  properties,  8 
but  at  moderation  in  their  amount.  And  yet,  if  he  prescribe 
this  moderate  amount  equally  to  all,  he  will  be  no  nearer  the 
•  c.  6.  §  15. 


74  Phaleasy 

II.  7  mark  ;  for  it  is  not  the  possessions  but  the  desires  of  mankind 
which  require  to  be  equalized  *,  and  this  is  impossible,  unless 
a  sufficient  education  is  provided  by  the  state.  But  Phaleas 
will  probably  reply  that  this  is  precisely  what  he  means ;  and 
that,  in  his  opinion,  there  ought  to  be  in  states,  not  only  equal 
9  property,  but  equal  education.  Still  he  should  tell  us  what 
will  be  the  character  of  his  education;  there  is  no  use  in 
having  one  and  the  same  for  all,  if  it  is  of  a  sort  that  predis- 

10  poses  men  to  avarice,  or  ambition,  or  both.  Moreover,  civil 
troubles  arise,  not  only  out  of  the  inequality  of  property,  but 
out  of  the  inequality  of  honour,  though  in  opposite  ways.     For 

1267  a  the  common  people  quarrel  about  the  inequality  of  property,  the 
higher  class  about  the  equality  of  honour ;  as  the  poet  says — 

'  The  bad  and  good  alike  in  honour  share  ^J* 

11  There  are  crimes  of  which  the  motive  is  want;  and  for 
these  Phaleas  expects  to  find  a  cure  in  the  equalization  of 
property,  which  will  take  away  from  a  man  the  temptation  to 

12  be  a  highwayman,  because  he  is  hungry  or  cold.  But  want 
is  not  the  sole  incentive  to  crime ;  men  desire  to  gratify  some 
passion  which  preys  upon  them,  or  they  are  eager  to  enjoy  the 
pleasures  which  are  unaccompanied  with  the  pain  of  desire, 
and  therefore  they  commit  crimes. 

Now  what  is  the  cure  of  these  three  disorders  ?  Of  the  first, 
moderate  possessions  and  occupation ;  of  the  second,  habits 
of  temperance ;  as  to  the  third,  if  any  desire  pleasures  which 
depend  on  themselves,  they  will  find  the  satisfaction  of  their 
desires  nowhere  but  in  philosophy ;    for  all  other  pleasures 

13  we  are  dependent  on  others.  The  fact  is  that  the  greatest 
crimes  are  caused  by  excess  and  not  by  necessity.     Men  do 

'  Cp.  c.  5.  §  12,  ■•'  II.  ix.  319. 


His  Errors  and  Omissions  jf 

not  become  tyrants  in  order  that  they  may  not  suffer  cold  ;  II.  7 
and  hence  great  is  the  honour  bestowed,  not  on  him  who  kills 
a  thief,  but  on  him  who  kills  a  tyrant.     Thus  we  see  that  the 
institutions  of  Phaleas  avail  only  against  petty  crimes. 

There  is  another  objection  to  them.  They  are  chiefly  14 
designed  to  promote  the  internal  welfare  of  the  state.  But 
the  legislator  should  consider  also  its  relation  to  neighbouring 
nations,  and  to  all  who  are  outside  of  it  \  The  government 
must  be  organized  with  a  view  to  military  strength ;  and  of 
this  he  has  said  not  a  word.  And  so  with  respect  to  pro-  15 
perty :  there  should  not  only  be  enough  to  supply  the  internal 
wants  of  the  state,  but  also  to  meet  dangers  coming  from 
without.  The  property  of  the  state  should  not  be  so  large 
that  more  powerful  neighbours  may  be  tempted  by  it,  while 
the  owners  are  unable  to  repel  the  invaders ;  nor  yet  so  small 
that  the  state  is  unable  to  maintain  a  war  even  against  states 
of  equal  power,  and  of  the  same  character.  Phaleas  has  not  16 
laid  down  any  rule ;  and  we  should  bear  in  mind  ^  that  a  cer- 
tain amount  of  wealth  ^  is  an  advantage.  The  best  limit  will 
probably  be,  not  so  much  as  will  tempt  a  more  powerful  neigh- 
bour, or  make  it  his  interest  to  go  to  war  with  you.  There  17 
is  a  story  that  Eubulus,  when  Autophradates  was  going  to 
besiege  Atarneus,  told  him  to  consider  how  long  the  opera- 
tion would  take,  and  then  reckon  up  the  cost  which  would 
be  incurred  in  the  time.  'For,'  said  he,  '  I  am  willing  for 
a  smaller  sum  than  that  to  leave  Atarneus  at  once.'  These 
words  of  Eubulus  made  an  impression  on  Autophradates,  and 
he  desisted  from  the  siege. 

One  advantage  gained  by  the  equalization  of  property  is  18 
that  it  prevents  the  citizens  from  quarrelling.     Not  that  the 

*  Cp.  c.  6.  §  7.  ^  Or  reading  6  n, '  what  amount  of  wealth.' 


76  Phaleas  and  Hippodamus 

II.  7  gain  in  this  direction  is  very  great.  For  the  nobles  will  be 
dissatisfied  because  they  do  not  receive  the  honours  which 
they  think  their  due;  and  this  is  often  found  to  be  a  cause 
jg  of  sedition  and  revolution  ^.  And  the  avarice  of  mankind 
is  insatiable ;  at  one  time  two  obols  was  pay  enough,  but 
now,  when  this  sum  has  become  customary,  men  always 
want  more  and  more  without  end ;  for  it  is  of  the  nature 
of  desire  not  to  be  satisfied,  and  most  men  live  only  for 
the  gratification  of  it.     ^  The  beginning  of  reform  *  is  not  so 

30  much  to  equalize  property  as  to  train  the  nobler  sort  of 
natures  not  to  desire  more,  and  to  prevent  the  lower  from 
getting  more ;  that  is  to  say,  they  must  be  kept  down,  but  not 

31  illtreated.  Besides,  the  equalization  proposed  by  Phaleas  is 
imperfect;  for  he  only  equalizes  land,  whereas  a  man  may  be 
rich  also  in  slaves,  and  cattle,  and  money,  and  in  the  abun- 
dance of  what  are  called  his  movables.  Now  either  all  these 
things  must  be  equalized,  or  some  limit  must  be  imposed  on 

2  2  them,  or  they  must  all  be  let  alone.  It  would  appear  that 
Phaleas  is  legislating  for  a  small  city  only,  if,  as  he  supposes, 
all  the  artisans  are  to  be  public  slaves  and  not  to  form  a  part 

23  of  the  population  of  the  city.  But  if  there  is  a  law  that 
artisans  are  to  be  public  slaves,  it  should  only  apply  to  those 
engaged  on  public  works  ',  as  at  Epidamnus,  or  at  Athens  on 
the  plan  which  Diophantus  once  introduced. 

From  these  observations  any  one  may  judge  how  far  Phaleas 
was  wrong  or  right  in  his  ideas. 

8       Hippodamus,  the  son  of  Euryphon,  a  native  of  Miletus,  the 

1  Cp.  §  10. 

"  Or,  reading  with  Bernays  a«i;,  '  the  remedy  for  such  evils.' 

'  Putting   a   comma   after    itvtu    and    removing   the   comma    after 


Hippodamus — His  Constitution  and  Laws  jj 

same  who  invented  the  art  of  planning  cities,  and  who  also  II.  8 
laid  out  the  Piraeus — a  strange  man,  whose  fondness  for  dis- 
tinction led  him  into  a  general  eccentricity  of  life,  which 
made  some  think  him  affected  (for  he  would  wear  flowing  hair 
and  expensive  ornaments  ;  and  yet  he  dressed  himself  in  the 
same  cheap  warm  garment  both  in  winter  and  summer.) ;  he, 
besides  aspiring  to  be  an  adept  in  the  knowledge  of  nature, 
was  the  first  person  not  a  statesman  who  made  enquiries  about 
the  best  form  of  government. 

The  city  of  Hippodamus  was  composed  of  1 0,000  citizens  2 
divided  into  three  parts — one  of  artisans,  one  of  husbandmen, 
and  a  third  of  armed  defenders  of  the  state.     He  also  divided  3 
the  land  into  three  parts,  one  sacred,  one  public,  the  third 
private :    the  first  was   set    apart  to  maintain  the  customary 
worship  of  the  gods,  the  second  was  to  support  the  warriors 
the  third  was  the  property  of  the  husbandmen.     He  also  4 
divided  his  laws  into  three  classes,  and  no  more,  for  he  main- 
tained  that    there   are     three    subjects    of    lawsuits — insult, 
injury,  and  homicide.     He  likewise  instituted  a  single  final 
court  of  appeal,  to  which  all   causes  seeming  to  have  been 
improperly  decided  might  be  referred ;  this  court  he  formed 
of  elders  chosen  for  the  purpose.     He  was  further  of  opinion  1268  a 
that  the  decisions  of  the  courts  ought  not  to  be  given  by  the  5 
use  of  a  voting  pebble,  but  that  every  one  should  have  a  tablet 
on  which  he  might  not  only  write  a  simple  condemnation,  or 
leave  the  tablet  blank  for  a  simple  acquittal ;  but,  if  he  partly 
acquitted  and  partly  condemned,  he  was  to  distinguish  accord- 
ingly.    To  the  existing  law  he  objected  that  it  obliged  the 
judges  to  be  guilty  of  perjury,  whichever  way  they  voted. 
He  also  enacted  that  those  who  discovered  anything  for  the  6 
good  of  the  state  should  be  rewarded ;  and  he  provided  that 


7  8  Hippodamus — His  Confusions 

II.  8  the  children  of  citizens  who  died  in  battle  should  be  main- 
tained at  the  public  expense,  as  if  such  an  enactment  had 
never  been  heard  of  before,  yet  it  actually  exists  at  Athens  * 

7  and  in  other  places.  As  to  the  magistrates,  he  would  have 
them  all  elected  by  the  people,  that  is,  by  the  three  classes 
already  mentioned,  and  those  who  were  elected  were  to  watch 
over  the  interests  of  the  public,  of  strangers  and  of  orphans. 
These  are  the  most  striking  points  in  the  constitution  of 
Hippodamus.     There  is  not  much  else. 

The  first  of  these   proposals  to  which  objection  may  be 

8  taken,  is  the  threefold  division  of  the  citizens.  The  artisans, 
and  the  husbandmen,  and  the  warriors,  all  have  a  share  in  the 
government.  But  the  husbandmen  have  no  arms,  and  the 
artisans  neither  arms  nor  land,  and  therefore  they  become  all 

9  but  slaves  of  the  warrior  class.  That  they  should  share  in 
all  the  offices  is  an  impossibility ;  for  generals  and  guardians 
of  the  citizens,  and  nearly  all  the  principal  magistrates,  must 
be  taken  from  the  class  of  those  who  carry  arms.  Yet,  if  the 
two  other  classes  have  no  share  in  the  government,  how  can 
they  be  loyal  citizens  ?  It  may  be  said  that  those  who  have 
arms  must  necessarily  be  masters  of  both  the  other  classes, 
but  this  is  not  so  easily  accomplished  unless  they  are  numer- 
ic ous ;  and  if  they  are,  why  should  the  other  classes  share  in  the 

government  at  all,  or  have  power  to  appoint  magistrates  ? 
Artisans  there  must  be,  for  these  are  wanted  in  every  city, 
and  they  can  live  by  their  craft,  as  elsewhere ;  and  the  hus- 
bandmen, too,  if  they  really  provided  the  warriors  with  food, 
might  fairly  have  a  share  in  the  government.  But  in  the 
republic  of  Hippodamus  they  are  supposed  to  have  land  of 
their  own,  which  they  cultivate  for  their  private  benefit. 
'  Cp,  Thuc.  ii.  c  46. 


Courts  of  haw :  Inventmis  79 

Again,  as  to  this  common  land  out  of  which  the  soldiers  are  II.  8 
maintained,  if  they  are  themselves  to  be  the  cultivators  of  it,  i ' 
the  warrior   class   will    be    identical  with   the  husbandmen, 
although  the  legislator  intended,  to  make  a  distinction  between 
them.     If,   again,   there  are  to  be  other  cultivators  distinct 
both  from  the  husbandmen,  who  have  land  of  their  own,  and 
from  the  warriors,  they  will  make  a  fourth  class,  which  has 
no  place  in  the  state  and  no  share  in  anything.     Or,  if  the  12 
same  persons  are  to  cultivate  their  own  lands  and  those  of  the 
public  as   well,  they  will  have  a  difficulty  in  supplying  the 
quantity  of  produce  which  will  maintain  two  households :  and  1268  b 
why,  in  this  case,    should  there    be    any  division,  for  they 
might  find  food  themselves  and  give  to  the  warriors  from  the 
same  lots  ?     There  is  surely  a  great  confusion  in  all  this. 

Neither  is  the  law  to  be  commended  which  says  that  the  13 
judges,  when  a  simple  issue  is  laid  before  them,  should  dis- 
tinguish in  their  judgment;  for  the  judge  is  thus  converted 
into  an  arbitrator.  Now,  in  an  arbitration,  although  the 
arbitrators  are  many,  they  confer  with  one  another  about  the 
decision,  and  therefore  they  can  distinguish ;  but  in  courts  of 
law  this  is  impossible,  and,  indeed,  most  legislators  take  pains 
to  prevent  the  judges  from  holding  any  communication  with 
one  another.  Again,  will  there  not  be  confusion  if  the  judge  14 
thinks  that  damages  should  be  given,  but  not  so  much  as  the 
suitor  demands  ?  He  asks,  say,  for  twenty  minae,  and  the 
judge  allows  him  ten  minae,  or  one  judge  more  and  another 
less  ;  one  five,  another  four  minae.  In  this  way  they  will  go 
on  apportioning  the  damages,  and  some  will  grant  the  whole 
and  others  nothing :  how  is  the  final  reckoning  to  be  taken  ?  15 
Again,  no  one  who  votes  for  a  simple  acquittal  or  condemna- 
tion is  compelled  to  perjure  himself,  if  the  indictment  is  quite 


8o  Should  Laws  be  Cha7igedf 

II.  8  simple  and  in  right  form  ;  for  the  judge  who  acquits  does  not 
decide  that  the  defendant  owes  nothing,  but  that  he  does  not 
owe  the  twenty  minae.  He  only  is  guilty  of  perjury  who 
thinks  that  the  defendant  ought  not  to  pay  twenty  minae,  and 
yet  condemns  him. 

1 6  To  reward  those  who  discover  anything  which  is  useful  to 
the  state  is  a  proposal  which  has  a  specious  sound,  but  cannot 
safely  be  enacted  by  law,  for  it  may  encourage  informers,  and 
perhaps  even  lead  to  political  commotions.  This  question 
involves  another.  It  has  been  doubted  whether  it  is  or  is  not 
expedient  to  make  any  changes  in  the  laws  of  a  country,  even 

17  if  another  law  be  better.  Now,  if  all  changes  are  inexpedient, 
we  can  hardly  assent  to  the  proposal  of  Hippodamus;  for, 
under  pretence  of  doing  a  public  service,  a  man  may  introduce 
measures  which  are  really  destructive  to  the  laws  or  to  the 
constitution.     But,  since  we  have  touched  upon  this  subject, 

18  perhaps  we  had  better  go  a  little  into  detail,  for,  as  I  was 
saying,  there  is  a  difference  of  opinion,  and  it  may  sometimes 
seem  desirable  to  make  changes.  Such  changes  in  the  other 
arts  and  sciences  have  certainly  been  beneficial ;  medicine,  for 
example,  and  gymnastic,  and  every  other  art  and  science  have 
departed  from  traditional  usage.     And,  if  politics  be  an  art, 

19  change  must  be  necessary  in  this  as  in  any  other  art.  The 
need  of  improvement  is  shown  by  the  fact  that  old  customs 
are  exceedingly  simple  and  barbarous.  For  the  ancient 
Hellenes  went  about  armed  ^  and  bought  their  wives  of  each 

20  other.     The  remains  of  ancient  laws  which  have  come  down 
1269  a  to  us  are  quite  absurd ;  for  example,  at  Cumae  there  is  a  law 

about  murder,  to  the  effect  that  if  the  accuser  produce  a  certain 
number  of  witnesses  from  among  his  own  kinsmen,  the  accused 
*  Cp.  Thucyd.  i.  c.  5  and  6. 


Should  Laws  be  Changed?  8i 

shall  be  held  guilty.     Again,  men  in  general  desire  the  good,  II. 
and  not  merely  what  their  fathers  had.     But  the  primaeval  21 
inhabitants  *,  whether  they  were  born  of  the  earth,  or  were 
the  survivors  of  some  destruction,  may  be  supposed  to  have 
been  no  better  than  ordinary  foolish  people  among  ourselves  ^ 
(such    is  certainly  the  tradition  "^  concerning  the  earth-bom 
men)  ;  and  it  would  be  ridiculous  to  rest  contented  with  their 
notions.      Even  when  laws   have  been   written  down,   they 
ought  not  always  to  remain  unaltered.    As  in  other  arts,  so  in  23 
making  a  constitution,  it  is  impossible  that  all  things  should  be 
precisely  set  down  in  writing ;  for  enactments  must  be  uni- 
versal, but  actions  are  concerned  with  particulars '.    Hence  we 
infer  that  sometimes  and  in  certain  cases  laws  may  be  changed ; 
but  when  we  look  at  the  matter  from  another  point  of  view, 
great  caution  would  seem  to  be  required.     For  the  habit  of  23 
lightly  changing  the  laws  is  an  evil,  and,  when  the  advantage 
is  small,  some  errors  both  of  lawgivers  and  rulers  had  better 
be  left ;  the  citizen  will  not  gain  so  much  by  the  change  as  he 
will  lose  by  the  habit  of  disobedience.     The  analogy  of  the  24 
arts  is  false ;  a  change  in  a  law  is  a  very  different  thing  from 
a  change  in  an  art.     For  the  law  has  no  power  to  command 
obedience  except  that  of  habit,  which  can  only  be  given  by 
time,   so  that  a  readiness  to  change  from  old  to  new  laws 
enfeebles  the  power  of  the  law.      Even  if  we  admit  that  the  -25 
laws  are  to  be  changed,  are  they  all  to  be  changed,  and  in 
every  state  ?     And  are  they  to  be  changed  by  anybody  who 

'  Or,  referring  ofxoiovs  to  yrpffvus,  '  whether  they  were  born  of  the 
earth  or  were  the  survivors  of  some  destruction,  who  were  no  better 
(o/ioious)  than  earth-born  men,  may  be  supposed  to  have  been  ordinary 
foolish  people.' 

'^  Cp.  Plato,  Laws,  iii.  677  a;  Polit.  271  a;  Tim.  22  c. 

5  Cp.  Plato,  Polit.  295  A. 

DAVIS  G 


82  Sparta:    the  Helots ^ 

II.  8  likes,  or  only  by  certain  persons  ?  These  are  very  important 
questions ;  and  therefore  we  had  better  reserve  the  discussion 
of  them  to  a  more  suitable  occasion. 
9  In  the  governments  of  Lacedaemon  and  Crete,  and  indeed 
in  all  governments,  two  points  have  to  be  considered ;  first, 
whether  any  particular  law  is  good  or  bad,  when  compared 
with  the  perfect  state ;  secondly,  whether  it  is  or  is  not  con- 
sistent with  the  idea  and  character  which  the  lawgiver  has  set 

2  before  his  citizens  ^  That  in  a  well-ordered  state  the  citizens 
should  have  leisure  and  not  have  to  provide  for  their  daily 
wants  is  generally  acknowledged,  but  there  is  a  difficulty  in 
seeing  how  this  leisure  is  to  be  attained.  [For,  if  you  employ 
slaves,  they  are  liable  to  rebel.]  The  Thessalian  Penestae 
have  often  risen  against  their  masters,  and  the  Helots  in  like 
manner  against  the  Lacedaemonians,  for  whose  misfortunes 

3  they  are  always  l5ring  in  wait.     Nothing,  however,   of  this 
1269  b  kind  has  as  yet  happened  to  the  Cretans ;  the  reason  probably 

is  that  the  neighbouring  cities,  even  when  at  war  with  one 
another,  never  form  an  alliance  with  rebellious  serfs,  rebellions 
not  being  for  their  interest,  since  they  themselves  have  a  de- 
pendent population  ^.  Whereas  all  the  neighbours  of  the 
Lacedaemonians,  whether  Argives,  Messenians,  or  Arcadians, 
are  their  enemies  [and  the  Helots  are  always  revolting  to 
them].  In  Thessaly,  again,  the  original  revolt  of  the  slaves 
occurred  at  a  time  when  the  Thessalians  were  still  at  war  with 
the   neighbouring  Achaeans,   Perrhaebians,   and   Magnesians. 

4  Besides,  if  there  were  no  other  difficulty,  the  treatment  or 
management  of  slaves  is  a  troublesome  affair ;  for,  if  not  kept 
in  hand,  they  are  insolent,  and  think  that  they  are  as  good  as 
their  masters,  and,  if  harshly  treated,  they  hate  and  conspire 

'  Or  'himself  (Beniays).  ^  Cp.  c.  lo.  §  5. 


Licence  of  the   Women  83 

against  them.     Now  it  is  clear  that  when  these  are  the  re-  H,  9 
suits  the  citizens  of  a  state  have  not  found  out  the  secret  of 
managing  their  subject  population. 

Again,  the  licence  of  the  Lacedaemonian  women  defeats  5 
the  intention  of  the  Spartan  constitution,  and  is  adverse  to  the 
good  order  of  the  state.      For  a  husband  and  a  wife,  being 
each  a  part  of  every  family,  the  state  may  be  considered  as 
about  equally  divided  into  men  and  women ;  and,  therefore,  in 
those  states  in  which  the  condition  of  the  women  is  bad,  half 
the  city '  may  be  regarded  as  having  no  laws.     And  this  is  6 
what  has  actually  happened  at  Sparta ;  the  legislator  wanted  to 
make  the  whole  state  hardy  and  temperate,  and  he  has  carried 
out  his  intention  in  the  case  of  the  men,  but  he  has  neglected 
the  women,  who  live  in  every  sort  of  intemperance  and  luxury. 
The  consequence  is  that  in  such  a  state  wealth  is  too  highly  7 
valued,  especially  if  the  citizens  fall  under  the  dominion  of 
their  wives,  after  the  manner  of  all  warlike  races,  except  the 
Celts  and  a  few  others  who  openly  approve  of  male  loves. 
The  old  mythologer  would  seem  to  have  been  right  in  uniting  8 
Ares  and  Aphrodite,  for  all  warlike  races  are  prone  to  the 
love  either  of  men  or  of  women.    This  was  exemplified  among 
the  Spartans  in  the  days  of  their  greatness ;  many  things  were 
managed  by  their  women.     But  what  difference  does  it  make  9 
whether  women  rule,  or  the  rulers  are  ruled  by  women  ?    The 
result  is  the  same.     Even  in  regard  to  courage,  which  is  of  no 
use  in  daily  life,  and  is  needed  only  in  war,  the  influence  of 
the  Lacedaemonian  women  has  been  most  mischievous.     The  10 
evil  showed  itself  in  the  Theban  invasion,  when,  unlike  the 
women  in  other  cities,  they  were  utterly  useless  and  caused 
more  confusion  than  the  enemy.    This  licence  of  the  Lacedae- 
1  Cp.  i.  13.  §  16. 
G  2 


84       Sparta:  Inequality  of  Property  ; 

II.  9  monian  women  existed  from  the  earliest  times,  and  was  only 
1270  a  what  might  be  expected.  For,  during  the  wars  of  the  Lace- 
daemonians, first  against  the  Argives,  and  afterwards  against 
the  Arcadians  and  Messenians,  the  men  were  long  away  from 
home,  and,  on  the  return  of  peace,  they  gave  themselves  into 
the  legislator's  hand,  already  prepared  by  the  discipline  of 
a  soldier's  life  (in  which  there  are  many  elements  of  virtue), 
to  receive  his  enactments.  But,  when  Lycurgus,  as  tradition 
says,  wanted  to  bring  the  women  under  his  laws,  they  resisted, 

12  and  he  gave  up  the  attempt.  They,  and  not  he,  are  to  blame 
for  what  then  happened,  and  this  defect  in  the  constitution  is 
clearly  to  be  attributed  to  them.  We  are  not,  however,  con- 
sidering what  is  or  is  not  to  be  excused,  but  what  is  right  or 

13  wrong  ;  and  the  disorder  of  the  women,  as  I  have  already  said, 
not  only  of  itself  gives  an  air  of  indecorum  to  the  state,  but 
tends  in  a  measure  to  foster  avarice. 

The  mention  of  avarice  naturally  suggests  a  criticism  on  the 

14  inequality  of  property.  While  some  of  the  Spartan  citizens 
have  quite  small  properties,  others  have  very  large  ones ;  hence 
the  land  has  passed  into  the  hands  of  a  few.  And  here  is 
another  fault  in  their  laws ;  for,  although  the  legislator  rightly 
holds  up  to  shame  the  sale  or  purchase  of  an  inheritance,  he 

15  allows  anybody  who  likes  to  give  and  bequeath  it.  Yet  both 
practices  lead  to  the  same  result.  And  nearly  two-fifths  of 
the  whole  country  are  held  by  women ;  this  is  owing  to  the 
number  of  heiresses  and  to  the  large  dowries  which  are  cus- 
tomary. It  would  surely  have  been  better  to  have  given  no 
dowries  at  all,  or,  if  any,  but  small  or  moderate  ones.  As  the 
law  now  stands,  a  man  may  bestow  his  heiress  on  any  one 
whom  he  pleases,  and,  if  he  die  intestate,  the  privilege  of 

16  giving  her  away  descends  to  his  heir.     Hence,  although  the 


Criticism  of  the  Ephoralty  8f  . 

country  is  able  to  maintain  1500  cavalry  and  30,000  hoplites,  II.  9 
the  whole   number  of  Spartan  citizens  [at  the  time  of  the 
Theban  invasion]  fell  belov^   1000.     The  result  proves  the 
faulty  nature  of  their  laws  respecting  j)roperty ;  for  the  city 
sank  under  a  single  defeat ;  the  want  of  men  was  their  ruin. 
There  is  a  tradition  that,  in  the  days  of  their  ancient  kings,  17 
they  were  in  the  habit  of  giving  the  rights  of  citizenship  to 
strangers,  and  therefore,  in  spite  of  their  long  wars,  no  lack  of 
population  was  experienced  by  them ;    indeed,^  at  one   time 
Sparta  is  said  to  have  numbered  not  less  than  10,000  citizens. 
Whether  this  statement  is  true  or  not,  it  would  certainly  have 
been  better  to  have  maintained  their  numbers  by  the  equaliza- 
tion of  property.     Again,  the  law  which  relates  to  the  pro-  18 
creation  of  children    is    adverse   to    the    correction    of  this 
inequality.     For  the   legislator,   wanting    to    have   as    many  1270  b 
Spartans  as  he  could,  encouraged  the  citizens  to  have  large 
families  ;  and  there  is  a  law  at  Sparta  that  the  father  of  three 
sons  shall  be  exempt  from  military  service,  and  he  who  has 
four  from  all  the  burdens  of  the  state.     Yet  it  is  obvious  that,  19 
if  there  were  many  children,  the  land  being  distributed  as  it  is, 
many  of  them  must  necessarily  fall  into  poverty. 

The  Lacedaemonian  constitution  is  defective  in  another 
point ;  I  mean  the  Ephoralty.  This  magistracy  has  authority 
in  the  highest  matters,  but  the  Ephors  are  all  chosen  from  the 
people,  and  so  the  office  is  apt  to  fall  into  the  hands  of  very 
poor  men,  who,  being  badly  off,  are  open  to  bribes.  There  20 
have  been  many  examples  at  Sparta  of  this  evil  in  former 
times ;  and  quite  recently,  in  the  matter  of  the  Andrians, 
certain  of  the  Ephors  who  were  bribed  did  their  best  to  ruin 
the  state.  And  so  great  and  tyrannical  is  their  power,  that 
even  the  kings  have  been  compelled  to  court  them ;  through 


8  5  Sparta:  Criticism  of  the  Council  of  Elders; 

II.  9  their  influence  the  constitution  has  deteriorated,  and  from 
21  being  an  aristocracy  has  turned  into  a  democracy.  The 
Ephoralty  certainly  does  keep  the  state  together;  for  the 
people  are  contented  when  they  have  a  share  in  the  highest 
office,  and  the  result,  whether  due  to  the  legislator  or  to 
3  2  chance,  has  been  advantageous.  For  if  a  constitution  is  to  be 
permanent,  all  the  parts  of  the  state  must  wish  that  it  should 
exist  and  be  maintained  ^.  This  is  the  case  at  Sparta,  where 
the  kings  desy-e  permanence  because  they  have  due  honour  in 
their  own  persons ;  the  nobles  are  represented  in  the  council 
of  elders  (for  the  office  of  elder  is  a  reward  of  virtue) ;  and 

23  the  people  in  the  Ephoralty,  for  all  are  eligible  to  it.  The 
election  of  Ephors  out  of  the  whole  people  is  perfectly  right, 
but  ought  not  to  be  carried  on  in  the  present  fashion,  which  is 
too  childish.  Again,  they  have  the  decision  of  great  causes, 
although  they  are  quite  ordinary  men,  and  therefore  they  should 
not  determine  them  merely  on  their  own  judgment,  but  accord- 

24  ing  to  written  rules,  and  to  the  laws.  Their  way  of  life,  too, 
is  not  in  accordance  with  the  spirit  of  the  constitution — they 
have  a  deal  too  much  licence ;  whereas,  in  the  case  of  the 
other  citizens,  the  excess  of  strictness  is  so  intolerable  that 
they  run  away  from  the  law  into  the  secret  indulgence  of 
sensual  pleasures. 

25  Again,  the  council  of  elders  is  not  free  from  defects.  It 
may  be  said  that  the  elders  are  good  men  and  well  trained  in 
manly  virtue ;  and  that,  therefore,  there  is  an  advantage  to  the 
state  in  having  them.  But  that  judges  of  important  causes 
should  hold  office  for  life  is  not  a  good  thing,  for  the  mind 

1271  ;i  grows  old  as  well  as  the  body.     And  when  men  have  been 
educated  in  such  a  manner  that  even  the  legislator  himself 
'  Cp.  iv.  9.  §  10;  V.  9.  §  5. 


Further  Criticisms  87 

cannot  trust  them,  there  is  real  danger.     Many  of  the  elders  II,  9 
are  well  known  to  have  taken  bribes  and  to  have  been  guilty  of  ^^ 
partiality  in  public  affairs.     And  therefore  they  ought  not  to 
be  irresponsible ;  yet  at  Sparta  they  are  so.     But  (it  may  be 
replied),   'All   magistracies   are  accountable  to  the  Ephors.' 
Yes,  but  this  prerogative  is  too  great  for  them,  and  we  main- 
tain that  the  control  should  be  exercised  in  some  other  manner. 
Further,  the  mode  in  which  the  Spartans  elect  their  elders  is  27 
childish ;   and  it  is  improper  that  ^  the  person  to  be  elected 
should  canvass  for  the  office ;    the  worthiest  should  be  ap- 
pointed, whether  he  chooses  or  not.     And  here  the  legislator  28 
clearly  indicates  the  same  intention  which   appears   in   other 
parts  of  his  constitution ;  he  would  have  his  citizens  ambitious, 
and  he  has  reckoned  upon  this  quality  in  the  election  of  the 
elders ;  for  no  one  would  ask  to  be  elected  if  he  were  not. 
Yet  ambition  and  avarice,  almost  more  than  any  other  passions, 
are  the  motives  of  crime. 

Whether  kings  are  or  are  not  an  advantage  to  states,  I  will  29 
consider  at  another  time  '^ ;  they  should  at  any  rate  be  chosen, 
not  as  they  are  now,  but  with  regard  to  their  personal  life  and 
conduct.  The  legislator  himself  obviously  did  not  suppose  30 
that  he  could  make  them  really  good  men ;  at  least  he  shows 
a  great  distrust  of  their  virtue.  For  this  reason  the  Spartans 
used  to  join  enemies  in  the  same  embassy,  and  the  quarrels 
between  the  kings  were  held  to  be  conservative  of  the  state. 

Neither  did  the  first  introducer  of  the  common  meals,  called 
'phiditia,'  regulate  them  well.     The  entertainment  ought  to  31 
have  been  provided  at  the  public   cost,   as  in  Crete  ^;    but 

*  Reading  to  avruv,  not  tuv,  as  Bekker,   2nd   edit.,    apparently  by 
a  misprint. 

2  Cp.  iii.  14  foil.  =  Cp.  c.  10.  §§  7,  8. 


88  Sparta:    Further  Criticisms 

II.  9  among  the  Lacedaemonians  every  one  is  expected  to  contri- 
bute, and  some  of  them  are  too  poor  to  afford  the  expense ; 

32  thus  the  intention  of  the  legislator  is  frustrated.  The  common 
meals  were  meant  to  be  a  popular  institution,  but  the  existing 
manner  of  regulating  them  is  the  reverse  of  popular.  For  the 
very  poor  can  scarcely  take  part  in  them ;  and,  according  to 
ancient  custom,  those  who  cannot  contribute  are  not  allowed 
to  retain  their  rights  of  citizenship. 

33  The  law  about  the  Spartan  admirals  has  often  been  censured, 
and  with  justice ;  it  is  a  source  of  dissension,  for  the  kings  are 
perpetual  generals  *,  and  this  office  of  admiral  is  but  the  setting 
up  of  another  king. 

1271b  The  charge  which  Plato  brings,  in  the  Laws*,  against  the 
^*  intention  of  the  legislator,  is  likewise  justified ;  the  whole  con- 
stitution has  regard  to  one  part  of  virtue  only — the  virtue  of 
.  the  soldier,  which  gives  victory  in  war.  And  so  long  as  they 
were  at  war,  their  power  was  preserved,  but  when  they  had 
attained  empire  they  fell '',  for  of  the  arts  of  peace  they  knew 
nothing,  and  had  never  engaged  in  any  employment   higher 

35  than  war.  There  is  another  error,  equally  great,  into  which 
they  have  fallen.  Although  they  truly  think  that  the  goods 
for  which  they  contend  are  to  be  acquired  by  virtue  rather  than 
by  vice,  they  err  in  supposing  that  these  goods  are  to  be  pre- 
ferred to  the  virtue  which  gains  them. 

36  Once  more :  the  revenues  of  the  state  are  ill-managed ; 
there  is  no  money  in  the  treasury,  although  they  are  obliged 
to  carry  on  great  wars,  and  they  are  unwilling  to  pay  taxes. 
The  greater  part  of  the  land  being  in  the  hands  of  the  Spar- 
tans, they  do  not  look  closely  into  one  another's  contributions. 

'  Reading  di'Siots.  *  Laws,  i.  630. 

*  Cp.  vii.  14.  §  22. 


Sparta  and  Crete  89 

The  result  which  the  legislator  has  produced  is  the  reverse  of  II.  9 
beneficial ;   for  he  has  made  his  city  poor,  and  his  citizens  37 
greedy. 

Enough  respecting  the  Spartan  constitution,  of  which  these 
are  the  principal  defects. 

The  constitutions  of  the  Cretan  cities  nearly  resemble  the  10 
Spartan,  and  in  some  few  points  are  quite  as  good ;  but  for  the 
most  part  less  perfect  in  form.  The  older  constitutions  are 
generally  less  elaborate  than  the  later,  and  the  Lacedaemonian 
is  said  to  be,  and  probably  is,  in  a  very  great  measure,  a  copy  2 
of  those  in  Crete.  According  to  tradition,  Lycurgus,  when 
he  ceased  to  be  the  guardian  of  King  Charilaus,  went  abroad 
and  spent  a  long  time  in  Crete.  For  the  two  countries  are 
nearly  connected;  the  Lyctians  are  a  colony  of  the  Lacedae- 
monians, and  the  colonists,  when  they  came  to  Crete,  adopted 
the  constitution  which  they  found  existing  among  the  inhabi-  3 
tants.  Even  to  this  day  the  Perioeci,  or  subject  population  of 
Crete,  are  governed  by  the  original  laws  which  Minos  enacted. 
The  island  seems  to  be  intended  by  nature  for  dominion  in 
Hellas,  and  to  be  well  situated ;  it  extends  right  across  the 
sea,  around  which  nearly  all  the  Hellenes  are  settled ;  and 
while  one  end  is  not  far  from  the  Peloponnese,  the  other 
almost  reaches  to  the  region  of  Asia  about  Triopium  and  4 
Rhodes.  Hence  Minos  acquired  the  empire  of  the  sea,  sub- 
duing some  of  the  islands  and  colonizing  others ;  at  last  he 
invaded  Sicily,  where  he  died  near  Camicus.  5 

The  Cretan  institutions  resemble  the  Lacedaemonian.    The 
Helots  are  the  husbandmen  of  the  one,  the  Perioeci  of  the  1272  a 
other,  and  both  Cretans  and  Lacedaemonians  have  common 
meals,  which  were  anciently  called  by  the  Lacedaemonians  not 
'  phiditia '  but  '  andria ' ;  and  the  Cretans  have  the  same  word, 


90  Crete  \ind  Sparta 

II.  10  the  use  of  which  proves  that  the  common  meals  [or  syssitia] 

6  originally  came  from  Crete.  Further,  the  two  constitutions 
are  similar  [in  many  particulars]  ;  for  the  office  of  the  Ephors 
is  the  same  as  that  of  the  Cretan  Cosmi,  the  only  difference 
being  that  whereas  the  Ephors  are  five,  the  Cosmi  are  ten  in 
number.  The  elders,  too,  answer  to  the  elders  in  Crete,  who 
are  termed  by  the  Cretans  the  council.  And  the  kingly  office 
once  existed  in  Crete,  but  was  abolished,  and  the  Cosmi  have 

7  now  the  duty  of  leading  them  in  war.  All  classes  share  in 
the  ecclesia,  but  it  can  only  ratify  the  decrees  of  the  elders 
and  the  Cosmi. 

The  common  meals  of  Crete  are  certainly  better  managed 
than  the  Lacedaemonian ;  for  in  Lacedaemon  every  one  pays 
so  much  per  head,  or,  if  he  fails,  the  law,  as  I  have  already 
explained,  forbids  him  to  exercise  the  rights  of  citizenship. 

8  But  in  Crete  they  are  of  a  more  popular  character.  There,  of 
all  the  fruits  of  the  earth,  of  cattle,  of  the  public  revenues,  and 
of  the  tribute  which  is  paid  by  the  Perioeci,  one  portion  is 
assigned  to  the  gods  and  to  the  service  of  the  state,  and 
another  to    the   common   meals,   so  that  men,   women,   and 

9  children  are  all  supported  out  of  a  common  stock  ^  The 
legislator  has  many  ingenious  ways  of  securing  moderation  in 
eating  which  he  conceives  to  be  a  gain ;  he  likewise  encourages 
the  separation  of  men  from  women,  lest  they  should  have  too 
many  children,  and  the  companionship  of  men  with  one  another 
— whether  this  is  a  good  or  bad  thing  I  shall  have  an  oppor- 
tunity of  considering  at  another  time  ^  But  that  the  Cretan 
common  meals  are  better  ordered  than  the  Lacedaemonian 
there  can  be  no  doubt. 

On  the  other  hand,  the  Cosmi  are  even  a  worse  institution 
'  Cp.  vii.  lo.  §  lo.  *  vii.  i6  (?). 


Cretan  Cosmi  and  Elders  91 

than  the  Ephors,  of  which  they  have  all  the  evils  without  the  II.  10 
good.  Like  the  Ephors,  they  are  any  chance  persons,  but  in  '° 
Crete  this  is  not  counterbalanced  by  a  corresponding  political 
advantage.  At  Sparta  every  one  is  eligible,  and  the  body  of 
the  people,  having  a  share  in  the  highest  office,  want  the  state 
to  be  permanent  ^.  But  in  Crete  the  Cosmi  are  elected,  out  of 
certain  families,  and  not  out  of  the  whole  people,  and  the 
elders  out  of  those  who  have  been  Cosmi. 

The  same  criticism  may  be  made  about  the  Cretan,  which  n 
has   been    already   made    about   the    Lacedaemonian  elders. 
Their  irresponsibility  and  life  tenure  is  too  great  a  privilege, 
and  their  arbitrary  power  of  acting  upon  their  own  judgment, 
and  dispensing  with  written  law,  is  dangerous.     It  is  no  proof  12 
of  the  goodness  of  the  institution  that  the  people  are  not 
discontented   at   being  excluded  from   it.     For  there  is  no 
profit  to  be  made  out  of  the  office ;  and,  unlike  the  Ephors,  1272  b 
the  Cosmi,  being  in  an  island,  are  removed  from  temptation. 

The  remedy  by  which  they  correct  the  evil  of  this  institu-  13 
tion  is  an  extraordinary  one,  suited  rather  to  a  close  oligarchy 
than  to  a  constitutional  state.  For  the  Cosmi  are  often  ex- 
pelled by  a  conspiracy  of  their  own  colleagues,  or  of  private 
individuals ;  and  they  are  allowed  also  to  resign  before  their 
term  of  office  has  expired.  Surely  all  matters  of  this  kind 
are  better  regulated  by  law  than  by  the  will  of  man,  which  is 
a  very  unsafe  rule.  Worst  of  all  is  the  suspension  of  the  14 
office  of  Cosmi,  a  device  to  which  the  nobles  often  have 
recourse  when  they  will  not  submit  to  justice.  This  shows 
that  the  Cretan  government,  although  possessing  some  of  the 
characteristics  of  a  constitutional  state,  is  really  a  close 
oligarchy. 

^  Cp.  supra,  c.  9.  §  21. 


9  2  Carthage:  ^'Merits  and 

II.  10  The  Cretans  have  a  habit,  too,  of  setting  up  a  chief;  they 
get  together  a  party  among  the  common  people  and  gather 
their  friends  and  then   quarrel  and  fight  with  one  another. 

15  What  is  this  but  the  temporary  destruction  of  the  state  and 
dissolution  of  society  ?  A  city  is  in  a  dangerous  condition 
when  those  who  are  willing  are  also  able  to  attack  her.  But, 
as  I  have  already  said,  the  island  of  Crete  is  saved  by  her 
situation ;  distance  has  the  same  effect  as  the  Lacedaemonian 

16  prohibition  of  strangers ;  and  the  Cretans  have  no  foreign 
dominions.  This  is  the  reason  why  the  Perioeci  are  contented 
in  Crete,  whereas  the  Helots  are  perpetually  revolting.  But 
when  lately  foreign  invaders  found  their  way  into  the  island, 
the  weakness  of  the  Cretan  constitution  was  revealed.  Enough 
of  the  government  of  Crete. 

11  The  Carthaginians  are  also  considered  to  have  an  excellent 
form  of  government,  which  differs  from  that  of  any  other 
state  in  several  respects,  though  it  is  in  some  very  like  the 
Lacedaemonian.  Indeed,  all  three  states — the  Lacedaemonian, 
the  Cretan,  and  the  Carthaginian — nearly  resemble  one  another, 
and  are  very  different  from  any  others.     Many  of  the  Cartha- 

2  ginian  institutions  are  excellent.  The  superiority  of  their 
constitution  is  proved  by  the  fact  that,  although  containing  an 
element  of  democracy,  it  has  been  lasting ;  the  Carthaginians 
have  never  had  any  rebellion  worth  speaking  of,  and  have 
never  been  under  the  rule  of  a  tyrant. 

3  Among  the  points  in  which  the  Carthaginian  constitution 
resembles  the  Lacedaemonian  are  the  following : — The  com- 
mon tables  of  the  clubs  answer  to  the  Spartan  phiditia,  and 
their  magistracy  of  the  1 04  to  the  Ephors ;  but,  whereas  the 
Ephors  are  any  chance  persons,  the  magistrates  of  the  Cartha- 
ginians are  elected  according  to  merit — this  is  an  improvement. 


Defects  of  the  Constitution  93 

They  have  also  their  kings  and  their  gerusia,  or  council  of  II.  U 
elders,  who  correspond  to  the   kings  and  elders  of  Sparta. 
Their  kings,  unlike  the  Spartan,  are  not  always  of  the  same  4 
family,  and  this  an  ordinary  one,   but  if  there  is  some  dis- 
tinguished family  they  are  selected  out  of  it  and  not  appointed 
by  seniority — this   is   far  better.      Such  officers  have  great 
power,  and  therefore,  if  they  are  persons  of  little  worth,  do 
a  great  deal  of  harm,  and  they  have  already  done  Jiarm  at  1273  a 
Lacedaemon. 

Most  of  the  defects  or  deviations  from  the  perfect  state,  for  5 
which  the  Carthaginian  constitution  would  be  censured,  apply 
equally  to  all  the  forms  of  government  which  we  have  men- 
tioned. But  of  the  deflections  from  aristocracy  and  constitu- 
tional government,  some  incline  more  to  democracy  and  some  to 
oligarchy.  The  kings  and  elders,  if  unanimous,  may  determine 
whether  they  will  or  will  not  bring  a  matter  before  the  people, 
but  when  they  are  not  unanimous,  the  people  may  decide 
whether  or  not  the  matter  shall  be  brought  forward.  And  6 
whatever  the  kings  and  elders  bring  before  the  people  is  not 
only  heard  but  also  determined  by  them,  and  any  one  who  likes 
may  oppose  it ;  now  this  is  not  permitted  in  Sparta  and  Crete. 
That  the  magistracies  of  five  who  have  under  them  many  7 
important  matters  should  be  co-opted,  that  they  should  choose 
the  supreme  council  of  1 00,  and  should  hold  office  longer  than 
other  magistrates  (for  they  are  virtually  rulers  both  before  and 
after  they  hold  office) — these  are  oligarchical  features ;  their 
being  without  salary  and  not  elected  by  lot,  and  any  similar 
points,  such  as  the  practice  of  having  all  suits  tried  by  the 
magistrates ',  and  not  some  by  one  class  of  judges  or  jurors 
and  some  by  another,  as  at  Lacedaemon,  are  characteristic  of 
'  Cp.  iii.  I.  §§  10,  II  ;  and  see  note  at  end. 


94  Carthage  a  Plutocracy  : 

II.  11  aristocracy.  The  Carthaginian  constitution  deviates  from 
aristocracy  and  inclines  to  oligarchy,  chiefly  on  a  point  where 
popular  opinion  is  on  their  side.  For  men  in  general  think 
that  magistrates  should  be  chosen  not  only  for  their  merit,  but 
for  their  wealth  :  a  man,  they  say,  who  is  poor  cannot  rule  well 
9  — he  has  not  the  leisure.  If,  then,  election  of  magistrates  for 
their  wealth  be  characteristic  of  oligarchy,  and  election  for 
merit  of  aristocracy,  there  will  be  a  third  form  under  which  the 
constitution  of  Carthage  is  comprehended ;  for  the  Cartha- 
ginians choose  their  magistrates,  and  particularly  the  highest 
of  them — their  kings  and  generals — with  an  eye  both  to  merit 
and  to  wealth. 

10  But  we  must  acknowledge  that,  in  thus  deviating  from 
aristocracy,  the  legislator  has  committed  an  error.  Nothing  is 
more  absolutely  necessary  than  to  provide  that  the  highest  class, 
not  only  when  in  office,  but  when  out  of  office,  should  have  leisure 
and  not  demean  themselves  in  any  way ;  and  to  this  his  atten- 
tion should  be  first  directed.  Even  if  you  must  have  regard  to 
wealth,  in  order  to  secure  leisure,  yet  it  is  surely  a  bad  thing 
that  the  greatest  offices,  such  as  those  of  kings  and  generals, 

11  should  be  bought.  The  law  which  allows  this  abuse  makes 
wealth  of  more  account  than  virtue,  and  the  whole  state 
becomes  avaricious.  For,  whenever  the  chiefs  of  the  state 
deem  anything  honourable,  the  other  citizens  are  sure  to  follow 

1273  b  their  example ;  and,  where  virtue  has  not  the  first  place,  there 

12  aristocracy  cannot  be  firmly  established.  Those  who  have 
been  at  the  expense  of  purchasing  their  places  will  be  in  the 
habit  of  repaying  themselves  ;  and  it  is  absurd  to  suppose  that 
a  poor  and  honest  man  will  be  wanting  to  make  gains,  and  that 
a  lower  stamp  of  man  who  has  incurred  a  great  expense  will 
not.     Wherefore  they  should  rule  who  are  able  to  rule  best 


Preserved  by  Accident  95- 

\apt.(TTap\(av\.     And  even  if  the  legislator  does  not  care  to  II,  11 
protect  the  good  from  poverty,  he  should  at  any  rate  secure 
leisure  for  those  in  office  ^ 

It  would  seem  also  to  be  a  bad  principle  that  the  same  13 
person  should  hold  many  offices,  which  is  a  favourite  practice 
among  the  Carthaginians,  for  one  business  is  better  done  by 
one  man ".  The  legislator  should  see  to  this  and  should  not 
appoint  the  same  person  to  be  a  flute-player  and  a  shoemaker. 
Hence,  where  the  state  is  large,  it  is  more  in  accordance  both  14 
with  constitutional  and  with  democratic  principles  that  the 
offices  of  state  should  be  distributed  among  many  persons. 
For,  as  I  was  saying,  this  arrangement  is  more  popular,  and 
any  action  familiarized  by  repetition  is  better  and  sooner  per- 
formed. We  have  a  proof  in  military  and  naval  matters ;  the 
duties  of  command  and  of  obedience  in  both  these  services 
extend  to  all. 

The  government  of  the  Carthaginians  is  oligarchical,  but  15 
they  successfully  escape  the  evils  of  oligarchy  by  their  wealth, 
which  enables  them  from  time  to  time  to  send  out  some 
portion  of  the  people  ^  to  their  colonies.  This  is  their 
panacea  and  the  means  by  which  they  give  stability  to  the 
state.  Accident  favours  them,  but  the  legislator  should  be 
able  to  provide  against  revolution  without  trusting  to  accidents. 
As  things  are,  if  any  misfortune  occurred,  and  the  people  16 
revolted  from  their  rulers,  there  would  be  no  way  of  restoring 
peace  by  legal  methods. 

1  Cp.  c.  9.  §  2.  ■'  Cp.  Plato,  Rep,  ii.  374  A. 

^  Or,  removing  the  comma  after  T:\ovrtiv,  and  adding  one  after  \iipo%, 
'  by  enriching  one  portion  of  the  people  after  another  whom  they  send  to 
their  colonies.'  Cp.  vi.  5.  §  9,  which  tends  to  confirm  this  way  of 
taking  the  words. 


^6    Solon  and  the  Athenian  Constitution 

II.  11  Such  is  the  character  of  the  Lacedaemonian,  Cretan,  and 
Carthaginian  constitutions,  which  are  justly  celebrated. 
12  Of  those  who  have  treated  of  governments,  some  have 
never  taken  any  part  at  all  in  public  affairs,  but  have  passed 
their  lives  in  a  private  station  ;  about  most  of  them,  what  was 
worth  telling  has  been  already  told.  Others  have  been  law- 
givers, either  in  their  own  or  in  foreign  cities,  whose  affairs 
they  have  administered ;  and  of  these  some  have  only  made 
laws,  others  have  framed  constitutions  ;  for  example,  Lycurgus 

2  and  Solon  did  both.  Of  the  Lacedaemonian  constitution 
I  have  already  spoken.  As  to  Solon,  he  is  thought  by  some 
to  have  been  a  good  legislator,  who  put  an  end  to  the  ex- 
clusiveness  of  the  oligarchy,  emancipated  the  people,  established 
the  ancient  Athenian  democracy,  and  harmonized  the  different 
elements  of  the  state.  According  to  their  view,  the  council 
of  Areopagus  was  an  oligarchical  element,  the  elected  magis-  • 

1274  a  tracy,  aristocratical,  and  the  courts  of  law,  democratical.    The 
truth  seems  to  be  that  the  council  and  the  elected  magistracy 

3  existed  before  the  time  of  Solon,  and  were  retained  by  him, 
but  that  he  formed  the  courts  of  law  out  of  all  the  citizens, 
thus  creating  the  democracy,  which  is  the  very  reason  why  he 
is  sometimes  blamed.  For  in  giving  the  supreme  power  to  the 
law  courts,  which  are  elected  by  lot,  he  is  thought  to  have 

A  destroyed  the  non-democratic  element.  When  the  law  courts 
grew  powerful,  to  please  the  people,  who  were  now  playing 
the  tyrant,  the  old  constitution  was  changed  into  the  existing 
democracy.  Ephialtes  and  Pericles  curtailed  the  power  of  the 
Areopagus ;  they  also  instituted  the  payment  of  the  juries,  and 
thus   every  demagogue   in  turn  increased  the  power  of  the 

5  democracy  until  it  became  what  we  now  see.  All  this  is  true; 
it  seems  however  to  be  the  result  of  circumstances,  and  not  to 


Famous  Lawgivers  97 

have  been  intended  .by  Solon.  For  the  people  having  been  II.  12 
instrumental  in  gaining  the  empire  of  the  sea  in  the  Persian 
War  \  began  to  get  a  notion  of  itself,  and  followed  worthless 
demagogues,  whom  the  better  class  opposed.  Solon  himself 
appears  to  have  given  the  Athenians  only  that  power  of  electing 
to  offices  and  calling  to  account  the  magistrates,  which  was 
absolutely  necessary  - ;  for  without  it  they  would  have  been 
in  a  state  of  slavery  and  enmity  to  the  government.  All  the  6 
magistrates  he  appointed  from  the  notables  and  the  men  of 
wealth,  that  is  to  say,  from  the  pentacosio-medimni,  or  from 
the  class  called  zeugitae  (because  they  kept  a  yoke  of  oxen),  or 
from  a  third  class  of  so-called  knights  or  cavalry.  The  fourth 
class  were  labourers  who  had  no  share  in  any  magistracy. 

Mere  legislators  were  Zaleucus,  who  gave  laws  to  the  Epi- 
zephyrian,  Locrians,  and  Charondas,  who  legislated  for  his 
own  city  of  Catana,  and  for  the  other  Chalcidian  cities  in 
Italy  and  Sicily.  Some  persons  attempt  ^  to  make  out  that  7 
Onomacritus  was  the  first  person  who  had  any  special  skill  in 
legislation  ^,  and  that  he,  although  a  Locrian  by  birth,  was 
trained  in  Crete,  where  he  lived  in  the  exercise  of  his  prophetic 
art ;  that  Thales  was  his  companion,  and  that  Lycurgus  and 
Zaleucus  were  disciples  of  Thales,  as  Charondas  was  of 
Zaleucus.  But  their  account  is  quite  inconsistent  with  8 
chronology. 

There  was  also  a  Theban  legislator,  whose  name  was 
Philolaus,  the  Corinthian.  This  Philolaus  was  one  of  the 
family  of  the  Bacchiadae,  and  a  lover  of  Diodes,  the  Olympic 
victor,  who  left  Corinth  in  horror  of  the  incestuous  passion 

•  Cp,  V.  4.  §  8;  viii.  6.  §  11.  '^  Cp.  iii.  11.  §  8. 

'  Or  (with  Beriiays),  '  to  make  out  aii  unbroken  series  of  great  legis- 
lators, Onomacritus  being  considered  the  first.' 
bAvis  H 


98  Famous  Lawgivers 

II.  12  whicli  his  mother  Halcyone  had  conceived  for  him,  and  retired 
to  Thebes,  where  the  two  friends  together  ended  their  days. 
9  The  inhabitants  still  point  out  their  tombs,  which  are  in  full 
view  of  one  another,  but  one  looks  towards  Corinth,  the  other 
not.  Tradition  says  that  the  two  friends  arranged  them  in 
this  way.  Diodes  out  of  horror  at  his  misfortunes,  so  that  the 
land  of  Corinth  might  not  be  visible  from  his  tomb ;  Philolaus 

1274  b  that  it  might.  This  is  the  reason  why  they  settled  at  Thebes, 
^°  and  so  Philolaus  legislated  for  the  Thebans,  and,  besides  some 
other  enactments,  gave  them  laws  about  the  procreation  of 
children,  which  they  call  the  '  Laws  of  Adoption.'  These 
laws  were  peculiar  to  him,  and  were  intended  to  preserve  the 
number  of  the  lots. 

1 1  In  the  legislation  of  Charondas  there  is  nothing  remarkable, 
except  the  laws  about  false  witnesses.  He  is  the  first  who 
instituted  actions  for  perjury.  His  laws  are  more  exact  and 
more  precisely  expressed  than  even  those  of  our  modern 
legislators. 

12  Characteristic  of  Phaleas  is  the  equalization  of  property ;  of 
Plato,  the  community  of  women,  children,  and  property,  the 
common  meals  of  women,  and  the  law  about  drinking,  that 
the  sober  shall  be  masters  of  the  feast  ^ ;  also  the  training  of 
soldiers  to  acquire  by  practice  equal  skill  with  both  hands,  so 
that  one  should  be  as  useful  as  the  other  ^. 

1 3  Draco  has  left  laws,  but  he  adapted  them  to  a  constitution 
which  already  existed,  and  there  is  no  peculiarity  in  them 
which  is  worth  mentioning,  except  the  greatness  and  severity 
of  the  punishments. 

Pittacus,  too,  was  only  a  lawgiver,  and  not  the  author  of 
a  constitution ;  he  has  a  law  which  is  peculiar  to  him,  that,  if 
'  Cp.  Laws,  ii.  671  D-673  A.  ^  Cp.  Laws,  vii.  794  d. 


Famous  Lawgivers  99 


a   drunken   man   strike   another,    he    shall    be    more    heavily  H.  12 
punished  than  if  he  were  sober  ^ ;  he  looked  not  to  the  excuse 
which  might  be  offered  for  the  dmnkard,  but  only  to  expedi- 
ency, for  dmnken  more  often  than  sober  people  commit  acts 
of  violence. 

Androdamas  of  Rhegium  gave  laws  to  the  Chalcidians  of  14 
Thrace.     Some  of  them  relate  to  homicide,  and  to  heiresses ; 
but  there  is  nothing  remarkable  in  them. 

And  here  let  us  conclude  our  enquiry  into  the  various  con- 
stitutions which  either  actually  exist,  or  have  been  devised  by 
theorists. 

1  Cp.  N.  Eth.  iii.  5.  §  8. 


II  2 


BOOK     III 

III.  1  He  who  would  enquire  into  the  nature  and  various  kinds  of 
government  must  first  of  all  determine  '  What  is  a  state  ? '  At 
present  this  is  a  disputed  question.  Some  say  that  the  state  has 
done  a  certain  act ;  others,  no,  not  the  state  \  but  the  oligarchy 
or  the  tyrant.  And  the  legislator  or  statesman  is  concerned 
entirely  with  the  state ;  a  constitution  or  government  being  an 

2  arrangement  of  the  inhabitants  of  a  state.  But  a  state  is  com- 
posite, and,  like  any  other  whole,  made  up  of  many  parts ; — 
these  are  the  citizens,  who  compose  it.     It  is  evident,  there- 

1275  a  fore,  that  we  must  begin  by  asking,  Who  is  the  citizen,  and 
what  is  the  meaning  of  the  term  ?  For  here  again  there  may 
be  a  difference  of  opinion.     He  who  is  a  citizen  in  a  demo- 

3  cracy  will  often  not  be  a  citizen  in  an  oligarchy.  Leaving  out 
of  consideration  those  who  have  been  made  citizens,  or  who 
have  obtained  the  name  of  citizen  in  any  other  accidental 
manner,  we  may  say,  first,  that  a  citizen  is  not  a  citizen 

4  because  he  lives  in  a  certain  place,  for  resident  aliens  and 
slaves  share  in  the  place ;  nor  is  he  a  citizen  who  has  no  legal 
right  except  that  of  suing  and  being  sued  ;  for  this  right  may 
be  enjoyed  under  the  provisions  of  a  treaty.  Even  resident 
aliens  in  many  places  possess  such  rights,  although  in  an 
imperfect   form ;     for   they  are   obliged   to    have    a   patron. 

5  Hence  they  do  but  imperfectly  participate  in  citizenship,  and 
we  call  them  citizens  only  in  a  qualified  sense,  as  we  might 
apply  the  term  to  children  who  are  too  young  to  be  on  the 

'  Cp.c.  3.  §  I. 


The  Definition  of  Citizenship  tn  'Theory   loi 

register,  or  to  old  men  who  have  been  relieved  from  state  III.  1 
duties.  Of  these  we  do  not  say  simply  that  they  are  citizens, 
but  add  in  the  one  case  that  they  are  not  of  age,  and  in  the 
other,  that  they  are  past  the  age,  or  something  of  that  sort; 
the  precise  expression  is  immaterial,  for  our  meaning  is  clear. 
Similar  difficulties  to  those  which  I  have  mentioned  may  be 
raised  and  answered  about  deprived  citizens  and  about  exiles. 
But  the  citizen,  whom  we  are  seeking  to  define,  is  a  citizen  in 
the  strictest  sense,  against  whom  no  such  exception  can  be 
taken,  and  his  special  characteristic  is  that  he  shares  in  the 
administration  of  justice,  and  in  offices.  Now  of  offices  some  6 
have  a  limit  of  time,  and  the  same  persons  are  not  allowed  to 
hold  them  twice,  or  can  only  hold  them  after  a  fixed  interval ; 
others  have  no  limit  of  time — for  example,  the  office  of  dicast 
or  ecclesiast '.  It  may,  indeed,  be  argued  that  these  are  not  7 
magistrates  at  all,  and  that  their  functions  give  them  no  share 
in  the  government.  But  surely  it  is  ridiculous  to  say  that 
those  who  have  the  supreme  power  do  not  govern.  Not  to 
dwell  further  upon  this,  which  is  a  purely  verbal  question, 
what  we  want  is  a  common  term  including  both  dicast  and 
ecclesiast.  Let  us,  for  the  sake  of  distinction,  call  it  '  inde- 
terminate office,'  and  we  will  assume  that  those  who  share  in 
such  office  are  citizens.  This  is  the  most  comprehensive  8 
definition  of  a  citizen,  and  best  suits  all  those  who  are  generally 
so  called. 

But  we  must  not  forget  that  things  of  which  the  underlying 
notions  differ  in  kind,  one  of  them  being  first,  another  second, 
another  third,  have,  when  regarded  in  this  relation,  nothing, 
or  hardly  anything,  worth  mentioning  in  common.     Now  we  9 

^  '  Dicast '  =  juryman  and  judge  in  one :  '  ecclesiast  '  =  member  of  the 
ecclesia  or  assembly  of  the  citizens. 


I02  The  Defimtion  of  Citi':!{enship  in  Practice 

III.  1  see  that  governments  differ  in  kind,  and  that  some  of  them 

1275  b  are  prior  and  that  others  are  posterior ;  those  which  are  faulty 

or   perverted    are    necessarily   posterior  to  those  which   are 

perfect.     (What  we   mean    by  perversion  will  be   hereafter 

explained  \)     The  citizen  then  of  necessity  differs  under  each 

10  form  of  government ;  and  our  definition  is  best  adapted  to  the 
citizen  of  a  democracy ;  but  not  necessarily  to  other  states. 
For  in  some  states  the  people  are  not  acknowledged,  nor  have 
they  any  regular  assembly,  but  only  extraordinary  ones ;  and 
suits  are  distributed  in  turn  among  the  magistrates.  At  Lace- 
daemon,  for  instance,  the  Ephors  determine  suits  about  con- 
tracts, which  they  distribute  among  themselves,  while  the 
elders  are  judges  of  homicide,  and  other  causes  are  decided 

11  by  other  magistrates.  A  similar  principle  prevails  at  Car- 
thage "^ ;  there  certain  magistrates  decide  all  causes.  We  may, 
indeed,  modify  our  definition  of  the  citizen  so  as  to  include 
these  states.  [But  strictly  taken  it  only  applies  in  democracies.] 
In  other  states  it  is  the  holder  of  a  determinate,  not  of  an 
indeterminate,  office  who  legislates  and  judges,  and  to  some 
or  all  such  holders  of  determinate  offices  is  reserved  the  right 
of  deliberating   or  judging   about    some  things  or  about  all 

1 2  things.    The  conception  of  the  citizen  now  begins  to  clear  up. 

He  who  has  the  power  to  take  part  in  the  deliberative  or 
judicial  administration  of  any  state  is  said  by  us  to  be  a  citizen 
of  that  ^tate ;  and  speaking  generally,  a  state  is  a  body  of 
citizens  sufficing  for  the  purposes  of  life. 
2  But  in  practice  a  citizen  is  defined  to  be  one  of  whom  both 
the  parents  are  citizens ;  others  insist  on  going  further  back ; 
say  to  two  or  three  or  more  grandparents.  This  is  a  short 
and  practical  definition ;  but  there  are  some  who  raise  the 
'  Cp.  c.  6.  §  II.  *  Cp.  ii.  II.  §  7. 


Difficulties  Created  by  T^evolutions     103 

further  question  :  How  this  third  or  fourth  ancestor  came  to  III.  2 
be  a  citizen  ?  Gorgias  of  Leontini,  partly  because  he  was  in 
a  difficulty,  partly  in  irony,  said — '  Moitars  are  made  by  the 
mortar-makers,  and  the  citizens  of  Larissa  are  also  a  manu- 
factured article,  made,  like  the  kettles  which  bear  their  name 
[Xaptfj-oio*],  by  the  magistrates  ^'  Yet  the  question  is  really  3 
simple,  for  if,  according  to  the  definition  just  given,  they 
shared  in  the  government*,  they  were  citizens.  [This  is  a 
better  definition  than  the  other.]  For  the  words,  '  born  of 
a  father  or  mother,  who  is  a  citizen,'  cannot  possibly  apply  to 
the  first  inhabitants  or  founders  of  a  state. 

There  is  a  greater  difficulty  in  the  case  of  those  who  have 
been   made  citizens  after  a  revolution,  as  by  Cleisthenes  at 
Athens  after  the  expulsion  of  the  tyrants,  for  he  enrolled  in 
tribes  a  number  of  strangers  and  slaves  and ''  resident  aliens. 
The  doubt  in  these  cases  is,  not  who  is,  but  whether  he,  who  4 
is,  ought  to  be  a  citizen ;  and  there  will  still  be  a  further  1276  a 
doubt,  whether  he  who  ought  not  to  be  a  citizen  is  one  in 
fact,  for  what  ought  not  to  be  is  what  is  false  and  is  not. 
Now,  there  are  some  who  hold  office,  and  yet  ought  not  to  5 
hold  office,  whom  we  call  rulers,  although  they  rule  unjustly. 
And  the  citizen  was  defined  by  the  fact  of  his  holding  some 
kind  of  rule  or  office — he  who  holds  a  judicial  or  legislative 
office  fulfils  our  definition  of  a  citizen.     It  is  evident,  there- 
fore, that  the  citizens  about  whom  the  doubt  has  arisen  must 

'  An  untranslatable  play  upon  the  word  Srjiuovpyoi,  which  means 
either  '  a  magistrate '  or  '  an  artisan.' 

"  Cp.  c.  I.  §  12. 

^  Inserting  kcu  before  (XfTo'iKOvs  with  Bekker  in  his  second  edition.  If 
Kol  is  omitted,  as  in  all  the  MSS.,  we  must  translate— '  he  enrolled  in 
tribes  many  metics,  both  strangers  and  slaves ' :  or,  '  he  enrolled  in  tribes 
many  strangers,  and  metics  who  had  been  slaves.' 


104        When  is  a  State  the  Same? 

III.  2  be  called  citizens ;   whether  they  ought  to  be  so  or  not  is 

a  question  which  is  bound  up  with  the  previous  enquiry  ^. 

3       A  parallel  question  is  raised  respecting  the  state  whether 

a  certain  act  is  or  is  not  an  act  of  the  state ;  for  example,  in 

the  transition  from  an  oligarchy  or  a  tyranny  to  a  democracy. 

2  In  such  cases  persons  refuse  to  fulfil  their  contracts  or  any 
other  obligations  on  the  ground  that  the  tyrant,  and  not  the 
state,  contracted  them  ;  they  argue  that  some  constitutions  are 
established  by  force,  and  not  for  the  sake  of  the  common 
good.  But  this  would  apply  equally  to  democracies,  for  they 
too  may  be  founded  on  violence,  and  then  the  acts  of  the 
democracy  will  be  neither  more  nor  less  legitimate  than  those 

3  of  an  oligarchy  or  of  a  tyranny.  This  question  runs  up  into 
another — When  shall  we  say  that  the  state  is  the  same,  and 
when  different  ?  It  would  be  a  very  superficial  view  which 
considered  only  the  place  and  the  inhabitants ;  for  the  soil  and 
the  population  may  be  separated,  and  some  of  the  inhabitants 

4  may  live  in  one  place  and  some  in  another.  This,  however? 
is  not  a  very  serious  difficulty ;  we  need  only  remark  that  the 
word  '  state  '  is  ambiguous,  meaning  both  state  and  city. 

It  is  further  asked:  When  are  men,  living  in  the  same 
place,  to  be  regarded  as  a  single  city — what  is  the  limit  ? 

.*)  Certainly  not  the  wall  of  the  city,  for  you  might  surround  all 
Peloponnesus  with  a  wall.  But  a  city,  having  such  vast 
circuit,  would  contain  a  nation  rather  than  a  state,  like  Baby- 
lon ^,  which,  as  they  say,  had  been  taken  for  three  days  before 

6  some  part  of  the  inhabitants  became  aware  of  the  fact.  This 
difficulty  may,  however,  with  advantage  be  deferred^  to 
another  occasion ;  the  statesman  has  to  consider  the  size  of 

1  Cp.  c.  I.  §  I.  =»  Cp.  ii.  6.  §  6. 

^  Cp.  vii.  c.  4  and  c.  5. 


when  is  a  State  the  Same?       loy 

the  state,  and  whether  it  should  consist  of  more  than  one  III.  3 
nation  or  not. 

Again,  shall  we  say  that  while  the  race  of  inhabitants,  as 
well  as  their  place  of  abode,  remain  the  same,  the  city  is  also 
the  same,  although  the  citizens  are  always  dying  and  being 
bom,  as  we  call  rivers  and  fountains  the  same,  although  the 
water  is  always  flowing  away  and  coming  again  ?  Or  shall 
we  say  that  the  generations  of  men,  like  the  rivers,  are  the 
same,  but  that  the  state  changes  ?  For,  since  the  state  is  1276  b 
a  community  of  citizens  united  by  sharing  in  one  form  of  ^ 
government,  when  the  form  of  the  government  changes  and 
becomes  different,  then  it  may  be  supposed  that  the  state  is 
no  longer  the  same,  just  as  a  tragic  differs  from  a  comic 
chorus,  although  the  members  of  both  may  be  identical.  And  8 
in  this  manner  we  speak  of  every  union  or  composition  of 
elements,  when  the  form  of  their  composition  alters ;  for 
example,  haimony  of  the  same  sounds  is  said  to  be  different, 
accordingly  as  the  Dorian  or  the  Phrygian  mode  is  employed. 
And  if  this  is  true  it  is  evident  that  the  sameness  of  the  state  9 
consists  chiefly  in  the  sameness  of  the  constitution,  and  may 
be  called  or  not  called  by  the  same  name,  whether  the  inhabi- 
tants are  the  same  or  entirely  different.  It  is  quite  another 
question,  whether  a  state  ought  or  ought  not  to  fulfil  engage- 
ments when  the  form  of  government  changes. 

There  is  a  point  nearly  allied  to  the  preceding :  Whether  4 
the  virtue  of  a  good  man  and  a  good  citizen  is  the  same  or 
not  ^  But,  before  entering  on  this  discussion,  we  must  first 
obtain  some  general  notion  of  the  virtue  of  the  citizen.  Like 
the  sailor,  the  citizen  is  a  member  of  a  community.  Now,  2 
sailors  have  difl^erent  functions,  for  one  of  them  is  a  rower, 
'  Cp.  N.  Eth.  V.  2.  §  II. 


io6  The  Good  Man  and 

III.  4  another  a  pilot,  a  third  a  look-out  man,  and  a  fourth  is 
described  by  some  similar  term ;  and  while  the  precise 
definition  of  each  individual's  virtue  applies  exclusively  to  him, 
there  is,  at  the  same  time,  a  common  definition  applicable  to 
them  all.     For  they  have  all  of  them  a  common  object,  which 

3  is  safety  in  navigation.  Similarly,  one  citizen  differs  from 
another,  but  the  salvation  of  the  community  is  the  common 
business  of  them  all.  This  community  is  the  state ;  the  virtue 
of  the  citizen  must  therefore  be  relative  to  the  constitution  of 
which  he  is  a  member.  If,  then,  there  are  many  forms  of 
government,  it  is  evident  that  the  virtue  of  the  good  citizen 
cannot  be  the  one  perfect  virtue.     But  we  say  that  the  good 

4  man  is  he  who  has  perfect  virtue.  Hence  it  is  evident  that 
the  good  citizen  need  not  of  necessity  possess  the  virtue 
which  makes  a  good  man. 

The  same  question  may  also  be  approached  by  another  road, 

5  from  a  consideration  of  the  jjerfect  state.  If  the  state  cannot" 
be  entirely  composed  of  good  men,  and  each  citizen  is  expected 
to  do  his  own  business  well,  and  must  therefore  have  virtue, 

1277  a  inasmuch  as  all  the  citizens  cannot  be  alike,  the  virtue  of  the 
citizen  and  of  the  good  man  cannot  coincide.  All  must  have 
the  virtue  of  the  good  citizen — thus,  and  thus  only,  can  the 
state  be  perfect ;  but  they  will  not  have  the  virtue  of  a  good 
man,  unless  we  assume  that  in  the  good  state  all  the  citizens 
must  be  good. 

6  Again,  the  state  may  be  compared  to  the  living  being :  as 
the  first  elements  into  which  the  living  being  is  resolved  are 
soul  and  body,  as  the  soul  is  made  up  of  reason  and  appetite, 
the  family  of  husband  and  wife,  property  of  master  and  slave, 
so  out  of  all  these,  as  well  as  other  dissimilar  elements,  the 
state    is    composed ;    and,   therefore,   the  virtue   of  all    the 


the  Good  Citizen  107 

citizens   cannot   possibly  be   the    same,   any  more  than  the  III.  4 
excellence  of  the  leader  of  a  chorus  is  the  same  as  that  of  the 
performer  who  stands  by  his  side.      I  have  said  enough  to  7 
show  why  the  two  kinds  of  virtue  cannot  be  absolutely  and 
always  the  same. 

But  will  there  then  be  no  case  in  which  the  virtue  of  the 
good  citizen  and  the  virtue  of  the  good  man  coincide  ?  To 
this  we  answer  [not  that  the  good  citizen,  but]  that  the  good 
ruler  is  a  good  and  wise  man,  and  that  he  who  would  be 
a  statesman  must  be  a  wise  man.  And  some  persons  say  that  8 
even  the  education  of  the  ruler  should  be  of  a  special  kind ; 
for  are  not  the  children  of  kings  instructed  in  riding  and 
military  exercises  ?     As  Euripides  says  : 

'No  subtle  arts  for  me,  but  what  the  state  requires'.' 
As  though  there  were  a  special  education  needed  by  a  ruler. 
If  then  the  virtue  of  a  good  ruler  is  the  same  as  that  of  a  good  9 
man,  and  we  assume  further  that  the  subject  is  a  citizen  as 
well  as  the  ruler,  the  virtue  of  the  good  citizen  and  the  virtue 
of  the  good  man  cannot  be  always  the  same,  although  in  some 
cases  [i.  e.  in  the  perfect  state]  they  may ;  for  the  virtue  of 
a  ruler  differs  from  that  of  a  citizen.  It  was  the  sense  of  this 
difference  which  made  Jason  say  that  '  he  felt  hungry  when  he 
was  not  a  tyrant,'  meaning  that  he  could  not  endure  to  live  in 
a  private  station.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  it  may  be  argued  10 
that  men  are  praised  for  knowing  both  how  to  rule  and  how 
to  obey,  and  he  is  said  to  be  a  citizen  of  approved  virtue  who 
is  able  to  do  both.  Now  if  we  suppose  the  virtue  of  a  good 
man  to  be  that  which  rules,  and  the  virtue  of  the  citizen  to 
include  ruling  and  obeying,  it  cannot  be  said  that  they  are 

*  Fragment  from  the  Aeolus,  quoted  in  Stobaeus,  45.  1 3. 


To8  The  Good  Man  and 

III.  4  equally  worthy  of  praise.  Since,  then,  it  is  occasionally  held 
^  ^  that  the  ruler  and  the  ruled  should  learn  different  things  and 
not  the  same  things,  and  that  the  citizen  must  know  and  share 
in  both ;  the  inference  is  obvious  ^.  There  is,  indeed,  the 
rule  of  a  master  which  is  concerned  with  menial  offices '', — the 
master  need  not  know  how  to  perform  these,  but  may  employ 
others  in  the  execution  of  them :    anything   else  would  be 

12  degrading ;  and  by  anything  else  I  mean  the  menial  duties 
which  vary  much  in  character  and  are  executed  by  various 
classes  of  slaves,  such,  for  example,  as  handicraftsmen,  who, 
as  their  name  signifies,  live  by  the  labour  of  their  hands : — 

1277  b  under  '  these  the  mechanic  is  included.  Hence  in  ancient 
times,  and  among  some  nations,  the  working  classes  had  no 
share  in  the  government — a  privilege  which  they  only  acquired 

13  under  the  extreme  democracy.  Certainly  the  good  man  and 
the  statesman  and  the  good  citizen  ought  not  to  learn  the 
crafts  of  inferiors  except  for  their  own  occasional  use  ^ ;  if 
they  habitually  practise  them,  there  will  cease  to  be  a  distinc- 
tion between  master  and  slave. 

14  This  is  not  the  rule  of  which  we  are  speaking ;  but  there 
is  a  rule  of  another  kind,  which  is  exercised  over  freemen  and 
equals  by  birth — a  constitutional  rule,  which  the  niler  must 
learn  by  obeying,  as  he  would  learn  the  duties  of  a  general  of 
cavalry  by  being  under  the  orders  of  a  general  of  cavalry,  or 
the  duties  of  a  general  of  infantry  by  being  under  the  orders 
of  a  general  of  infantry;  or  by  having  had  the  command  of 
a  company  or  brigade.     It  has  been  well  said  that  '  he  who 

1 5  has  never  learned  to  obey  cannot  be  a  good  commander.*   The 

'  Viz.  that  some  kind  of  previous  subjection  is  an  advantage  to  the 
ruler,     Cp.  infra,  §  14. 

-  Cp.  i.  7.  §§  2-5.  "^  Cp.  viii.  3.  §  5. 


the  Good  Citio^n  109 

two  are  not  the  same,  but  the  good  citizen  ought  to  be  capable  III.  4 
of  both ;  he  should  know  how  to  govern  like  a  freeman,  and 
how  to  obey  like  a  freeman — these  are  the  virtues  of  a  citizen. 
And,  although  the  temperance  and  justice  of  a  ruler  are  dis-  i6 
tinct  from  those  of  a  subject,  the  virtue  of  a  good  man  will 
include  both  ;  for  the  good  man,  who  is  free  and  also  a  .subject, 
will  not  have  one  virtue  only,  say  justice,  but  he  will  have 
distinct  kinds  of  virtue,  the  one  qualifying  him  to  rule,  the 
other  to  obey,  and  differing  as  the  temperance  and  courage  of 
men  and  women  differ^.  For  a  man  would  be  thought  a  17 
coward  if  he  had  no  more  courage  than  a  courageous  woman, 
and  a  woman  would  be  thought  loquacious  if  she  imposed  no 
more  restraint  on  her  conversation  than  the  good  man ;  and 
indeed  their  part  in  the  management  of  the  household  is 
different,  for  the  duty  of  the  one  is  to  acquire,  and  of  the 
other  to  preserve.  Practical  wisdom  only  is  characteristic  of 
the  ruler  ^ :  it  would  seem  that  all  other  virtues  must  equally 
belong  to  ruler  and  subject.  The  virtue  of  the  subject  is  ^8 
certainly  not  wisdom,  but  only  true  opinion ;  he  may  be  com- 
pared to  the  maker  of  the  flute,  while  his  master  is  like  the 
'flute-player  or  user  of  the  fluted 

From  these  considerations  may  be  gathered  the  answer  to 
the  question,  whether  the  virtue  of  the  good  man  is  the  same 
as  that  of  the  good  citizen,  or  different,  and  how  far  the  same, 
and  how  far  different  ^ 

There  still  remains  one  more  question  about  the  citizen :  5 
Is  he  only  a  true  citizen  who  has  a  share  of  office,  or  is  the 
mechanic  to  be  included  ?     If  they  who  hold  no  office  are  to 
be  deemed  citizens,  not  every  citizen  can  have  this  virtue  of 

'  Cp.  i.  13.  §  9.         ^  Cp.  Rep.  iv.  428.  '  Cp.  Rep.  x.  601  d,  e. 

*  Cp,  c.  5.  §  10;  c.  18.  §  I     iv.  7.  §  3  ;  vii,  14.  §  8. 


no  Are  Mechanics  Citin^ens ? 

III.  5  ruling  and  obeying  ^  which  makes  a  citizen  ^.  And  if  none  of 
the  lower  class  are  citizens,  in  which  part  of  the  state  are 
they  to  be  placed  ?  For  they  are  not  resident  aliens,  and  they 
1278  a  are  not  foreigners.  To  this  objection  may  we  not  reply,  that 
^  there  is  no  more  absurdity  in  excluding  them  than  in  excluding 
slaves  and  freedmen  from  any  of  the  above-mentioned  classes  ? 
It  must  be  admitted  that  we  cannot  consider  all  those  to  be 
citizens  who  are  necessary  to  the  existence  of  the  state;  for 
example,  children  are  not  citizens  equally  with  grown  up  men, 
who  are  citizens  absolutely,  but  children,  not  being  grown  up, 

3  are  only  citizens  in  a  qualified  sense.  Doubtless  in  ancient 
times,  and  among  some  nations,  the  artisan  class  were  slaves 
or  foreigners,  and  therefore  the  majority  of  them  are  so  now. 
The  best  form  of  state  will  not  admit  them  to  citizenship ; 
but  if  they  are  admitted,  then  our  definition  of  the  virtue  of 
a  citizen  will  apply  to  some  citizens  and  freemen  only,  and 

4  not  to  those  who  work  for  their  living.  The  latter  class,  tOj 
whom  toil  is  a  necessity,  are  either  slaves  who  minister  to  the 
wants  of  individuals,  or  mechanics  and  labourers  who  are  the 
servants  of  the  community.  These  reflections  carried  a  little 
further  will  explain  their  position ;  and  indeed  what  has  been 
said  already  is  of  itself  explanation  enough. 

5  Since  there  are  many  forms  of  government  there  must  be 
many  varieties  of  citizens,  and  especially  of  citizens  who  are 
subjects ;  so  that  under  some  governments  the  mechanic  and 
the  labourer  will  be  citizens,  but  not  in  others,  as,  for  example, 

'  Or, '  for  this  man  (i.e.  the  meaner  sort  of  man)  is  a  citizen  and  does 
not  exercise  rule '  (see  below,  §  3,  tt  5«  wat  owtos  iroXirtji).  According 
to  the  way  of  taking  the  passage  which  is  followed  in  the  text,  ovros  = 
o  excuv  TTjv  TotavTfjv  apfT-qv :  according  to  the  second  way,  it  refers  to 
0avav<Tos, 


Different  Kjnds  of  Citi^^ns 


1 1 1 


in  aristocracy  or  the  so-called  government  of  the  best  (if  there  III.  5 
be  such  an  one),   in  which  honours  are   given  according  to 
virtue  and  merit ;  for  no  man  can  practise  virtue  who  is  living 
the  life  of  a  mechanic  or  labourer.     In  oligarchies  the  qualifi-  6 
cation  for  office  is  high,  and  therefore  no  labourer  can  ever  be 
a  citizen ;  but  a  mechanic  may,  for  many  of  them  are  rich. 
At  Thebes  ^  there  was  a  law  that  no  man  could  hold  office  ^ 
who  had  not  retired  from  business  for  ten  years.     In  many 
states  the  law  goes  to  the  length  of  admitting  aliens ;  for  in 
some  democracies  a  man  is  a  citizen  though  his  mother  only 
be  a  citizen  [and  his  father  an  alien]  ;  and  a  similar  principle 
is  applied  to  illegitimate  children ;  the  law  is  relaxed  when  8 
there  is  a  dearth  of  population.     But  when  the  number  of 
citizens  increases,  first  the  children  of  a  male  or  a  female  slave 
are  excluded ;  then  those  whose  mothers  only  are  citizens ; 
and  at  last  the  right  of  citizenship  is  confined  to  those  whose 
fathers  and  mothers  are  both  citizens. 

Hence,  as  is  evident,  there  are  different  kinds  of  citizens ;  9 
and  he  is  a  citizen  in  the  highest  sense  who  shares  in  the 
honours  of  the  state.  In  the  poems  of  Homer  [Achilles 
complains  of  Agamemnon  treating  him]  '  like  some  dishonoured 
stranger  ^ ; '  for  he  who  is  excluded  from  the  honours  of  the 
state  is  no  better  than  an  alien.  But  when  this  exclusion  is 
concealed,  then  the  object  is  to  deceive  one's  fellow-country- 
men. 

As  to  the  question  whether  the  virtue  of  the  good  man  is  the  1278  b 
same  as  that  of  the  good  citizen,  the  considerations  already  '° 
adduced  prove  that  in  some  states  the  two  are  the  same,  and 
in  others  different.     When  they  are  the  same  it  is  not  the 
virtue  of  every  citizen  which  is  the  same  as  that  of  the  good 
'  Cp.  vi.  7.  §  4.  '^  II.  ix.  648. 


112    Government  True  and  Perverted 

III.  5  man,  but  only  the  virtue  of  the  statesman  and  of  those  who 
have  or  may  have,  alone  or  in  conjunction  with  others,  the 
conduct  of  public  affairs. 
6  Having  determined  these  questions,  we  have  next  to  con- 
sider whether  there  is  only  one  form  of  government  or  many, 
and  if  many,  what  they  are,  and  how  many,  and  what  are  the 
differences  between  them. 

A  constitution  is  the  arrangement  of  magistracies  in  a  state*, 
especially  of  the  highest  of  all.  The  government  is  every- 
where sovereign  in  the  state,  and  the  constitution  is  in  fact  the 

2  government.  For  example,  in  democracies  the  people  are 
supreme,  but  in  oligarchies,  the  few ;  and,  therefore,  we  say 
that  these  two  forms  of  government  are  different :  and  so  in 
other  cases. 

First,  let  us  consider  what  is  the-  purpose  of  a  state,  and 
how  many  forms  of  government  there  are  by  which  human 

3  society  is  regulated.  We  have  already  said,  in  the  former 
part  of  this  treatise^,  when  drawing  a  distinction  between 
household-management  and  the  rule  of  a  master,  that  man  is 
by  nature  a  political  animal.  And  therefore,  men,  even  when 
they  do  not  require  one  another's  help,  desire  to  live  together 
all  the  same,  and  are  in  fact  brought  together  by  their  common 
interests  in  proportion  as  they  severally  attain  to  any  measure 

4  of  well-being.  This  is  certainly  the  chief  end,  both  of  indi- 
viduals and  of  states.  And  also  for  the  sake  of  mere  life  (in 
which  there  is  possibly  some  noble  element)  mankind  meet 
together  and  maintain  the  political  community,  so  long  as  the 

5  evils  of  existence  do  not  greatly  overbalance  the  good '.  And 
we  all   see  that  men    cling    to    life   even    in   the    midst   of 

'  Cp.  c.  I.  §  I ;  iv.  I.  §  lo.  *  Cp.  i.  2.  §§  9,  10. 

3  Cp.  Plato,  Polit.  303  A. 


Government  T^rue  and  Perverted    113 

misfortune,   seeming  to  find  in   it  a  natural  sweetness  and  III.  6 
happiness. 

There  is  no  difficulty  in  distinguishing  the  various  kinds  of 
authority;  they  have  been  often  defined  already  in  popular 
works  ^.  The  rule  of  a  master,  although  the  slave  by  nature  6 
and  the  master  by  nature  have  in  reality  the  same  interests,  is 
nevertheless  exercised  primarily  with  a  view  to  the  interest  of 
the  master,  but  accidentally  considers  the  slave,  since,  if  the 
slave  perish,  the  rule  of  the  master  perishes  with  him.  On  7 
the  other  hand,  the  government  of  a  wife  and  children  and  of 
a  household,  which  we  have  called  household-management,  is 
exercised  in  the  first  instance  for  the  good  of  the  governed  or 
for  the  common  good  of  both  parties,  but  essentially  for  the 
good  of  the  governed,  as  we  see  to  be  the  case  in  medicine,  1279  a 
gymnastics,  and  the  arts  in  general,  which  are  only  accidentally 
concerned  with  the  good  of  the  artists  themselves^.  (For 
there  is  no  reason  why  the  trainer  may  not  sometimes  practise 
gymnastics,  and  the  pilot  is  always  one  of  the  crew.)  The  8 
trainer  or  the  pilot  considers  the  good  of  those  committed  to 
his  care.  But,  when  he  is  one  of  the  persons  taken  care  of, 
he  accidentally  participates  in  the  advantage,  for  the  pilot  is 
also  a  sailor,  and  the  trainer  becomes  one  of  those  in  training. 
And  so  in  politics :  when  the  state  is  framed  upon  the  prin-  9 
ciple  of  equality  and  likeness,  the  citizens  think  that  they 
ought  to  hold  office  by  turns.  In  the  order  of  nature  eveiy 
one  would  take  his  turn  of  service  ;  and  then  again,  somebody 
else  would  look  after  his  interest,  just  as  he,  while  in  office, 
had  looked  after  theirs'.  [That  was  originally  the  way.] 
But  nowadays,  for  the  sake  of  the  advantage  which  is  to  be  10 

'  Or,  'in  our  popular  works,'  ^  Cp.  Plato,  Rep.  i.  341  d. 

3  Cp.  ii.  2.  §§  6,  7. 

DAVIS  I 


TI4        Classfiicatio?!  of  Governments 

III.  6  gained  from  the  public  revenues  and  from  office,  men  want  to 
be  always  in  office.  One  might  imagine  that  the  rulers,  being 
sickly,  were  only  kept  in  health  while  they  continued  in  office; 
in  that  case  we  may  be  sure  that  they  would  be  hunting 
1 1  after  places.  The  conclusion  is  evident :  that  governments, 
which  have  a  regard  to  the  common  interest,  are  constituted 
in  accordance  with  strict  principles  of  justice,  and  are  there- 
fore true  forms ;  but  those  which  regard  only  the  interest  of 
the  rulers  are  all  defective  and  i)erverted  forms,  for  they  are 
despotic,  whereas  a  state  is  a  community  of  freemen. 
7  Having  determined  these  points,  we  have  next  to  consider 
how  many  forms  of  government  there  are,  and  what  they  are  ; 
and  in  the  first  place  what  are  the  tme  forms,  for  when  they 
are   determined  the   perversions    of  them    will    at   once   be 

2  apparent.  The  words  constitution  and  government  have  the 
same  meaning,  and  the  government,  which  is  the  supreme 
authority  in  states,  must  be  in  the  hands  of  one,  or  of  a  few, 
or  of  many.  The  tiue  forms  of  government,  therefore,  are 
those  in  which  the  one,  or  the  few,  or  the  many,  govern  with 
a  view  to  the  common  interest ;  but  governments  which  rule 
with  a  view  to  the  private  interest,  whether  of  the  one,  or  of 
the  few,  or  of  the  many,  are  perversions '.  For  citizens,  if 
they  are  truly  citizens,  ought  to  participate  in  the  advantages 
of  a  state.     Of  forms  of  government  in  which  one  iiiles,  we 

3  call  that  which  regards  the  common  interests,  kingship  or 
royalty ;  that  in  which  more  than  one,  but  not  many,  rule, 
aristocracy  [the  rule  of  the  best] ;  and  it  is  so  called,  either 
because  the  rulers  are  the  best  men,  or  because  they  have  at 
heart  the  best  interests  of  the  state  and  of  the  citizens.  But 
when  the  citizens  at  large  administer  the  state  for  the  common 

»  Cp.  Eth,  viii.  10,  * 


Classification  of  Governments 


iif 


interest,  the  government  is  called  by  the  generic  name — a  III.  7 
constitution  [TroXtTfia].     And  there  is  a  reason  for  this  use  of 
language.     One  man  or  a  few  may  excel  in  virtue;  but  of  4 
virtue  there  are  many  kinds :  and  as  the  number  increases  it 
becomes  more  difficult  for  them  to  attain  perfection  in  every  1279  b 
kind,  though  they  may  in  military  virtue,  for  this  is  found  in 
the    masses.      Hence,    in    a   constitutional    government   the 
fighting-men  have  the  supreme  power,  and  those  who  possess 
arms  are  the  citizens. 

Of  the  above-mentioned  forms,  the  perversions  are  as  5 
follows  : — of  royalty,  tyranny  ;  of  aristocracy,  oligarchy ;  of 
constitutional  government,  democracy.  For  tyranny  is  a  kind 
of  monarchy  which  has  in  view  the  interest  of  the  monarch 
only ;  oligarchy  has  in  view  the  interest  of  the  wealthy ; 
democracy,  of  the  needy :  none  of  them  the  common  good 
of  all. 

But  there  are  difficulties  about  these  forms  of  government,  8 
and  it  will  therefore  be  necessary  to  state  a  little  more  at 
length  the  nature  of  each  of  them.  For  he  who  would  make 
a  philosophical  study  of  the  various  sciences,  and  does  not 
regard  practice  only,  ought  not  to  overlook  or  omit  anything, 
but  to  set  forth  the  truth  in  every  particular.  Tyranny,  as  2 
I  was  saying,  is  monarchy  exercising  the  rule  of  a  master 
over  political  society  ;  oligarchy  is  when  men  of  property  have 
the  government  in  their  hands;  democracy,  the  opposite, 
when  the  indigent,  and  not  the  men  of  property,  are  the 
rulers.  And  here  arises  the  first  of  our  difficulties,  and  it  3 
relates  to  the  definition  just  given.  For  democracy  is  said  to 
be  the  government  of  the  many.  But  what  if  the  many  are 
men  of  property  and  have  the  power  in  their  hands  ?  In  like 
manner  oligarchy  is  said  to  be  the  government  of  the  few;  but 
I  2 


1 1 6    Oligarchy  and  Democracy  Defined 

III.  8  what  if  the  ix)or  are  fewer  than  the  rich,  and  have  the  power 
in  their  hands  because  they  are  stronger  ?  In  these  cases  the 
distinction  which  we  have  drawn  between  these  different  forms 
of  government  would  no  longer  hold  good. 

4  Suppose,  once  more,  that  we  add  wealth  to  the  few  and 
poverty  to  the  many,  and  name  the  governments  accordingly — 
an  oligarchy  is  said  to  be  that  in  wl)ich  the  few  and  the 
wealthy,  and  a  democracy  that  in  which  the  many  and  the 

5  poor  are  the  rulers — there  will  still  be  a  difficulty.  For,  if 
the  only  forms  of  government  are  the  ones  already  mentioned, 
how  shall  we  describe  those  other  governments  also  just 
mentioned  by  us,  in  which  the  rich  are  the  more  numerous 
and  the  poor  are  the  fewer,  and  both  govern  in  their  re- 
spective states  ? 

6  The  argument  seems  to  show  that,  whether  in  oligarchies 
or  in  democracies,  the  number  of  the  governing  body,  whether 
the  greater  number,  as  in  a  democracy,  or  the  smaller  number, 
as  in  an  oligarchy,  is  an  accident  due  to  the  fact  that  the  rich 
everywhere  are  few,  and  the  poor  numerous.  But  if  so, 
there  is  a  misapprehension  of  the  causes  of  the  difference 

7  between  them.     For  the  real  difference  between  democracy 
1280  a  and  oligarchy  is  poverty  and  wealth.     Wherever  men  nile 

by  reason  of  their  wealth,  whether  they  be  few  or  many,  that 
is  an  oligarchy,  and  where  the  poor  rule,  that  is  a  demo- 
cracy. But  as  a  fact  the  rich  are  few  and  the  poor  many: 
for  few  are  well-to-do,  whereas  freedom  is  enjoyed  by  all, 
and  wealth  and  freedom  are  the  grounds  on  which  the 
oligarchical  and  democratical  parties  respectively  claim  power 
in  the  state. 
9  Let  us  -begin  by  considering  the  common  definitions  of 
oligarchy  and  democracy,  and  what  is  justice  oligarchical  and 


Political  Justice  117 

democratical.  For  all  men  cling  to  justice  of  some  kind,  but  III.  8 
their  conceptions  are  imperfect  and  they  do  not  express  the 
whole  idea.  For  example,  justice  is  thought  by  them  to  be, 
and  is,  equality,  not,  however,  for  all,  but  only  for  equals. 
And  inequality  is  thought  to  be,  and  is,  justice ;  neither  is  2 
this  for  all,  but  only  for  unequals.  When  the  persons  are 
omitted,  then  men  judge  erroneously.  The  reason  is  that 
they  are  passing  judgment  on  themselves,  and  most  people 
are  bad  judges  in  their  own  case.  And  whereas  justice  3 
implies  a  relation  to  persons  as  well  as  to  things,  and  a  just 
distribution,  as  I  have  already  said  in  the  Ethics',  embraces 
alike  persons  and  things,  they  acknowledge  the  equality  of  the 
things,  but  dispute  about  the  merit  of  the  persons,  chiefly  for 
the  reason  which  I  have  just  given — because  they  are  bad 
judges  in  their  own  affairs ;  and  secondly,  because  both  the 
parties  to  the  argument  are  speaking  of  a  limited  and  partial 
justice,  but  imagine  themselves  to  be  speaking  of  absolute 
justice.  For  those  who  are  unequal  in  one  respect,  for  4 
example  wealth,  consider  themselves  to  be  unequal  in  all ; 
and  any  who  are  equal  in  one  respect,  for  example  freedom, 
consider  themselves  to  be  equal  in  all.  But  they  leave  out 
the  capital  point.  For  if  men  met  and  associated  out  of  5 
regard  to  wealth  only,  their  share  in  the  state  would  be 
proportioned  to  their  property,  and  the  oligarchical  doctrine 
would  then  seem  to  carry  the  day.  It  would  not  be  just 
that  he  who  paid  one  mina  should  have  the  same  share  of 
a  hundred  minae,  ^  whether  of  the  principal  or  of  the  profits  ^, 
as    he   who    paid  the   remaining   ninety-nine.     But   a   state  6 

1  N.  Eth.  V.  3.  §  4. 

'^  Or,  with  Beriiays,  '  either  in  the  case  of  the  original  contributors 
or  their  successors.' 


1 1 8  The  End  of  the  State 

III.  9  exists  for  the  sake  of  a  good  life,  and  not  for  the  sake  of  life 
only :  if  life  only  were  the  object,  slaves  and  brute  animals 
might  form  a  state,  but  they  cannot,  for  they  have  no  share 
in  happiness  or  in  a  life  of  free  choice.  Nor  does  a  state 
exist  for  the  sake  of  alliance  and  security  from  injustice  \  nor 
yet  for  the  sake  of  exchange  and  mutual  intercourse;  for  then 
the  Tyrrhenians  and  the  Carthaginians,  and  all  who  have 
commercial  treaties  with  one  another,  would  be  the  citizens  of 

7  one  state.  Tnie,  they  have  agreements  about  imports,  and  en- 
gagements that  they  will  do  no  wrong  to  one  another,  and 

1280  b  written  articles  of  alliance.  But  there  are  no  magistracies 
common  to  the  contracting  parties  who  will  enforce  their 
engagements ;  different  states  have  each  their  own  magistracies. 
Nor  does  one  state  take  care  that  the  citizens  of  the  other 
are  such  as  they  ought  to  be,  nor  see  that  those  who  come 
under  the  terms  of  the  treaty  do  no  wrong  or  wickedness  at 
all,   but   only    that    they    do    no    injustice   to   one    another. 

8  Whereas,  those  who  care  for  good  government  take  into 
consideration  [the  larger  question  of]  virtue  and  vice  in  states. 
Whence  it  may  be  further  inferred  that  ^  virtue  must  be  the 
serious  care  of  a  state  which  truly  deserves  the  name^:  for 
[without  this  ethical  end]  the  community  becomes  a  mere 
alliance  which  differs  only  in  place  from  alliances  of  which 
the  members  live  apart ;  and  law  is  only  a  convention,  '  a 
surety  to  one  another  of  justice,'  as  the  sophist  Lycophron 
says,  and  has  no  real  power  to  make  the  citizens  good  and 
just. 

9  This   is  obvious ;    for    suppose    distinct    places,    such   as 

>  Cp.  c.  I.  §4. 

^  Or,  '  virtue  must  be  the  care  of  a  state  whic  h  is  truly  so  called,  and 
not  merely  in  name.' 


The  End  of  the  State  1 1 9 

Corinth  and  Megara,  to  be  united  by  a  wall,  still  they  would  m.  9 
not  be  one  city,  not  even  if  the  citizens  had  the  right  to  lo 
intermarry,  which  is  one  of  the  rights  peculiarly  characteristic 
of  states.  Again,  if  men  dwelt  at  a  distance  from  one 
another,  but  not  so  far  off  as  to  have  no  intercourse,  and 
there  were  laws  among  them  that  they  should  not  wrong 
each  other  in  their  exchanges,  neither  would  this  be  a  state. 
Let  us  suppose  that  one  man  is  a  carpenter,  another  a 
husbandman,  another  a  shoemaker,  and  so  on,  and  that  their 
number  is  ten  thousand  :  nevertheless,  if  they  have  nothing  in 
common  but  exchange,  alliance,  and  the  like,  that  would  not 
constitute  a  state.  Why  is  this  ?  Surely  not  because  they  1 1 
are  at  a  distance  from  one  another :  for  even  supposing  that 
such  a  community  were  to  meet  in  one  place,  and  that  each 
man  had  a  house  of  his  own,  which  was  in  a  manner  his 
state,  and  that  they  made  alliance  with  one  another,  but  only 
against  evil-doers ;  still  an  accurate  thinker  would  not  deem 
this  to  be  a  state,  if  their  intercourse  with  one  another  was  of 
the  same  character  after  as  before  their  union.  It  is  clear  12 
then  that  a  state  is  not  a  mere  society,  ha\ing  a  common 
place,  established  for  the  j)revention  of  crime  and  for  the  sake 
of  exchange.  These  are  conditions  without  which  a  state 
cannot  exist;  but  all  of  them  together  do  not  constitute 
a  state,  which  is  a  community  of  well-being  in  families  and 
aggregations  of  families,  for  the  sake  of  a  perfect  and  self- 
sufficing  life.  Such  a  community  can  only  be  established  13 
among  those  who  live  in  the  same  place  and  intermarry. 
Hence  arise  in  cities  family  connexions,  brotherhoods, 
common  sacrifices,  amusements  which  draw  men  together. 
They  are  created  by .  friendship,  for  friendship  is  the  motive 
of  society.     The   end    is   the  good    life,  and  these  are  the 


120 


Sovereignty 


III.  9  means  towards  it.    And  the  state  is  the  union  of  families  and 
'4  villages  having  for  an  end  a  perfect  and  self-sufficing  life,  by 
which  we  mean  a  happy  and  honourable  life  ^. 

Our  conclusion,  then,  is  that  political  society  exists  for  the 
1 5  sake  of  noble  actions,  and  not  of  mere  companionship.  And 
they  who  contribute  most  to  such  a  society  have  a  greater 
share  in  it  than  those  who  have  the  same  or  a  greater  freedom 
or  nobility  of  birth  but  are  inferior  to  them  in  political  virtue ; 
or  than  those  who  exceed  them  in  wealth  but  are  surpassed 
by  them  in  virtue. 

From  what  has  been  said  it  will  be  clearly  seen  that  all  the 
partisans  of  different  forms  of  government  speak  of  a  part  of 
justice  only. 
10  There  is  also  a  doubt  as  to  what  is  to  be  the  supreme 
power  in  the  state: — Is  it  the  multitude?  Or  the  wealthy? 
Or  the  good  ?  Or  the  one  best  man  ?  Or  a  tyrant  ?  Any 
of  these  alternatives  seems  to  involve  disagreeable  conse- 
quences. If  the  poor,  for  example,  because  they  are  more  in 
number,  divide  among  themselves  the  property  of  the  rich, 
is  not  this  unjust  ?  No,  by  heaven  (will  be  the  reply),  for 
3  the  lawful  authority  [i.  e.  the  people]  willed  it.  But  if  this  is 
not  injustice,  pray  what  is  ?  Again,  when  [in  the  first 
division]  all  has  been  taken,  and  the  majority  divide  anew  the 
property  of  the  minority,  is  it  not  evident,  if  this  goes  on, 
that  they  will  ruin  the  state  ?  Yet  surely,  virtue  is  not  the 
ruin  of  those  who  possess  her,  nor  is  justice  destructive  of 
a  state  '^ ;  and  therefore  this  law  of  confiscation  clearly  cannot 
3  be  just.  If  it  were,  all  the  acts  of  a  tyrant  must  of  necessity 
be  just ;  for  he  only  coerces  other  men  by  superior  power, 
just  as  the  multitude  coerce  the  rich.  But  is  it  just,  then, 
'  Cp.  i.  2.  §  8 ;  N.  Eth.  i.  7.  §  6.  ^  Cp.  Plato,  Rep.  i.  351,  353. 


Sovereignty  of  the  People 


121 


that  the  few  and  the  wealthy  should  be  the  rulers  ?     And  III.  10 
what  if  they,  in  like  manner,  rob  and  plunder  the  people — is 
this  just  ?     If   so,    the    other    case    [i.  e.    the    case  of  the 
majority  plundering  the  minority]  will  likewise  be  just.     But  4 
there  can  be  no  doubt  that  all  these  things  are  wrong  and 
unjust. 

Then  ought  the  good  to  rule  and  have  supreme  power  ? 
But  in  that  case  everybody  else,  being  excluded  from  power, 
will  be  dishonoured.  For  the  offices  of  a  state  are  posts  of 
honour ;  and  if  one  set  of  men  always  hold  them,  the  rest 
must  be  deprived  of  them.  Then  will  it  be  well  that  the  one  5 
best  man  should  rule  ?  Nay,  that  is  still  more  oligarchical, 
for  the  number  of  those  who  are  dishonoured  is  thereby 
increased.  Some  one  may  say  that  it  is  bad  for  a  man, 
subject  as  he  is  to  all  the  accidents  of  human  passion,  to 
have  the  supreme  power,  rather  than  the  law.  But  what  if  the 
law  itself  be  democratical  or  oligarchical,  how  will  that  help 
us  out  of  our  difficulties  *  ?  Not  at  all ;  the  same  conse- 
quences will  follow. 

Most   of  these   questions   may   be    reserved    for   another  11 
occasion.     The   principle    that   the   multitude    ought   to    be 
supreme  rather  than  the  few  best  is  capable  of  a  satisfactory 
explanation,  and,  though  not  free  from  difficulty,  yet  seems  to 
contain  an  element  of  truth.     For  the  many,  of  whom  each  2 
individual  is  but  an  ordinary  person,  when  they  meet  together  1281  b 
may  very  likely  be  better  than  the  few  good,  if  regarded  not 
individually  but  collectively,  just  as  a  feast  to  which  many 
contribute  is  better  than   a  dinner  provided  out  of  a  single 
purse.     For  each  individual  among  the   many   has  a  share 
of  virtue  and  prudence,  and  when  they  meet  together  they 

*    Cp.  C,  1 1 .  §  2C. 


122 


Treasons  for  and  against 


III.  U  become  in  a  manner  one  man,  who  has  many  feet,  and  hands, 
and  senses ;   that  is  a  figure  of  their  mind  and  disposition. 

3  Hence  the  many  are  better  judges  than  a  single  man  of  music 
and  poetry ;  for  some  understand  one  part,  and  some  another, 

4  and  among  them,  they  understand  the  whole.  There  is 
a  similar  combination  of  qualities  in  good  men,  who  differ 
from  any  individual  of  the  many,  as  the  beautiful  are  said 
to  differ  from  those  who  are  not  beautiful,  and  works  of 
art  from  realities,  because  in  them  the  scattered  elements  are 
combined,  although,  if  taken  separately,  the  eye  of  one  person 
or  some  other  feature  in  another  person  would  be  fairer  than 

5  in  the  picture.  Whether  this  principle  can  apply  to  every 
democracy,  and  to  all  bodies  of  men,  is  not  clear.  Or  rather, 
by  heaven,  in  some  cases  it  is  impossible  of  application ;  for 
the  argument  would  equally  hold  about  brutes ;  and  wherein, 
it  will  be  asked,  do  some  men  differ  from  brutes  ?  But  there 
may  be  bodies  of  men  about  whom  our  statement  is  neverthe- 

6  less  true.  And  if  so,  the  difficulty  which  has  been  already 
raised,  and  also  another  which  is  akin  to  it — viz.  what  power 
should  be  assigned  to  the  mass  of  freemen  and  citizens,,  who 
are  not  rich  and  have  no  personal  merit — are  both  solved. 

7  There  is  still  a  danger  in  allowing  them  to  share  the  great 
offices  of  state,  for  their  folly  will  lead  them  into  error,  and 
their  dishonesty  into  crime.  But  there  is  a  danger  also  in  not 
letting  them  share,  for  a  state  in  which  many  poor  men  are 

S  excluded  from  office  will  necessarily  be  full  of  enemies.  The 
only  way  of  escape  is  to  assign  to  them  some  deliberative  and 
judicial  functions.  For  this  reason  Solon  ^  and  certain  other 
legislators  give  them  the  power  of  electing  to  offices,  and 
of  calling  the  magistrates  to  account,  but  they  do  not  allow 
*■  Cp.  ii.  12.  §  5. 


Sovereignty  of  the  People  123 

them  to  hold  office  singly.     When  they  meet  together  their  III.  11 
perceptions  are  quite  good  enough,  and  combined  with  the  9 
better    class  they   are   useful    to  the    state  (just   as  impure 
food  when  mixed  with  what  is   pure  sometimes  makes  the 
entire  mass   more  wholesome  than   a   small  quantity  of  the 
pure  would  be),   but  each  individual,  left  to  himself,  forms 
an   imperfect   judgment.     On   the    other   hand,   the   popular  10 
form  of  government  involves  certain  difficulties.     In  the  first 
place,  it  might  be  objected  that  he  who  can  judge  of  the 
healing   of  a  sick   man    would  be  one  who   could  himself 
heal  his   disease,   and  make  him  whole — that  is,   in    other 
words,   the  physician ;   and  so   in  all  professions  and  arts.  1"J82  a. 
As,  then,  the  physician  ought  to   be  called  to  account  by 
physicians,  so  ought  men  in  general  to  be  called  to  account 
by  their  peers.     But  physicians  are  of  three  kinds: — there  11 
is  the  apothecary,  and  there  is  the  physician  of  the  higher 
class,  and  thirdly  the  intelligent  man  who  has   studied  the 
art :    in    all    arts   there   is    such   a   class ;    and  we  attribute 
the  power  of  judging  to  them  quite  as  much  as  to  professors 
of  the    art.     Now,   does    not    the  same  principle  apply  to  12 
elections  ?     For  a  right  election  can  only  be  made  by  those 
who   have    knowledge ;    a   geometrician,    for   example,    will 
choose  rightly  in  matters  of  geometry,  or  a  pilot  in  matters 
of  steering ;    and,    even   if  there   be   some    occupations   and 
arts  with  which  private  persons  are  familiar,  they   certainly 
cannot  judge  better  than  those  who  know.     So  that,  according  13 
to  this  argument,  neither  the  election  of  magistrates,  nor  the 
calling  of  them  to  account,  should  be  entrusted  to  the  many.  14 
Yet  possibly  these  objections  are  to  a  great  extent  met  by 
our  old  answer,  that  if  the  people  are  not  utterly  degraded, 
although  individually  they  may  be  worse  judges  than  those 


I  24  "Reasons  for  and  against 

III.  11  who  have  special  knowledge — as  a  body  they  are  as  good 
or  better.  Moreover,  there  are  some  artists  whose  works 
are  judged  of  solely,  or  in  the  best  manner,  not  by  them- 
selves, but  by  those  who  do  not  possess  the  art ;  for  example, 
the  knowledge  of  the  house  is  not  limited  to  the  builder 
only;  the  user,  or,  in  other  words,  the  master,  of  the 
house  will  even  be  a  better  judge  than  the  builder,  just  as 
the  pilot  will  judge  better  of  a  rudder  than  the  carpenter, 
and  the  guest  will  judge  better  of  a  feast  than  the  cook. 

15  This  difficulty  seems  now  to  be  sufficiently  answered,  but 
there  is  another  akin  to  it.  That  inferior  persons  should 
have  authority  in  greater  matters  than  the  good  would  appear 
to  be  a  strange  thing,  yet  the  election  and  calling  to  account 
of  the  magistrates  is  the  greatest  of  all.  And  these,  as 
I  was  saying,  are  functions  which  in  some  states  are  assigned 
to  the  people,  for  the  assembly  is  supreme  in  all  such  matters. 

16  Yet  persons  of  any  age,  and  having  but  a  small  property 
qualification,  sit  in  the  assembly  and  deliberate  and  judge, 
although  for  the  great  officers  of  state,  such  as  controllers  and 
generals,  a  high  qualification  is  required.  This  difficulty  may 
be  solved  in  the  same  manner  as  the  preceding,,  and  the 
present   practice   of  democracies    may  be  really  defensible. 

17  For  the  power  does  not  reside  in  the  dicast,  or  senator, 
or  ecclesiast,  but  in  the  court  and  the  senate,  and  the 
assembly,    of  which    individual   senators,   or  ecclesiasts,   or 

18  dicasts,  are  only  parts  or  members.  And  for  this  reason 
the  many  may  claim  to  have  a  higher  authority  than  the 
few ;  for  the  people,  and  the  senate,  and  the  courts  consist  of 
many  persons,  and  their  property  collectively  is  greater  than 
the  property  of  one  or  of  a  few  individuals  holding  great 
offices.     But  enough  of  this. 


Equality  and  Inequality  125- 

The  discussion  of  the  first  question  ^   shows  nothing  so  III.  11 
clearly  as  that  laws,  when  good,   should  be  supreme;   and  '9 
that   the    magistrate    or    magistrates    should    regulate    those 
matters   only   on   which   the  laws  are  unable  to  speak,  with 
precision    owing   to   the    difficulty    of  any    general   principle 
embracing   all   particulars^.     But  what    are  good  laws   has  20 
not  yet  been  clearly  explained;  the  old  difficulty  remains^. 
The  goodness  or  badness,   justice  or  injustice,   of  laws  is 
of  necessity  relative  to  the  constitutions  of  states.     But  if  21 
so,  true  forms  of  government  will  of  necessity  have  just  laws, 
and  perverted  forms  of  government  will  have  unjust  laws. 

In  all  sciences  and  arts  the  end  is  a  good,  and  especially  and  12 
above  all  in  the  highest  of  all  * — this  is  the  political  science 
of  which  the  good  is  justice,  in  other  words,  the  common 
interest.  All  men  think  justice  to  be  a  sort  of  equality  ;  and 
to  a  certain  extent  ^  they  agree  in  the  philosophical  distinctions 
which  have  been  laid  down  by  us  about  Ethics".  For 
they  admit  that  justice  is  a  thing  having  relation  to  persons, 
and  that  equals  ought  to  have  equality.  But  there  still  re-  2 
mains  a  question — equality  or  inequality  of  what  ?  Here  is  a 
difficulty  which  the  political  philosopher  has  to  resolve.  For 
very  likely  some  persons  will  say  that  offices  of  state  ought 
to  be  unequally  distributed  according  to  superior  excellence, 
in  whatever  respect,  of  the  citizen,  although  there  is  no  other 
difference  between  him  and  the  rest  of  the  community ;  for 
that  those  who  differ  in  any  one  respect  have  different  rights 
and  claims.  But,  surely,  if  this  is  true,  the  complexion  or  3 
height  of  a  man,  or  any    other  advantage,  will  be  a  reason 

1  Cp.  c.  10.  §  I.  2  cp.  N.  Eth.  V.  10.  §  4. 

'  Cp,  c,  10.  §  5.  *  Cp.  i.  I.  §  I ;  N.  Eth.  i.  i.  §  I. 

5  Cp.  c.  9.  5  1.  «  Cp.  N.  Eth.  V.  3. 


126  Conflicting  Claims 

III.  12  for   his  obtaining  a  greater  share  of  political   rights.     The 

4  error  here  lies  upon  the  surface,  and  may  be  illustrated  from 
the  other  arts  and  sciences.  When  a  number  of  flute-players 
are  equal  in  their  art,  there  is  no  reason  why  those  of  them 
who  are  better  born  should  have  better  flutes  given  to  them ; 
for  they  will  not  play  any  better  on  the  flute,  and  the  superior 
instrument  should  be  reserved  for  him  who  is  the  superior 
artist.     If  what  I  am  saying  is  still  obscure,  it  will  be  made 

5  clearer  as  we  proceed.  For  if  there  were  a  superior  flute- 
player  who  was  far  inferior  in  birth  and  beauty,  although 
either  of  these  may  be  a  greater  good  than  the  art  of  flute- 
playing,  and  persons  gifted  with  these  qualities  may  excel  the 
flute-player  in  a  greater  ratio  than  he  excels  them  in  his  art, 

1283  a  still    he  ought  to  have  the  best  flutes  given  to  him,  unless 
the  advantages  of  wealth  and  birth  contribute  to  excellence 

6  in  flute-playing,  which  they  do  not.  Moreover  upon  this 
principle  any  good  may  be  compared  with  any  other.  For 
if  a  given  height,  then  height  in  general  may  be  measured 
either  against  height  or  against  freedom.  Thus  if  A  excels  in 
height  more  than  B  in  virtue,  and  height  in  general  is  more 
excellent  than  virtue,  all  things  will  be  commensurable 
[which  is  absurd] ;  for  if  a  certain  magnitude  is  greater 
than  some  other,  it  is  clear  that  some  other  will  be  equal. 

7  But  since  no  such  comparison  can  be  made,  it  is  evident  that 
there  is  good  reason  why  in  politics  men  do  not  ground  their 
claim  to  office  on  every  sort  of  inequality  any  more  than 
in  the  arts.  For  if  some  be  slow,  and  others  swift,  that 
is  no  reason  why  the  one  should  have  little  and  the  others 
much ;    it  is  in  gymnastic    contests   that  such  excellence  is 

8  rewarded.  Whereas  the  rival  claims  of  candidates  for  office 
can  only  be  based  on  the  possession  of  elements  which  enter 


to  Sovereign  Power  \ij 

into  the  composition  of  a  state,  [such  as  wealth,  virtue,  etc.].  III.  12 
And  therefore  the  noble,  or  freeborn,  or  rich,  may  with 
good  reason  claim  office ;  for  holders  of  offices  must  be 
freemen  and  tax-payers  :  a  state  can  be  no  more  composed 
entirely  of  poor  men  than  entirely  of  slaves.  But  if  wealth  9 
and  freedom  are  necessary  elements,  justice  and  valgur  are 
equally  so  ^ ;  for  without  the  former  a  state  cannot  exist 
at  all,  without  the  latter  not  well. 

If  the  existence  of  the  state  is  alone  to  be  considered,  then  13 
it  would  seem  that  all,  or  some  at  least,  of  these  claims 
are  just ;  but,  if  we  take  into  account  a  good  life,  as  I  have 
already  said^,  education  and  virtue  have  superior  claims. 
As,  however,  those  who  are  equal  in  one  thing  ought  not  to 
be  equal  in  all,  nor  those  who  are  unequal  in  one  thing  to 
be  unequal  in  all,  it  is  certain  that  all  forms  of  govern- 
ment which  rest  on  either  of  these  principles  are  perversions. 
All  men  have  a  claim  in  a  certain  sense,  as  1  have  already  2 
admitted,  but  they  have  not  an  absolute  claim.  The  rich  claim 
because  they  have  a  greater  share  in  the  land,  and  land  is  the 
common  element  of  the  state ;  also  they  are  generally  more 
trustworthy  in  contracts.  The  free  claim  under  the  same 
title  as  the  noble ;  for  they  are  nearly  akin.  And  the  noble 
are  citizens  in  a  truer  sense  than  the  ignoble,  since  good 
birth  is  always  valued  in  a  man's  own  home  and  country  ^. 
Another  reason  is,  that  those  who  are  sprung  from  better  3 
ancestors  are  likely  to  be  better  men,  for  nobility  is  excellence 
of  race.  Virtue,  too,  may  be  truly  said  to  have  a  claim,  for 
justice  has  been  acknowledged  by  us  to  be  a  social  *  virtue, 
and  it  implies  all  others  °.     Again,  the  many  may  urge  their  4 

1  Cp.  iv.  4.  §§  12-16.  ^  Cp.  c.  9.  §§  14, 15. 

»  Cp.  i.  6.  §  7.         "  Cp.  i.  2.  §  16.  "  Cp.  N.  Eth.  v.  i.  §  15. 


128         Conflicting  claims  to  Power 

III.  13  claim    against   the   few ;  for,    when   taken  collectively,  and 

compared  with  the  few,  they  are  stronger  and  richer  and 

1283  b  better.     But,  what  if  the  good,  the  rich,  the  noble,  and  the 

other  classes  who  make  up  a  state,  are  all  living  together  in 

the  same  city ;   will  there,  or  will  there  not,  be  any  doubt 

5  who  shall  rule  ? — No  doubt  at  all  in  determining  who  ought 
to  rule  in  each  of  the  above-mentioned  forms  of  government. 
For  states  are  characterized  by  differences  in  their  governing 
bodies — one  of  them  has  a  government  of  the  rich,  another 
of  the  virtuous,  and  so  on.     But  a  difficulty  arises  when  all 

6  these  elements  coexist.  How  are  we  to  decide  ?  Suppose 
the  virtuous  to  be  very  few  in  number :  may  we  consider 
their  numbers  in  relation  to  their  duties,  and  ask  whether  they 
are  enough  to  administer  the  state,  or  must  they  be  so  many  as 
will  make  up  a  state  ?     Objections  may  be  urged  against  all 

7  the  aspirants  to  political  power.  For  those  who  found  their 
claims  on  wealth  or  family  have  no  basis  of  justice ;  on  this 
principle,  if  any  one  person  were  richer  than  all  the  rest,  it  is 
clear  that  he  ought  to  be  the  ruler  of  them.  In  like  manner 
he  who  is  veiy  distinguished  by  his  birth  ought  to  have  the 
superiority  over  all  those  who  claim  on  the  ground  that  they  are 

8  freebom.  In  an  aristocracy,  or  government  of  the  best,  a  like 
difficulty  occurs  about  virtue ;  for  if  one  citizen  be  better  than 
the  other  members  of  the  government,  however  good  they 
may  be,  he  too,  upon  the  same  principle  of  justice,  should  rule 
over  them.  And  if  the  people  are  to  be  supreme  because  they 
are  stronger  than  the  few,  then  if  one  man,  or  more  than  one, 
but  not  a  majority,  is  stronger  than  the  many,  they  ought  to 
rule,  and  not  the  many. 

9  All  these  considerations  appear  to  show  that  none  of 
the  principles  on  which   men   claim  to   rule,   and  hold  all 


Conflicting  Claims  to  Power         129 

other  men    in   subjection   to   them,  are  strictly    right.     To  III.  13 
those  who  claim  to  be  the  masters  of  state  on  the  ground  'o 
of  their  virtue  or  their  wealth,  the  many  might  fairly  answer 
that  they  themselves  are  often  better   and   richer  than  the 
few — I  do    not    say   individually,    but    collectively.       And  ir 
another  ingenious  objection  which  is  sometimes  put  forward 
may   be    met   in   a   similar    manner.     Some   persons    doubt 
whether  the  legislator  who  desires  to  make  the  justest  laws 
ought   to  legislate    with  a  view  to  the  good  of  the  higher 
classes   or  of  the    many,    when   the    case  which   we    have 
mentioned   occurs  [i.  e.   when   all   the    elements   coexist  *]. 
Now  what  is  just  or  right  is  to  be  interpreted  in  the  sense  12 
of  '  what  is  equal ' ;    and  that  which  is  right  in  the  sense 
of   being  equal    is  to  be  considered    with  reference  to  the 
advantage  of  the  state,  and  the  common  good  of  the  citizens. 
And   a  citizen   is  one  who  shares   in  governing  and  being 
governed.     He  differs  under  different  forms  of  government,  1284  a 
but  in  the  best  state  he  is  one  who  is  able  and  willing  to  be 
governed  and  to  govern  with  a  view  to  the  life  of  virtue. 

If,  however,  there  be  some  one  person,  or  more  than  one,  13 
although  not  enough  to  make  up  the  full  complement  of  a 
state,  whose  virtue  is  so  pre-eminent  that  the  virtues  or  the 
political  capacity  of  all  the  rest  admit  of  no  comparison  with 
his  or  theirs,  he  or  they  can  be  no  longer  regarded  as  part  of 
a  state ;  for  justice  will  not  be  done  to  the  superior,  if  he  is 
reckoned  only  as  the  equal  of  those  who  are  so  far  inferior  to 
him  in  virtue  and  in  political  capacity.  Such  an  one  may 
truly  be  deemed  a  God  among  men.  Hence  we  see  that  14 
legislation  is  necessarily  concerned  only  with  those  who  are 
equal  in  birth  and  in  power ;  and  that  for  men  of  pre-eminent 
'  Cp.  §  4. 


130  The  One  Best  Man 

III.  13  virtue  there  is  no  law — they  are  themselves  a  law.  Any  one 
would  be  ridiculous  who  attempted  to  make  laws  for  them : 
they  would  probably  retort  what,  in  the  fable  of  Antisthenes, 
the  lions  said  to  the  hares  ['  where  are  your  claws  ? '], 
when  in  the  council  of  the  beasts  the  latter  began  haranguing 

15  and  claiming  equality  for  all.  And  for  this  reason  democratic 
states  have  instituted  ostracism ;  equality  is  above  all  things 
their  aim,  and  therefore  they  ostracise  and  banish  from 
the  city  for  a  time  those  who  seem  to  predominate  too  much 
through  their  wealth,    or   the    number   of  their  friends,  or 

16  through  any  other  political  influence.  Mythology  tells  us  that 
the  Argonauts  left  Heracles  behind  for  a  similar  reason  ;  the 
ship  Argo  would  not  take  him  because  she  feared  that  he  would 
have  been  too  much  for  the  rest  of  the  crew.  Wherefore 
those  who  denounce  tyranny  and  blame  the  counsel  which 
Periander  gave  to  Thrasybulus  cannot  be  held  altogether  just  in 

1 7  their  censure.  The  story  is  that  Periander,  when  the  herald 
was  sent  to  ask  counsel  of  him,  said  nothing,  but  only  cut  off 
the  tallest  ears  of  corn  till  he  had  brought  the  field  to  a  level. 
The  herald  did  not  know  the  meaning  of  the  action,  but 
came  and  reported  what  he  had  seen  to  Thrasybulus,  who 
understood  that  he  was  to  cut  off  the  principal  men  in  the 

18  state*;  and  this  is  a  policy  not  only  expedient  for  tyrants 
or  in  practice  confined  to  them,  but  equally  necessary  in 
oligarchies  and  democracies.  Ostracism  '^  is  a  measure  of  the 
same  kind,  which  acts  by  disabling  and  banishing  the  most 

19  prominent  citizens.  Great  powers  do  the  same  to  whole 
cities  and  nations,  as  the  Athenians  did  to  the  Samians, 
Chians,  and  Lesbians ;  no  sooner  had  they  obtained  a  firm 
grasp  of  the  empire,  than  they  humbled  their  allies  contrary 

1  Cp.  V.  10.  §  13.  2  Cp.  V.  3.  §  3. 


Ostracism 


131 


to  treaty ;  and  the  Persian  king  has  repeatedly  crushed  the  m.  13 
Medes,  Babylonians,  and  other  nations,  when  their  spirit  has  1284  b 
been  stirred  by  the  recollection  of  their  former  greatness. 

The  problem  is  a  universal  one,  and  equally  concerns  all  20 
forms  of   government,   true  as  well  as  false;    for,  although 
perverted   forms   with   a   view   to    their   own  interests    may 
adopt  this  policy,  those  which  seek  the  common  interest  do 
so  likewise.       The  same  thing  may  be  observed  in  the  arts  21 
and  sciences  ^ ;   for  the  painter  will  not  allow  the  figure  to 
have  a  foot  which,  however  beautiful,  is  not  in  proportion, 
nor  will  the  ship-builder  allow  the  stern  or  any  other  part 
of  the  vessel  to  be  unduly  large,  any  more  than  the  chorus- 
master  will  allow  any  one  who  sings  louder  or  better  than  all 
the  rest  to  sing  in  the  choir.     ^  Monarchs,  too,  may  practise  22 
compulsion    and  still   live  in    harmony   with    their    cities,  if 
their  government  is   for  the  interest  of  the  state  ^.     Hence 
where  there  is  an  acknowledged  superiority  the  argument  in 
favour  of  ostracism  is  based  upon  a  kind  of  political  justice. 
It  would  certainly  be  better  that  the  legislator  should  from  the  23 
first  so  order  his  state  as  to  have  no  need  of  such  a  remedy. 
But  if  the  need  arises,  the  next  best  thing  is  that  he  should 
endeavour  to  correct  the  evil  by  this  or  some  similar  measure. 
The  principle,  however,  has  not  been  fairly  applied  in  states; 
for,  instead  of  looking  to  the  public  good,  they  have  used 
ostracism  for  factious  purposes.    It  is  true  that  under  perverted  24 
forms  of  government,  and  from  their  special  point  of  view, 
such  a  measure  is  just  and  expedient,  but  it  is  also  clear  that 
it  is  not  absolutely  just.     In  the  perfect  state  there  would  be 

^  Cp.  V,  3.  §  6 ;  9.  §  7 ;  vii.  4.  §  10 ;  Rep.  iv.  420. 
^  Or,  '  Monarchies  do  not  differ  in  this  respect  (i.  e.  the  employment 
of  compulsion)  from  free  states,  but  their  government  must  be,'  etc. 
K  2 


132  t^jngly  ^ule 


III.  13  great  doubts  about  the  use  of  it,  not  when  applied  to  excess 
in  strength,  wealth,  popularity,  or  the  like,  but  when  used 
against  some  one  who  is  pre-eminent  in  virtue, — what  is  to 
25  be  done  with  him  ?  Mankind  will  not  say  that  such  an 
one  is  to  be  expelled  and  exiled ;  on  the  other  hand,  he 
ought  not  to  be  a  subject — that  would  be  as  if  men  should 
claim  to  rule  over  Zeus  on  the  principle  of  rotation  of 
office.  The  only  alternative  is  that  all  should  joyfully  obey 
such  a  ruler,  according  to  what  seems  to  be  the  order  of 
nature,  and  that  men  like  him  should  be  kings  in  their  state 
for  life. 
14  The  preceding  discussion,  by  a  natural  transition,  leads 
to  the  consideration  of  royalty,  which  we  admit  to  be  one 
of  the  true  forms  of  government  ^  Let  us  see  whether  in 
order  to  be  well  governed  a  state  or  country  should  be  under 
the  rule  of  a  king  or  under  some  other  form  of  government ; 
and  whether  monarchy,  although  good  for  some,  may  not  be 

2  bad  for  others.    But  first  we  must  determine  whether  there  is 
1286  a  one  species  of  royalty  or  many.     It  is  not  easy  to  see  that 

there  are  many,  and  that  the  manner  of  government  is  not  the 
same  in  all  of  them. 

3  (i)  Of  royalties  according  to  law,  the  Lacedaemonian  is 
thought  to  answer  best  to  the  true  pattern ;  but  there  the  royal- 
power  is  not  absolute,  except  when  the  kings  go  on  an 
expedition,  and   then  they  take  the  command.     Matters  of 

4  religion  are  likewise  committed  to  them.  The  kingly  office  is 
in  truth  a  kind  of  generalship,  irresponsible  and  perpetual. 
The  king  has    not  the  power  of  life   and    death,    except* 

^  ii.  9.  §  29. 

^  Omitting  iv  ran  Baffi\fUf,  which  is  bracketed  by  Bekker  in  his  ^nd 
edit. 


Varieties  of  Kingly  l^le  133 

when  upon  a  campaign  and  in  the  field ;  after  the  manner  of  III.  14 
the  ancients  which  is  described  in  Homer.   For  Agamemnon 
is  patient  when  he  is  attacked  in  the  assembly,  but  when  the 
army   goes  out  to  battle  he  has  the  power  even  of  life  and 
death.     Does  he  not  say  ? —  5 

'  When  I  find  a  man  skulking  apart  from  the  battle,  nothing 
shall  save  him  from  the  dogs  and  vultures,  for  in  my  hands  is 
death  1.' 

This,  then,  is  one  form  of  royalty — a  generalship  for  life : 
and  of  such  royalties  some  are  hereditary  and  others  elective. 

(2)  There  is  another  sort  of  monarchy  not  uncommon  6 
among  the  barbarians,  which  nearly  resembles  tyranny.  But 
even  this  is  legal  and  hereditary.  For  barbarians,  being  more 
servile  in  character  than  Hellenes,  and  Asiatics  than 
Europeans,  do  not  rebel  against  a  despotic  government.  Such  7 
royalties  have  the  nature  of  tyrannies  because  the  people  are 
by  nature  slaves  ^ ;  but  there  is  no  danger  of  their  being 
overthrown,  for  they  are  hereditary  and  legal.  Wherefore 
also  , their  guards  are  such  as  a  king  and  not  such  as  a  tyrant 
would  employ,  that  is  to  say,  they  are  composed  of 
citizens,  whereas  the  guards  of  tyrants  are  mercenaries  ^.  For 
kings  rule  according  to  law  over  voluntary  subjects,  but 
tyrants  over  involuntary ;  and  the  one  are  guarded  by  their 
fellow-citizens,  the  others  are  guarded  against  them. 

These   are   two    forms   of  monarchy,    and  there    was   a  8 
third  (3)  which  existed  in  ancient  Hellas,  called  an  Aesym-   ^ 
netia  or  dictatorship.     This  may  be  defined  generally  as  an 
elective  tyranny,  which,  like  the  barbarian  monarchy,  is  legal, 

*  II.  ii.  391-393.     The  last  clause  is  not  found  in  our  Homer. 
2  Cp.  i.  2.  §  4.  '  Cp.  V.  10.  §  10. 


134  Kj^^^  ^^  ^^^  Heroic  Ages 

III.  14  but  differs  from  it  in  not  being  hereditary.     Sometimes  the 

9  office  is  held  for  life,  sometimes  for  a  term  of  years,  or  until 

certain     duties   have   been   performed.      For   example,    the 

Mitylenaeans  elected  Pittacus  leader  against  the  exiles,  who 

10  were  headed  by  Antimenides  and  Alcaeus  the  poet.  And 
Alcaeus  himself  says  in  one  of  his  ^  irregular  songs  \  '  They 
chose  Pittacus  tyrant,'  and  he  reproaches  his  fellow-citizens 
for 

'  having  made  the  low-born  Pittacus  tyrant  of  the  spiritless 
1285  b  and  ill-fated  city,  with  one  voice  shouting  his  praises.' 

1 1  These  forms  of  government  have  always  had  the  character 
of  despotism,  because  they  possess  tyrannical  power;  but 
inasmuch  as  they  are  elective  and  acquiesced  in  by  their 
subjects,  they  are  kingly. 

(4)  There  is  a  fourth  species  of  kingly  rule — that  of  the 
heroic  times — which  was  hereditary  and  legal,  and  was  exer- 

12  cised  over  willing  subjects.  For  the  first  chiefs  were  bene- 
factors of  the  people  ^  in  arts  or  arms ;  they  either  gathered 
them  into  a  community,  or  procured  land  for  them ;  and  thus 
they  became  kings  of  voluntary  subjects,  and  their  power  was 
inherited  by  their  descendants.  They  took  the  command  in 
war  and  presided  over  the  sacrifices,  except  those  which 
required  a  priest.  They  also  decided  causes  either  with  or 
without  an  oath  ;  and  when  they  swore,  the  form  of  the  oath 

13  was  the  stretching  out  of  their  sceptre.  In  ancient  times  their 
power  extended  to  all  things  whatsoever,  in  city  and  country, 
as  well  as  in  foreign  parts ;  but  at  a  later  date  they  relin- 
quished several  of  these  privileges,  and  others  the  people  took 
from  them,  until  in  some  states  nothing  was  left  to   them 

1  Or,  '  banquet-odes,'  OKoKia.  *  Cp.  v.  c.  10.  §  3. 


Is  Monarchy  a  Good?  135- 

but    the    sacrifices ;    and   where  they  retained   more  of  the  III.  14 
reality  they  had  only  the  right  of  leadership  in  war  beyond 
the  border. 

These,  then,  are  the  four  kinds  of  royalty.  First  the  14 
monarchy  of  the  heroic  ages ;  this  was  exercised  over  volun- 
tary subjects,  but  limited  to  certain  functions ;  the  king  was 
a  general  and  a  judge,  and  had  the  control  of  religion.  The 
second  is  that  of  the  barbarians,  which  is  an  hereditary 
despotic  government  in  accordance  with  law.  A  third  is  the 
power  of  the  so-called  Aesymnete  or  Dictator;  this  is  an 
elective  tyranny.  The  fourth  is  the  Lacedaemonian,  which 
is  in  fact  a  generalship,  hereditary  and  perpetual.  These  15 
four  forms  differ  from  one  another  in  the  manner  which 
I  have  described. 

There  is  a  fifth  form  of  kingly  rule  in  which  one  has  the 
disposal  of  all,  just  as  each  tribe  or  each  state  has  the  disposal 
of  the  public  property ;  this  form  corresponds  to  the  control 
of  a  household.  For  as  household  management  is  the  kingly 
rule  of  a  house,  so  kingly  rule  is  the  household  management 
of  a  city,  or  of  a  nation,  or  of  many  nations. 

Of  these  forms  we  need  only  consider  two,  the  Lacedae-  15 
monian  and  the  absolute  royalty ;  for  most  of  the  others  lie  in 
a  region  between  them,  having  less  power  than  the  last,  and 
more  than  the  first.     Thus  the  enquiry  is  reduced  to  two  3 
points :  first,  is  it  advantageous  to  the  state  that  there  should 
be  a  perpetual  general,  and  if  so,  should  the  office  be  confined 
to  one  family,  or  open  to  the  citizens  in  turn  ?     Secondly,  is  1286  a 
it  well  that  a  single  man  should  have  the  supreme  power  in  all 
things  ?      The  first  question   falls  under  the  head  of  laws 
rather  than  of  constitutions ;  for  perpetual  generalship  might 
equally  exist  under  any  form  of  government,   so  that  this  3 


I  3  <^   Is  not  the  l{ule  of  Many  Better  ^ 

III.  15  matter  may  be  dismissed  for  the  present.  The  other  kind  of 
royalty  is  a  sort  of  constitution ;  this  we  have  now  to  con- 
sider, and  briefly  to  run  over  the  difficulties  involved  in  it. 
We  will  begin  by  enquiring  whether  it  is  more  advantageous 
to  be  ruled  by  the  best  man  or  by  the  best  laws  ^ 

4  The  advocates  of  royalty  maintain  that  the  laws  speak  only 
in  general  terms,  and  cannot  provide  for  circumstances ;  and 
that  for  any  science  to  abide  by  written  rules  is  absurd.  Even 
in  Egypt  the  physician  is  allowed  to  alter  his  treatment  after 
the  fourth  day,  but  if  sooner,  he  takes  the  risk.  Hence  it  is 
argued  that  a  government  acting  according  to  written  laws  is 

5  plainly  not  the  best.  Yet  surely  the  ruler  cannot  dispense  with 
the  general  principle  which  exists  in  law ;  and  he  is  a  better 
ruler  who  is  free  from  passion  than  he  who  is  passionate. 
Whereas  the  law  is  passionless,  passion  must  ever  sway  the 
heart  of  man. 

6  Yes,  some  one  will  answer,  but  then  on  the  other  hand  an 
individual  will  be  better  able  to  advise  in  particular  cases.  [To 
whom  we  in  turn  make  reply :]  A  king  must  legislate,  and 
laws  must  be  passed,  but  these  laws  will  have  no  authority 
when  they  miss  the  mark,  though  in  all  other  cases  retaining 
their  authority.  [Yet  a  further  question  remains  behind:] 
When  the  law  cannot  determine  a  point  at  all,  or  not. well, 

7  should  the  one  best  man  or  should  all  decide  ?  According  to 
our  present  practice  assemblies  meet,  sit  in  judgment,  deliberate 
and  decide,  and  their  judgments  all  relate  to  individual  .cases. 
Now  any  member  of  the  assembly,  taken  separately,  is  cer- 
tainly inferior  to  the  wise  man.  But  the  state  is  made  up  of 
many  individuals.  And  as  a  feast  to  which  all  the  guests 
contribute  is  better  than  a  banquet  furnished  by  a  single  man  ^, 

'  Cp.  Plato,  Polit.  pp.  293-295.  ^  Cp.  supra,  c.  11.  §  2. 


Constitutional  History  of  Greece    137 

so  a  multitude  is  a  better  judge  of  many  things  than  any  III.  15 
individual. 

Again,  the  many  are  more  incorruptible  than  the  few ;  they  8 
are  like  the  greater  quantity  of  water  which  is  less  easily  cor- 
rupted than  a  little.  The  individual  is  liable  to  be  overcome 
by  anger  or  by  some  other  passion,  and  then  his  judgment  is 
necessarily  perverted ;  but  it  is  hardly  to  be  supposed  that  a 
great  number  of  persons  would  all  get  into  a  passion  and  go 
wrong  at  the  same  moment.  Let  us  assume  that  they  are  9 
freemen,  never  acting  in  violation  of  the  law,  but  filling  up  the 
gaps  which  the  law  is  obliged  to  leave.  Or,  if  such  virtue  is 
scarcely  attainable  by  the  multitude,  we  need  only  suppose 
that  the  majority  are  good  men  and  good  citizens,  and  ask 
which  will  be  the  more  incorruptible,  the  one  good  ruler,  or 
the  many  who  are  all  good  ?  Will  not  the  many  ?  But,  you  1286  b 
will  say,  there  may  be  parties  among  them,  whereas  the  one 
man  is  not  divided  against  himself.  To  which  we  may  10 
answer  that  their  character  is  as  good  as  his.  If  we  call  the 
rule  of  many  men,  who  are  all  of  them  good,  aristocracy,  and 
the  rule  of  one  man  royalty,  then  aristocracy  will  be  better  for 
states  than  royalty,  whether  the  government  is  supported  by 
force  or  not  ^,  provided  only  that  a  number  of  men  equal  in 
virtue  can  be  found. 

The  first  governments  were  kingships,  probably  for  this  11 
reason,  because  of  old,  when  cities  were  small,  men  of  eminent 
virtue  were  few.  They  were  made  kings  because  they  were 
benefactors  ^,  and  benefits  can  only  be  bestowed  by  good 
men.  But  when  many  persons  equal  in  merit  arose,  no  longer 
enduring  the  pre-eminence  of  one,  they  desired  to  have  a 
commonwealth,  and  set  up  a  constitution.  The  ruling  class  12 
»  Cp.  infra,  §  15.  2  Cp.  c.  14.  §  12. 


138     Constitutional  History  of  Greece 

III.  15  soon  deteriorated  and  enriched  themselves  out  of  the  public 
treasury ;  riches  became  the  path  to  honour,  and  so  oligar- 
chies naturally  grew  up.  These  passed  into  tyrannies  and 
tyrannies  into  democracies  ;  for  love  of  gain  in  the  ruling 
classes  was  always  tending  to  diminish  their  number,  and  so 
to  strengthen  the  masses,  who  in  the  end  set  upon  their 
masters    and    established    democracies.       Since   cities    have 

13  increased  in  size,  no  other  form  of  government  appears  to 
be  any  longer  possible  \ 

Even  supposing  the  principle  to  be  maintained  that  kingly 
power  is  the  best  thing  for  states,  how  about  the  family  of  the 
king  ?     Are  his  children  to  succeed  him  ?     If  they  are  no 

14  better  than  anybody  else,  that  will  be  mischievous.  But 
[says  the  lover  of  royalty]  the  king,  though  he  might,  will 
not  hand  on  ^is  power  to  his  children.  That,  however,  is 
hardly  to  be  expected,  and  is  too  much  to  ask  of  human 
nature.  There  is  also  a  difficulty  about  the  force  which  he 
is  to  employ ;  should  a  king  have  guards  about  him  by  whose 

1 5  aid  he  may  be  able  to  coerce  the  refractory  ?  but  if  not,  how 
will  he  administer  his  kingdom  ?  Even  if  he  be  the  lawful 
sovereign  who  does  nothing  arbitrarily  or  contrary  to  law, 
still  he  must  have  some  force  wherewith  to  maintain  the  law. 

16  In  the  case  of  a  limited  monarchy  there  is  not  much  difficulty 
in  answering  this  question ;  the  king  must  have  such  force  as 
will  be  more  than  a  match  for  one  or  more  individuals,  but 
not  so  great  as  that  of  the  people.  The  ancients  observed 
this  principle  when  they  gave  the  guards  to  any  one  whom 
they  appointed  dictator  or  tyrant.  Thus,  when  Dionysius 
asked  the  Syracusans  to  allow  him  guards,  somebody  advised 
that  they  should  give  him  only  a  certain  number. 

»  Cp.  iv.  6,  §  5;  13.  §  10. 


The  T{u.le  of  One  is  thought  %)nnatural  139 

At  this  place  in  the  discussion  naturally  follows  the  enquiry  III.  16 
respecting  the  king  who  acts  solely  according  to  his  own  "^^^^  * 
will ;  he  has  now  to  be  considered.  The  so-called  limited 
monarchy,  or  kingship  according  to  law,  as  I  have  already 
remarked  ^,  is  not  a  distinct  form  of  government,  for  under  all 
governments,  as,  for  example,  in  a  democracy  or  aristocracy, 
there  may  be  a  general  holding  office  for  life,  and  one  person 
is  often  made  supreme  over  the  internal  administration  of 
a  state.  A  magistracy  of  this  kind  exists  at  Epidamnus  2, 
and  also  at  Opus,  but  in  the  latter  city  has  a  more  limited 
power.  Now,  absolute  monarchy,  or  the  arbitrary  rule"  of  2 
a  sovereign  over  all  the  citizens,  in  a  city  which  consists  of 
equals,  is  thought  by  some  to  be  quite  contrary  to  nature ;  it 
is  argued  that  those  who  are  by  nature  equals  must  have  the 
same  natural  right  and  worth,  and  that  for  unequals  to  have 
an  equal  share,  or  for  equals  to  have  an  unequal  share,  in  the 
offices  of  state,  is  as  bad  as  for  different  bodily  constitutions 
to  have  the  same  food  and  clothing  or  the  same  different. 
Wherefore  it  is  thought  to  be  just  that  among  equals  every  3 
one  be  ruled  as  well  as  rule,  and  that  all  should  have  their 
turn.  We  thus  arrive  at  law;  for  an  order  of  succession 
implies  law.  And  the  rule  of  the  law  is  preferable  to  that 
of  any  individual.  On  the  same  principle,  even  if  it  be  better  4 
for  certain  individuals  to  govern,  they  should  be  made  only 
guardians  and  ministers  of  the  law.  For  magistrates  there 
must  be, — this  is  admitted ;  but  then  men  say  that  to  give 
authority  to  any  one  man  when  all  are  equal  is  unjust.  There 
may  indeed  be  cases  which  the  law  seems  unable  to  determine, 
but  in  such  cases  can  a  man  ?  Nay,  it  will  be  replied,  the  5 
law  trains  officers  for  this  express  purpose,  and  appoints  them 
1  Cp.  c.  15.  §  2.  *  Cp.  V.  I.  §§  10,  11;  4.  §  7 


140  Law  the  True  l^ler 

III.  16  to  determine  matters  which  are  left  undecided  by  it  to  the 
best  of  their  judgment.  Further  it  permits  them  to  make  any 
amendment  of  the  existing  laws  which  experience  suggests. 
[But  still  they  are  only  the  ministers  of  the  law.]  He  who 
bids  the  law  rule,  may  be  deemed  to  bid  God  and  Reason 
alone  rule,  but  he  who  bids  man  rule  adds  an  element  of  the 
beast;  for  desire  is  a  wild  beast,  and  passion  perverts  the 
minds  of  rulers,  even  when  they  are  the  best  of  men.     The 

6  law  is  reason  unaffected  by  desire.  We  are  told  that  a  patient 
should   call  in  a  physician ;  he  will  not  get  better  if  he  is 

7  doctored  out  of  a  book.  But  the  parallel  of  the  arts  is 
clearly  not  in  point ;  for  the  physician  does  nothing  contrary 
to  reason  from  motives  of  friendship ;  he  only  cures  a  patient 
and  takes  a  fee ;  whereas  magistrates  do  many  things  from 
spite  and  partiality.  And,  indeed,  if  a  man  suspected  the 
physician  of  being  in  league  with  his  enemies  to  destroy  him 

8  for  a  bribe,  he  would  rather  have  recourse  to  the  book.     Even 
1287  b  physicians  when  they  are  sick,  call  in  other  physicians,  and 

training-mastiers  when  they  are  in  training,  other  training- 
masters,  as  if  they  could  not  judge  truly  about  their  own  case 
and  might  be  influenced  by  their  feelings.  Hence  it  is 
evident  that  in  seeking  for  justice  men  seek  for  the  mean  or 

9  neutral  \  and  the  law  is  the  mean.  Again,  customary  laws 
have  more  weight,  and  relate  to  more  important  matters,  than 
written  laws,  and  a  man  may  be  a  safer  ruler  than  the  written 
law,  but  not  safer  than  the  customary  law. 

Again,  it  is  by  no  means  easy  for  one  man  to  superintend 
many  things;  he  will  have  to  appoint  a  number  of  subordi- 
nates ;  and  what  difference  does  it  make  whether  these  sub- 
ordinates always  existed  or  were  appointed  by  him  because  he 
'  Cp.  N,  Eth.  V.  4.  §  7. 


Many  better  than  One  141 

needed  them  ?     If,  as  I  said  before  ^   the  good  man  has  III.  16 
a  right  to  rule  because  he  is  better,  then  two  good  men  are  ^° 
better  than  one :  this  is  the  old  saying, — 

'  two  going  together  * ; ' 

and  the  prayer  of  Agamemnon, — 

*  would  that  I  had  ten  such  counsellors  ^ !  ' 

And  at  this  day  there  are  some  magistrates,  for  example 
judges  *,  who  have  authority  to  decide  matters  which  the  law 
is  unable  to  determine,  since  no  one  doubts  that  the  law  would 
command  and  decide  in  the  best  manner  whatever  it  could. 
But  some  things  can,  and  other  things  cannot,  be  com-  n 
prehended  under  the  law,  and  this  is  the  origin  of  the  vexed 
question  whether  the  best  law  or  the  best  man  should  rule. 
For  matters  of  detail  about  which  men  deliberate  cannot  be 
included  in  legislation.  Nor  does  any  one  deny  that  the 
decision  of  such  matters  must  be  left  to  man,  but  it 
is  argued  that  there  should  be  many  judges,  and  not  one 
only.  For  every  ruler '  who  has  been  trained  by  the  law  12 
judges  well ;  and  it  would  surely  seem  strange  that  a  person 
should  see  better  with  two  eyes,  or  hear  better  with  two  ears, 
or  act  better  with  two  hands  or  feet,  than  many  with  many ; 
indeed,  it  is  already  the  practice  of  kings  to  make  to  them- 
selves many  eyes  and  ears  and  hands  and  feet.  For  they 
make  colleagues  of  those  who  are  the  friends  of  themselves 
and  their  governments.  They  must  be  friends  of  the  monarch  13 
and  of  his  government;  if  not  his  friends,  they  will  not 
do  what  he  wants;  but  friendship  implies  likeness  and 
equality;  and,  therefore,  if  he  thinks  that  friends  ought  to 

1  Cp.  c.  13.  §  25.       *  II.  X.  224.         ^  II.  ii.  372.       •  o  SjAfaaTiJi. 
*  Cp.  for  similar  arguments  c.  15.  §  9. 


142       Tet  there  may  he  an  Exception 

III.  16  rule,  he  must  think  that  those  who  are  equal  to  himself  and 
like  himself  ought  to  rule.  These  are  the  principal  con- 
troversies relating  to  monarchy. 
17  But  may  not  all  this  be  true  in  some  cases  and  not  in 
others  ?  ^  for  there  is  a  natural  justice  and  expediency  in  the 
relation  of  a  master  to  his  servants,  or,  again,  of  a  king  to  his 
subjects,  as  also  in  the  relation  of  free  citizens  to  one  another  ; 
whereas  there  is  no  such  justice  or  expediency  in  a  tyranny  *, 
or  in  any  other  perverted  form  of  government,  which  comes 
1288  a  into  being  contrary  to  nature.  Now,  from  what  has  been  said, 
^  it  is  manifest  that,  where  men  are  alike  and  equal,  it  is  neither 
expedient  nor  just  that  one  man  should  be  lord  of  all,  whether 
there  are  laws,  or  whether  there  are  no  laws,  but  he  himself 
is  in  the  place  of  law.  Neither  should  a  good  man  be  lord 
over  good  men,  or  a  bad  man  over  bad ;  nor,  even  if  he  excels 
in  virtue,  should  he  have  a  right  to  rule,  unless  in  a  particular 
case,  which  I  have  already  mentioned,  and  to  which  I  will 

3  once  more  recur  '^.  But  first  of  all,  I  must  determine  what 
natures  are  suited  for  royalties,  and  what  for  an  aristocracy, 
and  what  for  a  constitutional  government. 

4  A  people  who  are  by  nature  capable  of  producing  a  race 
superior  in  virtue  and  political  talent  are  fitted  for  kingly 
government ;  and  a  people  '  submitting  to  be  ruled  as  free- 
men by  men  whose  virtue  renders  them  capable  of  political 

*  Or,  *  for  there  are  men  who  are  by  nature  fitted  to  be  ruled  by  a 
master,  others  to  be  ruled  by  a  king,  others  to  live  under  a  consti- 
tutional government,  and  for  whom  these  several  relations  are  just  and 
expedient ;  but  there  are  no  men  naturally  fitted  to  be  ruled  by  a  tyrant/ 
etc. 

^  c.  13.  §  25,  and  §  5,  infra. 

^  Omitting  the  words  ■n\'qQo%  h  iri^Hf  iptptiv,  which  appear  to  be  a 
repetition  from  the  previous  clause. 


The  I^le  of  the  Best  Man        143 

command  are  adapted  for  an  aristocracy :  while  the  people  III.  17 
wlio  are  suited  for  constitutional  freedom  are  those  among 
whom  there  naturally  exists^  a  warlike  multitude  ^  able  to 
rule  and  to  obey  in  turn  by  a  law  which  gives  office  to  the 
well-to-do  according  to  their  desert.     But  when  a   whole  5 
family,  or  some  individual,  happens  to  be  so  pre-eminent  in 
virtue  as  to    surpass    all  others,    then    it  is   just   that   they 
should  be  the  royal  family  and  supreme  over  all,  or  that  this 
one  citizen  should   be  king  of  the   whole  nation.     For,  as  6 
I  said  before ',  to  give  them  authority  is  not  only  agreeable  to 
that  ground  of  right  which  the  founders  of  all  states,  whether 
aristocratical,     or    oligarchical,    or    again    democratical,    are 
accustomed  to  put  forward  (for  these  all  recognize  the  claim 
of  excellence,  although  not  the  same  excellence),  but  accords 
with   the  principle  already    laid  down  *.     For  it  would  not  7 
be   right  to   kill,   or  ostracize,   or   exile  such   a  person,  or 
require  that  he  should  take  his  turn  in  being  governed:     The 
whole  is  naturally  superior  to  the  part,  and  he  who  has  this 
pre-eminence  is  in  the  relation  of  a  whole  to  a  part.      But  8 
if  so,  the  only  alternative  is  that  he  should  have  the  supreme 
power,  and  that  mankind  should  obey  him,   not  in  turn,  but 
always.  These  are  the  conclusions  at  which  we  arrive  respect- 
ing royalty  and  its  various  forms,  and  this  is  the  answer  to  the 
question,  whether  it  is  or  is  not  advantageous  to  states,  and  to 
whom,  and  how. 

We  maintain  that  the  true  forms  of  government  are  three,  18 
and  that  the  best  must  be  that  which  is  administered  by  the 
best,  and  in   which  there   is  one  man,   or  a  whole  family, 

^  Omitting  koX  «V.  ^  Cp.  c.  7.  §  4. 

»  Cp.  c.  9.  §  15. 

*  Or,  •  but  differing  in  tlie  manner  already  laid  down.* 


144  T^^^  Perfect  State 

III.  18  or  many  persons,  excelling  in  virtue,  and  both  rulers  and 
subjects  are  fitted,  the  one  to  rule,  the  others  to  be  ruled  ^,  in 
such  a  manner  as  to  attain  the  most  eligible  life.  We  showed 
at  the  commencement  of  our  enquiry  *  that  the  virtue  of  the 
good  man  is  necessarily  the  same  as  the  virtue  of  the  citizen 
of  the  perfect  state.  Clearly  then  in  the  same  manner,  and 
by  the  same  means  through  which  a  man  becomes  truly  good, 
he  will  frame  a  state  [which  will  be  truly  good]  whether 
1288  b  aristocratical,  or  under  kingly  rule,  and  the  same  education  and 
the  same  habits  will  be  found  to  make  a  good  man  and  a  good 
statesman  and  king. 
2  Having  arrived  at  these  conclusions,  we  must  proceed  to 
speak  of  the  perfect  state,  and  describe  how  it  comes  into 
being  and  is  established.  He  who  would  proceed  with  the 
enquiry  in  due  manner.  .   .  .' 

^  Omitting  koX  apxftv,  which  is  inserted,  without  MS.  authority,  in 
Bekker  s  2nd  edit. 

»  Cp.  c.  4. 

'  Retaining  the  words  of  the  MSS.,  'AvayKTj  5^  rbv  fxiWovra  ntpl 
aiiT^s  noifiaaaOai  r^v  itpoaiiKovaav  OKixpiv,  which  are  omitted  by 
Bekker  in  his  2nd  edit. 


BOOK    IV 

In  all  arts  and  sciences  which  embrace  the  whole  of  IV.  1 
any  subject,  and  are  not  restricted  to  a  part  only,  it  is  the 
province  of  a  single  art  or  science  to  consider  all  that 
appertains  to  a  single  subject.  For  example,  the  art  of 
gymnastic  considers  not  only  the  suitableness  of  different 
modes  of  training  to  different  bodies  (2),  but  what  sort  is 
absolutely  the  best  (i)  (for  the  absolutely  best  must  suit 
that  which  is  by  nature  best  and  best  furnished  with  the 
means  of  life),  and  also  what  common  form  of  training  is 
adapted  to  the  great  majority  of  men  (4).  And  if  a  man  2 
does  not  desire  the  best  habit  of  body  or  the  greatest  skill  in 
gymnastics,  which  might  be  attained  by  him,  still  the  trainer 
or  the  teacher  of  gymnastic  should  be  able  to  impart  any 
lower  degree  of  either  (3).  The  same  principle  equally  holds 
in  medicine  and  ship-building,  and  the  making  of  clothes,  and 
in  the  arts  generally  ^. 

Hence  it  is  obvious  that  government  too  is  the  subject  3 
of  a  single  science,  which  has  to  consider  what  kind  of 
government  would  be  best  and  most  in  accordance  with 
our  aspirations,  if  there  were  no  external  impediment,  and 
also  what  kind  of  government  is  adapted  to  particular  states. 
For  the  best  is  often  unattainable,  and  therefore  the  true 
legislator  and  statesman  ought  to  be  acquainted,  not  only 
with  (i)  that  which   is  best  in  the  abstract,  but  also  with 

*  The  numbers  in  this  paragraph  are  made  to  correspond  with  the 
numbers  in  the  next. 

DAVIS  L 


1^6  Political  Problems 

IV.  1(2)   that    which    is   best    relatively   to    circumstances.     We 

4  should  be  able  further  to  say  how  a  state  may  be  constituted 
under  any  given  conditions  (3);  both  how  it  is  originally 
formed  and,  when  formed,  how  it  may  be  longest  preserved ; 
the  supposed  state  being  so  far  from  the  very  best  that  it 
is  unprovided  even  with  the  conditions  necessary  for  the  very 
best ;  neither  is  it  the  best  under  the  circumstances,  but  of  an 
inferior  type. 

5  He  ought,  moreover,  to  know  (4)  the  form  of  govern- 
ment which  is  best  suited  to  states  in  general;  for  political 
writers,   although   they  have  excellent  ideas,   are  often    un- 

6  practical.  We  should  consider,  not  only  what  form  of 
government  is  best,  but  also  what  is  possible  and  what  is 
easily  attainable  by  all.  There  are  some  who  would  have 
none  but  the  most  perfect ;  for  this  many  natural  advantages 

1289  a  are  required.  Others,  again,  speak  of  a  more  attainable  form, 
and,  although  they  reject  the  constitution  under  which  they 
are  living,  they  extol  some  one  in  particular,  for  example 

7  the  Lacedaemonian  ^  Any  change  of  government  which 
has  to  be  introduced  should  be  one  which  men  will  be  both 
willing  and  able  to  adopt,  since  there  is  quite  as  much  trouble 
in  the  reformation  of  an  old  constitution  as  in  the  establish- 
ment of  a  new  one,  just  as  to  unlearn  is  as  hard  as  to  learn. 
And  therefore,  in  addition  to  the  qualifications  of  the  states- 
man already  mentioned,  he  should  be  able  to  find  remedies 

8  for  the  defects  of  existing  constitutions  ^  This  he  cannot 
do  unless  he  knows  how  many  forms  of  government  there 
are.  It  is  often  supposed  that  there  is  only  one  kind  of 
democracy  and  one  of  oligarchy.  But  this  is  a  mistake ; 
and,  in  order  to  avoid  such  mistakes,  we  must  ascertain  what 

>  Cp,  ii.  6,  §  16.  2  Cp.  §  4. 


Governments  True  and  Pei'verted    147 

differences  there  are  in  the  constitutions  of  states,  and  in  IV.  1 
how   many  ways    they  are  combined.     The   same  political  9 
insight  will  enable  a  man  to  know  which  laws  are  the  best, 
and  which  are  suited  to  different  constitutions ;  for  the  laws 
are,  and  ought  to  be,  relative  to  the  constitution,  and  not  the 
constitution  to  the  laws.    A  constitution  is  the  organization  of  10 
offices  in  a  state,  and  determines  what  is  to  be  the  governing 
body,  and  what  is  the  end  of  each  community.     But  ^  laws 
are  not  to  be  confounded  with  the  principles  of  the  constitu- 
tion ^ :  they  are  the  rules  according  to  which  the  magistrates 
should  administer  the  state,  and   proceed  against  offenders. 
So    that  we    must   know  the  number  and  varieties  of  the  ri 
several  forms  of  government,  if  only  with  a  view  to  making 
laws.     For  the   same  laws  cannot  be  equally  suited  to  all 
oligarchies  and  to  all  democracies,  and  there  is  certainly  more 
than  one  form  both  of  democracy  and  of  oligarchy. 

In  our  original  discussion  '^  about  governments  we  divided  2 
them  into  three  true  forms :  kingly  rule,  aristocracy,  and 
constitutional  government,  and  three  corresponding  per- 
versions— tyranny,  oligarchy,  and  democracy.  Of  kingly 
rule  and  of  aristocracy  we  have  already  spoken,  for  the 
enquiry  into  the  perfect  state  is  the  same  thing  with  the 
discussion  of  the  two  forms  thus  named,  since  both  imply 
a  principle  of  virtue  provided  with  external  means.  We 
have  already  determined  in  what  aristocracy  and  kingly  rule 
differ  from  one  another,  and  when  the  latter  should  be 
established^.  In  what  follows  we  have  to  describe  the 
so-called  constitutional  government,  which  bears  the  common 

^  Or ,  '  laws,  though   in  themselves  distinct,  show  the  character  of 
the  constitution,' 

»  Book  iii,  7  ;  N.  Eth.  viii.  10.  ^  Cp.  iii.  17.  §  8. 

J.  ? 


148    Governments  True  and  Ver verted 

IV.  2  name    of  all    constitutions,  and   the  other   forms,  tyranny, 
oligarchy,  and  democracy. 

2  It  is  obvious  which  of  the  three  perversions  is  the  worst, 
and  which  is  the  next  in  badness.  That  which  is  the 
perversion   of  the  first  and   most  divine  is   necessarily  the 

1289  b  worst.  And  just  as  a  royal  mle,'  if  not  a  mere  name,  must 
exist  by  virtue  of  some  great  personal  superiority  in  the  king, 
so  tyranny,  which  is  the  worst  of  governments,  is  necessarily 
the  farthest  removed  from  a  well-constituted  form ;  oligarchy 
is  a  little  better,  but  a  Ibng  way  from  aristocracy,  and  democracy 
is  the  most  tolerable  of  the  three. 

3  A  writer'  who  preceded  me  has  already  made  these 
distinctions,  but  his  point  of  view  is  not  the  same  as  mine. 
For  he  lays  down  the  principle  that  of  all  good  constitutions 
(under  which  he  would  include  a  virtuous  oligarchy  and  the 
like)  democracy  is  the  worst,  but  the  best  of  bad  ones. 
Whereas  we  maintain  that  they  are  all  defective,  and  that 
one  oligarchy  is  not  to  be  accounted  better  than  another,  but 
only  less  bad. 

4  Not  to  pursue  this  question  further  at  present,  let  us  begin 
by  determining  (i)^  how  many  varieties  of  states  there 
are  (since  of  democracy  and  oligarchy  there  are  several); 
(2)'  what  constitution  is  the  most  generally  acceptable,  and 
what  is  eligible  in  the  next  degree  *  after  the  perfect  or 
any  other  aristocratical  and  well-constituted  form  of  govern- 
ment— if  any  other  there  be — which  is  at  the  same  time 
adapted  to  states  in  general  * ;   (3)  *  of  the  other  forms  of 

•  Plato,  Polit.  303  A.,  *  c.  4-6,  '  c.  7-9  and  11. 

*  Or,  *  after  the  perfect  state ;  and  besides  this  what  other  there  is 
which  is  aristocratical  and  well  constituted,  and  at  the  same  time  adapted 
to  states  in  general.'  *  c.  12. 


A  Table  of  Contents  149 

government  to  whom  each  is  suited.     For  democracy  may  IV.  2 
meet  the  needs  of  some  better  than  oligarchy,  and  conversely.  5 
In  the  next  place  (4)  ^  we  have  to  consider  in  what  manner 
a  man  ought  to  proceed  who  desires  to  establish  some  one 
among    these  various    forms,   whether  of  democracy  or  of 
oligarchy ;    and  lastly,   (5)  ^    having  briefly  discussed  these  6 
subjects   to  the  best  of  our  power,   we  will   endeavour  to 
ascertain  whence  arise   the   ruin  and  preservation  of  states, 
both  generally  and  in  individual  cases,  and  to  what  causes 
they  are  to  be  attributed. 

The    reason   why  there  are   many  forms  of  government  3 
is   that  every   state   contains   many   elements.     In   the   first 
place  we  see  that  all  states  are  made  up  of  families,  and  in 
the  multitude  of  citizens  there  must  be  some  rich  and  some 
poor,  and  some  in  a  middle  condition ;  ^  the  rich  are  heavy- 
armed,  and  the  poor  not  ^.     Of  the  common  people,  some  2 
are    husbandmen,    and    some    traders,    and    some    artisans. 
There  are    also   among   the   notables   differences    of   wealth 
and  property — for  example,  in  the  number  of  horses  which 
they  keep,   for  they  cannot  afford  to  keep  them  unless  they 
are  rich.    And  therefore  in  old  times  the  cities  whose  strength  3 
lay  in  the  cavalry  were  oligarchies,  and  they  used  cavalry* 
in  wars  against  their  neighbours ;  as  was  the  practice  of  the 
Eretrians  and  Chalcidians,  and  also  of  the  Magnesians  on  the 
river  Maeander,   and   of  other  peoples   in    Asia.     Besides  4 
differences  of  wealth  there  are  diflferences  of  rank  and  merit, 

^  Book  vi.  ^  Book  v. 

*  Or,  '  and  again  both  of  rich  and  poor  some  are  armed  and  some  are 
unarmed.' 

*  Reading  either  iroXf/xovs  with  v.  tr.  (Moerbek)  and  Bekk.  2nd  edit., 
or  noKefuovs  with  the  Greek  MSS. ;  cp.  c.  13.  §  10;  vi.  c.  7.  §  I. 


I  f  o     why  forms  of  Government  Differ 

IV.  3  and  there  are  some   other  elements  which  were  mentioned 

1290  a  {jy  yg  ^hen   in   treating   of  aristocracy  we  enumerated   the 

essentials  of  a  state  ^     Of  these  elements,  sometimes  all, 

sometimes    the   lesser    and   sometimes    the   greater   number, 

5  have  a  share  in  the  government.  It  is  evident  then  that 
there  must  be  many  forms  of  government,  differing  in  kind, 
since  the  parts  of  which  they  are  composed  differ  from 
each  other  in  kind.  For  a  constitution  is  an  organization 
of  offices  which  all  the  citizens  distribute  among  themselves, 
according  to  the  power  which  different  classes  possess,  for 
example  the  rich  or  the  poor,  or  according  to  some  common 
equality  subsisting  among  them  or  some  power  common  to 

6  both.  There  must  therefore  be  as  many  forms  of  government 
as  there  are  modes  of  arranging  the  offices,  according  to  the 
superiorities  and  other  inequalities  of  the  different  parts  of 
the  state. 

There  are  generally  thought  to  be  two  principal  forms : 
as  men  say  of  the  winds  that  there  are  but  two — north 
and  south — and  that  the  rest  of  them  are  only  variations 
of  these,   so  of  governments  there  are  said  to  be  only  two 

7  forms — democracy  and  oligarchy.  For  aristocracy  is  con- 
sidered to  be  a  kind  of  oligarchy,  as  being  the  rule  of 
a  few,  and  the  so-called  constitutional  government  to  be 
really  a  democracy,  just  as  among  the  winds  we  make  the 
west  a  variation  of  the  north,  and  the  east  of  the  south 
wind.  Similarly  of  harmonies  there  are  said  to  be  two 
kinds,  the  Dorian  and  the  Phrygian ;  the  other  arrangements 
of  the  scale  ase    comprehended   under   one    of  these    two. 

8  About  forms  of  government  this  is  a  very  favourite  notion. 
But  in  either   case  the  better   and   more  exact  way   is   to 

'  Not  in  what  has  preceded,  but  cp.  vii.  8. 


Democracy  and  Oligarchy  i  y  i 

distinguish,  as  I  have  done,  the  one  or  two  which  are  IV.  3 
true  forms,  and  to  regard  the  others  as  perversions,  whether 
of  the  most  perfectly  attempered  harmony  or  of  the  best  form 
of  government ;  we  may  compare  the  oligarchical  forms  to 
the  severer  and  more  overpowering  modes,  and  the  demo- 
cratic to  the  more  relaxed  and  gentler  ones. 

It  must  not  be  assumed,  as  some  are  fond  of  saying,  that  4 
democracy   is    simply    that   form    of  government   in    which 
the   greater  number  are  sovereign ',  for  in  oligarchies,  and 
indeed  in   every  government,  the   majority  rules ;   nor  again 
is  oligarchy  that  form   of  government  in   which   a  few  are 
sovereign.     Suppose   the  whole  population  of  a  city  to  be  2 
1300,  and  that  of  these   1000  are  rich,  and  do  not  allow 
the  remaining  300  who  are  poor,  but  free,  and  in  all  other 
respects  their  equals,   a  share  of  the  government — no  one 
will  say  that  this  is  a  democracy.     In  like  manner,  if  the  3 
poor  were  few  and  the  masters  of  the  rich,  who  outnumber 
them,  no  one  would  ever  call  such  a  government,  in  which 
the   rich    majority  have    no  share   of  office,    an   oligarchy. 
Therefore   we    should    rather    say   that    democracy    is   the  1290  b 
forni    of   government    in    which    the   free    are    rulers,    and 
oligarchy   in  which  the  rich ;    it  is   only   an    accident   that  4 
the  free  are  the  many  and  the  rich  are  the  few.     Otherwise 
a  government  in  which  the  offices  were  given  according  to 
stature,  as  is  said  to  be  the  case  in  Ethiopia,  or  according  to 
beauty,  would  be  an  oligarchy  ;  for  the  number  of  tall  or  good- 
looking  men   is  small.     And  yet  oligarchy  and  democracy  5 
are  not  sufficiently  distinguished  merely  by  these  two  charac- 
teristics   of  wealth    and  freedom.      Both   of  them    contain 
many   other    elements,    and   therefore    we    must    carry   our 
1  Cp.  iii.8.  §§3-7. 


1 5*2  The  State  Compared  to   the  Animal 

IV.  4  analysis  further,  and  say  that  the  government  is  not  a  de- 
mocracy in  which  the  freemen,  being  few  in  number,  nile 
over  the  many  who  art  not  free,  as  at  ApoUonia,  on  the 
Ionian  Gulf,  and  at  Thera  (for  in  each  of  these  states 
the  nobles,  who  were  also  the  earliest  settlers,  were  held  in 
chief  honour,  although  they  were  but  a  few  out  of  many). 
Neither  is  it  a  democracy  when  the  rich  have  the  government, 
because  they  exceed  in  number ;  as  was  the  case  formerly  at 
Colophon,  where  the  bulk  of  the  inhabitants  were  possessed 

6  of  large  property  before  the  Lydian  War.  But  the  form 
of  government  is  a  democracy  when  the  free,  who  are  also 
poor  and  the  majority,  govern,  and  oligarchy  when  the 
rich  and  the  noble  govern,  they  being  at  the  same  time  few 
in  number. 

7  I  have  said  that  there  are  many  forms  of  government,  and 
have  explained  to  what  causes  the  variety  is  due.  Why 
there  are  more  than  those  already  mentioned,  and  what  they 
are,  and  whence  they  arise,  I  will  now  proceed  to  consider, 
starting  from  the  principle  already  admitted  ^,  which  is  that 

8  every  state  consists,  not  of  one,  but  of  many  parts.  If  we 
were  going  to  speak  of  the  different  species  of  animals,  we 
should  first  of  all  determine  the  organs  which  are  indispens- 
able to  every  animal,  as  for  example  some  organs  of  sense 
and  instruments  of  receiving  and  digesting  food,  such  as  the 
mouth  and  the  stomach,  besides  organs  of  locomotion.  As- 
suming now  that  there  are  only  so  many  kinds  of  organs,  but 
that  there  may  be  differences  in  them — I  mean  different  kinds 
of  mouths,  and  stomachs,  and  perceptive  and  locomotive 
organs — the  possible  combinations  of  these  differences  will 
necessarily  furnish  many  varieties  of  animals.     (For  animals 

1  Cp.  c.  3.  §  I. 


Essential  Elements  of  the  State      15-3 

cannot  be  the  same  which  have*  different  kinds  of  mouths  or  IV.  4 
of  ears.)     And   when  all   the   combinations  are  exhausted, 
there  will  be  as  many  sorts  of  animals  as  there  are  combina- 
tions of  the  necessary  organs.     In  like  manner  the  forms  of  9 
government  which  have  been  described,  as   I  have  repeatedly 
said,  are  composed,  not  of  one,  but  of  many  elements.     One 
element  is  the  food-producing  class,  who  are  called  husband- 
men;  a  second,  a  class  of  mechanics,  who  practise  the  arts  1291a 
without  which  a  city  cannot  exist ; — of  these  arts  some  are 
absolutely  necessary,   others   contribute  to  luxury  or  to  the 
grace  of  life.    The  third  class  is  that  of  traders,  and  by  traders  1  o 
I  mean  those  who  are  engaged  in  buying  and  selling,  whether 
in  commerce  or  in  retail  trade.     A  fourth  class  is  that  of  the 
serfs  or  laboureis.    The  warriors  make  up  the  fifth  class,  and 
they  are  as  necessary  as  any  of  the  others,  if  the  country  is  not 
to  be  the  slave  of  every  invader.     For  how  can  a  state  which  1 1 
has  any  title  to  the  name  be  of  a  slavish  nature  ?   The  state  is 
indejjendent  and  self-sufficing,  but  a  slave  is  the  reverse  of  inde- 
pendent.    Hence  we  see  that  this  subject,  though  ingeniously, 
has  not  been  satisfactorily  treated  in  the  Republic  ^     Socrates  12 
says  that  a  state  is  made  up  of  four  sorts  of  people  who  are 
absolutely  necessary;    these    are   a  weaver,   a   husbandman, 
a  shoemaker,  and  a  builder;    afterwards,  finding  that  they 
are  not  enough,  he  adds  a  smith,  and  again  a  herdsman,  to 
look  after  the  necessary  animals ;  then  a  merchant,  and  then 
a  retail  trader.    All  these  together  form  the  complement  of  the  1 3 
first  state,  as  if  a  state  were  established  merely  to  supply  the 
necessaries  of  life,  rather  than  for  the  sake  of  the  good,  or 
stood  equally  in  need  of  shoemakers   and  of  husbandmen. 
But  he  does  not  admit  into  the  state  a  military  class  until  the 
*  Rep.  ii.  369. 


1 5-4      Essential  Elements  of  the  State 

IV.  4  country  has  increased  in  size,  and  is  beginning  to  encroach  on 
its  neighbour's  land,  whereupon  they  go  to  war.  Yet  even 
amongst  his  four  original  citizens,  or  whatever  be  the  number 
of  those  whom  he  associates  in  the  state,  there  must  be  some 
one  who  will  dispense  justice  and  determine  what  is  just. 

14  And  as  the  soul  may  be  said  to  be  more  truly  part  of  an 
animal  than  the  body,  so  the  higher  parts  of  states,  that  is  to 
say,  the  warrior  class,  the  class  engaged  in  the  administration 
of  justice,  and  in  deliberation,  which  is  the  special  business 
of  political  common  sense, — these  are  more  essential  to  the 
state  than  the  parts  which  minister  to  the  necessaries  of  life. 

1 5  Whether  their  several  functions  are  the  functions  of  different 
citizens,  or  of  the  same — for  it  may  often  happen  that  the 
same  persons  are  both  warriors  and  husbandmen — is  imma- 
terial to  the  argument.  The  higher  as  well  as  the  lower 
elements  are  to  be  equally  considered  parts  of  the  state,  and 
if  so,  the  military  element  must  be  included.  There  are  also 
the  wealthy  who  minister  to  the  state  with  their  property; 

16  these  form  the  seventh  class.  The  eighth  class  is  that  of 
magistrates  and  of  officers ;  for  the  state  cannot  exist  without 
rulers.    And  therefore  some  must  be  able  to  take  office  and  to 

17  serve  the  state,  either  always  or  in  turn.  There  only  remains 
the  class  of  those  who  deliberate  and  who  judge  between  dis- 
putants ;  we  were  just  now  distinguishing  them.  If  the  fair 
and  equitable  organization  of  all  these  elements  is  necessary  to 

1291  b  states,  then  there  must  also  be  persons  who  have  the  ability  of 

18  statesmen.  '  Many  are  of  opinion  that  different  functions  can 
be  combined  in  the  same  individual  ^ ;  for  example,  the  war- 
rior may  be  a  husbandman,  or  an  artisan ;  or  again,  the  coun- 
sellor a  judge.     And  all  claim  to  possess  political  ability,  and 

^  Or,  'Differeat  functions  appear  to  be  often  combined,'  etc. 


Varieties  of  Democracy  i  y  j- 

think,  that  they  are  quite  competent  to  fill  most  offices.  But  IV.  4 
the  same  persons  cannot  be  rich  and  poor  at  the  same  time. 
For  this  reason  the  rich  and  the  poor  are  regarded  in  an  19 
especial  sense  as  "parts  of  a  state.  Again,  because  the  rich 
are  generally  few  in  number,  while  the  poor  are  many,  they 
appear  to  be  antagonistic,  and  as  the  one  or  the  other  prevails 
they  form  the  government.  Hence  arises  the  common 
opinion  that  there  are  two  kinds  of  government — democracy 
and  oligarchy. 

I  have  already  explained  ^  that  there  are  many  differences  20 
of  constitutions,  and  to  what  causes  the  variety  is  due.  Let 
me  now  show  that  there  are  different  forms  both  of  democracy 
and  oligarchy,  as  will  indeed  be  evident  from  what  has  pre- 
ceded. For  both  in  the  common  people  and  in  the  notables  21 
various  classes  are  included ;  of  the  common  people,  one  class 
are  husbandmen,  another  artisans  ;  another  traders,  who  are 
employed  in  buying  and  selling ;  another  are  the  seafaring 
class,  whether  engaged  in  war  or  in  trade,  as  ferrymen  or  as 
fishermen.  (In  many  places  any  one  of  these  classes  forms 
quite  a  large  population  ;  for  example,  fishermen  at  Tarentum 
and  Byzantium,  crews  of  triremes  at  Athens,  merchant  sea- 
men at  Aegina  and  Chios,  ferrymen  at  Tenedos.)  To  the 
classes  already  mentioned  may  be  added  day-labourers,  and 
those  who,  owing  to  their  needy  circumstances,  have  no 
leisure,  or  those  who  are  not  free  of  birth  on  both  sides ;  and 
there  may  be  other  classes  as  well.  The  notables  again  may  22 
be  divided  according  to  their  wealth,  birth,  virtue,  education, 
and  similar  differences. 

Of  forms  of  democracy  first  comes  that  which  is  said  to 
be  based  strictly  on  equality.     In  such  a  democracy  the  law 
1  Cp.  iii.  c.  6. 


ij;6  Extreme  Democracy 

IV.  4  says  that  it  is  just  for  nobody  to  be  poor,  and  for  nobody  to 
be  rich  ^ ;  and  that  neither  should  be  masters,  but  both  equal. 

23  For  if  liberty  and  equality,  as  is  thought  by  some,  are  chiefly 
to  be  found  in  democracy,  they  will  be  best  attained  when  all 
persons  alike  share  in  the  government  to  the  utmost.  And 
since  the  people  are  the  majority,  and  the  opinion  of  the 
majority  is  decisive,  such  a  government  must  necessarily  be 

24  a  democracy.  Here  then  is  one  sort  of  democracy.  There 
is  another  in  which  the  magistrates  are  elected  according  to 
a  certain  property  qualification,  but  a  low  one ;  he  who  has 
the  required  amount  of  property  has  a  share  in  the  govem- 

1292  a  ment,  but  he  who  loses  his  property  loses  his  rights.  Another 
kind  is  that  in  which  all  the  citizens  who  are  under  no  dis- 
qualification   share  in   the  government,   but  still  the  law  is 

25  supreme.  In  another,  everybody,  if  he  be  only  a  citizen,  is 
admitted  to  the  government,  but  the  law  is  supreme  as  before. 
A  fifth  form  of  democracy,  in  other  respects  the  same,  is  that 
in  which,  not  the  law,  but  the  multitude,  have  the  supreme 

26  power,  and  supersede  the  law  by  their  decrees.  This  is 
a  state  of  affairs  brought  about  by  the  demagogues.  For  in 
democracies  which  are  subject  to  the  law  the  best  citizens 
hold  the  first  place,  and  there  are  no  demagogues  ;  but  where 
the  laws  are  not  supreme,  there  demagogues  spring  up.  For 
the  people  becomes  a  monarch,  and  is  many  in  one ;  and  the 
many  have  the  power  in  their  hands,  not  as  individuals,  but 

2  7  collectively.     Homer  says  that,  '  it  is  not  good  to  have  a  rule 

•  Or,  reading  apxuv  with  Victorius,  '  that  the  poor  should  no  more 
govern  than  the  rich.'  The  emendation  is  not  absolutely  necessary, 
though  supported  by  vi,  2.  §  9,  iffov  yap  t6  firj9\v  fxaWov  apxuv  touj 
aiTopovs  7]  Toi/s  fi/nopovs  lirjol  Kvpiovs  ehai  (wvovs  dWa  navras  If  icrov 
uar  dpiOfiov. 


Extreme  Democracy  ifj 

of  many ' ',  but  whether  he  means  this  corporate  nile,  or  the  IV.  4 
rule  of  many  individuals,  is  uncertain.  And  the  people,  who 
is  now  a  monarch,  and  no  longer  under  the  control  of  law, 
seeks  to  exercise  monarchical  sway,  and  grows  into  a  despot ; 
the  flatterer  is  held  in  honour ;  this  sort  of  democracy  being 
relatively  to  other  democracies  what  tyranny  is  to  other  forms 
of  monarchy.  The  spirit  of  both  is  the  same,  and  they  alike  28 
exercise  a  despotic  rule  over  the  better  citizens.  The  decrees 
of  the  demos  correspond  to  the  edicts  of  the  tyrant ;  and  the 
demagogue  is  to  the  one  what  the  flatterer  is  to  the  other. 
Both  have  great  power — the  flatterer  with  the  tyrant,  the 
demagogue  with  democracies  of  the  kind  which  we  are 
describing.  The  demagogues  make  the  decrees  of  the  people  29 
override  the  laws,  and  refer  all  things  to  the  popular  assembly. 
And  therefore  they  grow  great,  because  the  people  have  all 
things  in  their  hands,  and  they  hold  in  their  hands  the  votes 
of  the  people,  who  are  too  ready  to  listen  to  them.  Further,  3° 
those  who  have  any  complaint  to  bring  against  the  magis- 
trates say,  '  let  the  people  be  judges  * ;  the  people  are  too 
happy  to  accept  the  invitation  ;  and  so  the  authority  of  every 
oflRce  is  undermined.  Such  a  democracy  is  fairly  open  to  the 
objection  that  it  is  not  a  constitution  at  all ;  for  where  the 
laws  have  no  authority,  there  is  no  constitution.  The  law  3t 
ought  to  be  supreme  over  all,  and  the  magistracies  and  the 
government  should  judge  only  of  particulars.  So  that  if 
democracy  be  a  real  form  of  government,  the  sort  of  constitu- 
tion in  which  all  things  are  regulated  by  decrees  is  clearly  not 
a  democracy  in  the  true  sense  of  the  word,  for  decrees  relate 
only  to  particulars  ^. 

»  II.  ii.  204.  *  Cp.  N.  Eth.  V.  10.  §  7. 


If  8  Varieties  of  Oligarchy 

IV.  5  These  then  are  the  different  kinds  of  democracies.  Of 
oligarchies,  too,  there  are  different  kinds — one  where  the 
property  qualification  for  office  is  so  high  that  the  poor, 
although  they  form  the  majority,  have  no  share  in  the  govern- 
ment, yet  he  who  acquires  a  qualification  may  obtain  a  share. 

lf?92  b  Another  sort  is  when  there  is  a  qualification  for  office,  but 
a  high  one,  and  the  vacancies  in  the  governing  body  are  filled 
by  co-optation.  If  the  election  is  made  out  of  all  the  qualified 
persons,  a  constitution  of  this  kind  inclines  to  an  aristocracy, 
3  if  out  of  a  privileged  class,  to  an  oligarchy.  Another  sort  of 
oligarchy  is  when  the  son  succeeds  the  father.  There  is 
a  fourth  form,  likewise  hereditary,  in  which  the  magistrates 
are  supreme  and  not  the  law.  Among  oligarchies  this  is 
what  tyranny  is  among  monarchies,  and  the  last-mentioned 
form  of  democracy  among  democracies  ;  and  in  fact  this 
sort  of  oligarchy  receives  the  name  of  a  dynasty  (or  rule  of 
powerful  families). 

3  These  are  the  different  sorts  of  oligarchies  and  democra- 
cies. It  should  however  be  remembered  that  in  many  states ' 
the  constitution  which  is  established  by  law,  although  not 
democratic,  owing  to  the  character  and  habits  of  the  people, 
may  be  administered  democratically,  and  conversely  in  other 
states  the  established  constitution  may  incline  to  democracy, 

4  but  may  be  administered  in  an  oligarchical  spirit.  This  most 
often  happens  after  a  revolution :  for  governments  do  not 
change  at  once ;  at  first  the  dominant  party  are  content  with 
encroaching  a  little  upon  their  opponents.  The  laws  which 
existed  previously  continue  in  force,  but  the  authors  of  the 
revolution  have  the  power  in  their  hands. 

6      From  what  has  been  already  said  we  may  safely  infer  that 
'  Cp.  V.  I.  §  8. 


Stages  of  Democracy  1 79 

there  are  so  many   different  kinds   of  democracies  and   of   V.  6 
oligarchies.     For  it  is  evident  that  either  all  the  classes  whom 
we  mentioned  must  share  in  the  government,  or  some  only  and 
not  others.     When  the  class  of  husbandmen  and  of  those  2 
who  possess  moderate  fortunes  have  the  supreme  power,  the 
government  is  administered  according  to  law.     For  the  citi- 
zens being  compelled  to  live  by  their  labour  have  no  leisure ; 
and  so  they  set  up  the  authority  of  the  law,   and  attend 
assemblies  only  when   necessary.      Since  they  all  obtain  a  3 
share  in  the  government  when  they  have  acquired  the  quali- 
fication which  is  fixed  by  the  law,  nobody  is  excluded — the 
absolute  exclusion   of  any  class   would  be  a  step  towards 
oligarchy.     But  leisure  cannot  be  provided  for  them  unless 
there  are  revenues  to  support  them.     This  is  one  sort  of 
democracy,  and  these  are  the  causes  which  give  birth  to  it. 
Another  kind   is  based   on  the  mode  of  election,  ^  which 
naturally  comes  next  in  order  ^;  in  this,  every  one  to  whose 
birth  there  is  no  objection  is  eligible,  and  may  share  in  the 
government  if  he  can  find  leisure.     And  in  such  a  democracy  4 
the  supreme  power  is  vested  in  the  laws,  because  the  state  has 
no  means  of  paying  the  citizens.     A  third  kind  is  when  all 
freemen  have  a  right  to  share  in  the  government,  but  do  not 
actually  share,  for  the  reason  which  has  been  already  given ; 
so  that  in  this  form  again  the  law  must  rule.     A  fourth  kind  5 
of  democracy  is  that  which  comes  latest  in  the  history  of  1293  a 
states.     In  our  own  day,  when  cities  have  far  outgrown  their 
original  size,  and  their  revenues  have  increased,  all  the  citizens 
have  a  place  in  the  government,  through  the  great  prepon- 
derance of  their  numbers;  and  they  all,  including  the  poor 
who  receive  pay,  and  therefore  have  leisure  to  exercise  their 

'  Or,  '  which  is  proper  to  it.' 


i6o  Stages  of  Oligarchy 

IV.  6  rights,  shaie  in  the  administration.     Indeed,  when  they  are 

6  paid,  the  common  people  have  the  most  leisure,  for  they  are 
not  hindered  by  the  care  of  their  property,  which  often  fetters 
the  rich,  who  are  thereby  prevented  from  taking  part  in  the 
assembly  or  in  the  courts,  and  so  the  state  is  governed  by  the 

7  poor,  who  are  a  majority,  and  not  by  the  laws.  So  many 
kinds  of  democracies  there  are,  and  they  grow  out  of  these 
necessary  causes. 

Of  oligarchies,  one  form  is  that  in  which  the  majority  of 
the  citizens  have  some  property,  but  not  very  much ;  and  this 
is  the  first  form,  which  allows  to  any  one  who  obtains  the 

8  required  amount  the  right  of  sharing  in  the  government.  The 
sharers  in  the  government  being  a  numerous  body,  it  follows 
that  the  law  must  govern,  and  not  individuals.  For  in  pro- 
portion as  they  are  further  removed  from  a  monarchical  form 
of  government,  and  in  respect  of  property  have  neither  so 
much  as  to  be  able  to  live  without  attending  to  business,  nor  so 
little  as  to  need  state  support,  they  must  admit  the  rule  of  law 

9  and  not  claim  to  rule  themselves.  But  if  the  men  of  property 
in  the  state  are  fewer  than  in  the  former  case,  and  own  more 
property,  there  arises  a  second  form  of  oligarchy.  For  the 
stronger  they  are,  the  more  power  they  claim,  and  having  this 
object  in  view,  they  themselves  select  those  of  the  other 
classes  who  are  to  be  admitted  to  the  government ;  but,  not 
being  as  yet  strong  enough  to  rule  without  the  law,  they  make 

10  the  law  represent  their  wishes.  When  this  power  is  inten- 
sified by  a  further  diminution  of  their  numbers  and  increase 
of  their  property,  there  arises  a  third  and  further  stage  of 
oligarchy,  in  which  the  governing  class  keep  the  offices  in 
their  own   hands,  and  the  law  ordains  that  the  son   shall 

11  succeed   the   father.     When,   again,   the    rulers    have    great 


Aristocracy;  the  Pure  and  the  Mixed    i6i 

wealth  and  numerous  friends,  this  sort  of  dynastia  or  family  IV.  6 
despotism  approaches  a  monarchy;  individuals  rule  and  not 
the  law.     This  is  the  fourth  sort  of  oligarchy,  and  is  analogous 
to  the  last  sort  of  democracy. 

There  are  still  two  forms  besides  democracy  and  oligarchy ;  7 
one  of  them  is  universally  recognized  and  included  among  the 
four  principal  forms  of  government,  which  are  said  to  be 
(i)  monarchy,  (2)  oligarchy,  (3)  democracy,  and  (4)  the  so- 
called  aristocracy  or  government  of  the  best.  But  there  is  also 
a  fifth,  which  retains  the  generic  name  of  polity  or  constitu- 
tional government ;  this  is  not  common,  and  therefore  has  not 
been  noticed  by  writers  who  attempt  to  enumerate  the  dif- 
ferent kinds  of  government ;  like  Plato  in  his  books  about  the  1293  b 
state,  they  recognize  four  only.  The  term  '  aristocracy '  2 
is  rightly  applied  to  the  form  of  government  which  is  de- 
scribed in  the  first  part  of  our  treatise :  for  that  only  can 
be  rightly  called  aristocracy  [the  government  of  the  best] 
which  is  a  government  formed  of  the  best  men  absolutely, 
and  not  merely  of  men  who  are  good  when  tried  by  any  given 
standard.  In  the  perfect  state  the  good  man  is  absolutely  the 
same  as  the  good  citizen  ;  whereas  in  other  states  the  good 
citizen  is  only  good  relatively  to  his  own  form  of  govern- 
ment. But  there  are  some  states  differing  from  oligarchies  3 
and  also  differing  from  the  so-called  polity  or  constitu- 
tional government;  these  are  termed  aristocracies,  and  in 
them  magistrates  are  certainly  chosen,  both  according  to  their 
wealth  and  according  to  their  merit.  Such  a  form  of  govern- 
ment is  not  the  same  with  the  two  just  now  mentioned,  and 
is  termed  an  aristocracy.  For  indeed  in  states  which  do  not  4 
make  virtue  the  aim  of  the  community,  men  of  merit  and 
reputation  for  virtue  may  be  found.     And  so  where  a  govem- 

DAVIS  M 


i62  Mixed  Constitutions 

IV.  7  ment  has  regard  to  wealth,  virtue,  and  numbers,  as  at  Car- 
thage ^,  that  is  aristocracy  ;  and  also  where  it  has  regard  only 
to  two  out  of  the  three,  as  at  Lacedaemon,  to  virtue  and 
numbers,   and  the  two  principles  of  democracy  and  virtue 

5  temper  each  other.  There  are  these  two  forms  of  aristocracy 
in  addition  to  the  first  and  perfect  state,  and  there  is  a  third 
form,  viz.  the  polities  which  incline  towards  oligarchy. 

8  I  have  yet  to  speak  of  the  so-called  polity  and  of  tyranny. 
I  put  them  in  this  order,  not  because  a  polity  or  constitutional 
government  is  to  be  regarded  as  a  perversion  any  more  than  the 
above-mentioned  aristocracies.  The  truth  is,  that  they  all 
fall  short  of  the  most  perfect  form  of  government,  and  so 
they  are  reckoned  among  perversions,  and  other  forms  {sc. 
the    really    perverted  forms)   are  perversions   of  these,  as  I 

3  said  before  '^.  Last  of  all  I  will  speak  of  tyranny,  which 
I  place  last  in  the  series  because  I  am  enquiring  into  the 
constitutions  of  states,  and  this  is  the  very  reverse  of 
a  constitution. 

Having  explained  why  I  have  adopted  this  order,  I  will 
proceed  to  consider  constitutional  government ;  of  which  the 
nature  will  be   clearer  now    that  oligarchy   and   democracy 

3  have  been  defined.  For  polity  or  constitutional  government 
may  be  described  generally  as  a  fusion  of  oligarchy  and 
democracy;  but  the  term  is  usually  applied  to  those  forms 
of  government  which  incline  towards  democracy,  and  the 
term  aristocracy  to  those  which  incline  towards  oligarchy, 
because  birth   and  education  are  commonly  the  accompani- 

4  ments  of  wealth.  Moreover,  the  rich  already  possess  the 
external  advantages  the  want  of  which  is  a  temptation  to 
crime,  and   hence  they  are  called  noblemen  and  gentlemen. 

'  Cp.  ii.  II.  §S  5-IO.  *  Cp.  iii,  7. 


Mixed  Constitutions  16^ 

And  inasmuch  as  aristocracy  seeks  to  give  predominance  to  IV.  8 
the   best    of  the    citizens,    people    say   also    of  oligarchies 
that  they  are  composed  of  noblemen  and  gentlemen.     Now  1294  a 
it  appears   to   be  an  impossible  thing  that  the   state  which  5 
is  governed  by  the  best  citizens  should  be  ill-governed  \  and 
equally  impossible  that  the  state  which  is  ill-governed  should 
be  governed  by  the  best.     But  we  must  remember  that  good 
laws,  if  they  are  not  obeyed,  do  not  constitute  good  govern- 
ment.    For  there  are  two  parts  of  good  government ;  one  6 
is  the  actual   obedience  of  citizens  to  the  laws,  the  other 
part  is  the  goodness  of  the  laws    which    they    obey ;   they 
may  obey  bad  laws  as  well  as  good.     And  there  may  be 
a  further  subdivision ;  they   may   obey  either  the  best  laws 
which  are  attainable  to  them,  or  the  best  absolutely. 

The  distribution  of  offices  according  to  merit  is  a  special  7 
characteristic  of  aristocracy,  for  the  principle  of  an  aristocracy 
is   virtue,  as  wealth  is  of  an  oligarchy,    and   freedom  of  a 
democracy.     In  all  of  them  there  of  course  exists  the  right 
of  the  majority,  and  whatever  seems  good  to  the  majority  of 
those  who  share  in  the  government  has  authority.     Generally,  8 
however,  a  state  of  this  kind  is  called  a  constitutional  govern- 
ment  [not  an  aristocracy],    for  the   fusion  goes   no   further 
than  the  attempt  to  unite  the  freedom  of  the  poor  and  the 
wealth  of  the  rich,   who  commonly  take  the  place  of  the 
noble.     And  as  there  are  three  grounds  on  which  men  claim  9 
an  equal  share  in  the  government — freedom,  wealth,  and  virtue 
(for  the  fourth  or  good  birth  is  the  result  of  the  two  last, 
being  only   ancient    wealth  and  virtue) — it  is  clear  that  the 
admixture  of  the  two  elements,  that  is  to  say,  of  the  rich 
and  poor,  is  to  be  called  a  polity  or  constitutional  government ; 
^  Omitting  oAAd  wovijpoicpaTovufvrjv. 
M  2 


1(^4  Aristocracy  and  Polity 

IV.  8  and  the   union   of  the  three  is   to  be   called   aristocracy   or 
the  government  of  the  best,  and  more  than  any  other  form  of 
government,  except  the  true  and  ideal,  has  a  right  to  this 
name, 
lo      Thus  far  I   have  described  the  different  forms  of  states 
which  exist  besides   monarchy,    democracy,  and   oligarchy, 
and  what  they   are,  and   in  what   aristocracies  differ   from 
one  another,   and  polities  from   aristocracies — that   the  two 
latter  are  not  very  unlike  is  obvious. 
9      Next  we  have  to  consider  how  by  the  side  of  oligarchy 
and  democracy  the  so-called  polity  or  constitutional  govern- 
ment springs  up,   and    how  it  should    be   organized.     The 
nature  of  it  will  be  at  once  understood  from  a  comparison  of 
oligarchy  and  democracy ;    we  must  ascertain  their  different 
characteristics,  and  taking  a  portion  from  each,  put  the  two 
3  together,  like  the  parts  of  an  indenture.     Now  there  are  three 
modes  in  which  fusions  of  government  may  be  effected.    The 
nature  of  the  fusion  will  be  made  intelligible  by  an  example  of 
the  manner  in  which  different  governments  legislate,  say  con- 
cerning  the   administration  of  justice.     In   oligarchies    they 
impose  a  fine  on  the  rich  if  they  do  not  serve  as  judges,  and 
to  the  poor  they  give  no  pay ;  but  in  democracies  they  give 
3  pay  to  the  poor  and  do  not  fine  the  rich.     Now  (i)  the  union 
of  these  two  modes  *  is  a  common  or  middle  term  between 
1294  b  them,    and  is    therefore   characteristic    of  a    constitutional 
government,  for  it  is  a  combination  of  both.     This  is  one 
mode  of  uniting  the  two  elements.     Or  (2)  a  mean  may  be 
taken  between  the  enactments  of  the  two :  thus  democracies 
require  no  property  qualification,  or  only  a  small  one,  from 
members   of  the   assembly,    oligarchies  a   high   one;    here 
1  Cp.  c.  13.  §  6. 


Polity  \6j 

neither  of  these  is  the  common  term,  but  a  mean  between  them.  IV.  9 
(3)  There  is  a  third  mode,  in  which  something  is  borrowed  4 
from  the  oligarchical  and  something  from  the  democratical 
principle.     For  example,  the  appointment  of  magistrates  by 
lot  is  democratical,   and  the  election   of  them  oligarchical; 
democratical  again  when  there    is  no  property  qualification, 
oligarchical  when  there  is.     In  the  aristocratical  or  constitu-  5 
tional  state,  one  element  will  be  taken  from  each — from  oli- 
garchy the  mode  of  electing  to  offices,  from  democracy  the 
disregard  of  qualification.     Such  are  the  various  modes  of  6 
combination. 

There  is  a  true  union  of  oligarchy  and  democracy  when  the 
same  state  may  be  termed  either  a  democracy  or  an  oligarchy ; 
those  who  use  both  names  evidently  feel  that  the  fusion 
is  complete.  Such  a  fusion  there  is  also  in  the  mean;  for 
both  extremes  appear  in  it.  The  Lacedaemonian  constitution,  7 
for  example,  is  often  described  as  a  democracy,  because  it  has 
many  democratical  features.  In  the  first  place  the  youth 
receive  a  democratical  education.  For  the  sons  of  the  poor 
are  brought  up  with  the  sons  of  the  rich,  who  are  educated 
in  such  a  manner  as  to  make  it  possible  for  the  sons  of  the 
poor  to  be  educated  like  them.  A  similar  equality  prevails  8 
in  the  following  period  of  life,  and  when  the  citizens  are 
grown  up  to  manhood  the  same  rule  is  observed;  there  is 
no  distinction  between  the  rich  and  poor.  In  like  manner 
they  all  have  the  same  food  at  their  public  tables,  and 
the  rich  wear  only  such  clothing  as  any  poor  man  can 
afford.  Again,  the  people  elect  to  one;  of  the  two  greatest  9 
offices  of  states,  and  in  the  other  they  share  ' ;  for  they  elect 
the  Senators  and  share  in  the  Ephoralty.  By  others  the 
1  Cp.  ii.  9.  §  21. 


1 66  Tyranny 

IV.  0  Spartan  constitution  is  said  to  be  an  oligarchy,  because  it 
has  many  oligarchical  elements.  That  all  offices  are  filled 
by  election  and  none  by  lot,  is  one  of  these  oligarchical 
-  characteristics ;  that  the  power  of  inflicting  death  or  banish- 
ment rests  with  a  few  persons  is  another ;  and  there  are 
10  others.  In  a  well  attempered  polity  there  should  appear  to 
be  both  elements  and  yet  neither ;  also  the  government  should 
rely  on  itself,  and  not  on  foreign  aid,  nor  on  the  good  will  of 
a  majority  of  foreign  states — they  might  be  equally  well- 
disposed  when  there  is  a  vicious  form  of  government — but  on 
the  general  willingness  of  all  classes  in  the  state  to  maintain 
the  constitution. 

Enough  of  the  manner  in  which  a  constitutional  government, 

and  in  which  the  so-called  aristocracies  ought  to  be  framed. 

10      Of  the  nature  of  tyranny  I  have  still  to  speak,  in  order 

1 J95  a  jjjjj^  jj,  j^^y  j^g^g  jjg  pjace  in  our  enquiry,  since  even  tyranny  is 

reckoned  by  us  to  be  a  form  of  government,  although  there  is 

not  much  to  be  said  about  it.     I  have  already  in  the  former 

part  of  this  treatise  ^  discussed  royalty  or  kingship  according 

to  the    most   usual   meaning  of  the   term,    and  considered 

whether  it  is  or  is  not  advantageous  to  states,  and  what  kind 

of  royalty  should  be  established,  and  whence,  and  how  it 

arises. 

2       When  speaking  of  royalty  we    also  spoke  of  two   forms 

of  tyranny,  which  are  both  according  to  law,  and  therefore 

easily  pass  into  royalty.     Among  Barbarians  there  are  elected 

monarchs  who  exercise   a  despotic   power;    despotic  rulers 

were  also  elected  in  ancient  Hellas,  called  Aesymnetes  or 

?.  dictators.      These   monarchies,   when    compared   with    one 

another,  exhibit    certain  differences.       And    they  are,  as  I 

^  iii.  14-17. 


Polity 


167 


said  before,  royal,  in  so  far  as  the  monarch  rules  accord-  IV.  10 
ing  to  law  and  over  willing  subjects ;  but  they  are  tyrannical 
in  so  far  as  he  is  despotic  and  rules  according  to  his  own 
fancy.  There  is  also  a  third  kind  of  tyranny,  which  is  the 
most  typical  form,  and  is  the  counterpart  of  the  perfect 
monarchy.  This  tyranny  is  just  that  arbitrary  power  of  an  4 
individual  which  is  responsible  to  no  one,  and  governs  all 
alike,  whether  equals  or  betters,  with  a  view  to  its  own 
advantage,  not  to  that  of  its  subjects,  and  therefore  against 
their  will.  No  freeman,  if  he  can  escape  from  it,  will  endure 
such  a  government. 

The  kinds  of  tyranny  are  such  and  so  many,  and  for  the 
I'easons  which  I  have  given. 

We  have  now  to  enquire  what  is  the  best  constitution  11 
for  most  states,  and  the  best  life  for  most  men,  neither 
assuming  a  standard  of  virtue  which  is  above  ordinary  persons, 
nor  an  education  which  is  exceptionally  favoured  by  nature 
and  circumstances,  nor  yet  an  ideal  state  which  is  an  aspiration 
only,  but  having  regard  to  the  life  in  which  the  majority 
are  able  to  share,  and  to  the  form  of  government  which  states 
in  general  can  attain.  As  to  those  aristocracies,  as  they  are  2 
called,  of  which  we  were  just  now  speaking,  they  either 
lie  beyond  the  possibilities  of  the  greater  number  of  states, 
or  they  approximate  to  the  so-called  constitutional  govern- 
ment, and  therefore  need  no  separate  discussion.  And  in 
fact  the  conclusion  at  which  we  arrive  respecting  all  these 
forms  rests  upon  the  same  grounds.  For  if  it  has  been  truly  3 
said  in  the  Ethics  *  that  the  happy  life  is  the  life  according 
to  unimpeded  virtue,  and  that  virtue  is  a  mean,  then  the 
life  which  is  in  a  mean,  and  in  a  mean  attainable  by  every 
1  N.  Eth.  vii.  13.  §  2 


1(^8      The  J^le  of  the  Middle  Class 

IV.  11  one,  must  be  the  best.  And  the  same  criteria  of  virtue 
1295  b  and  vice  apply  both  to  cities  and  to  constitutions ;  for  the 
constitution  is  in  a  figure  the  life  of  the  city  ^. 

4  Now  in  all  states  there  are  three  elements ;  one  class  is 
very  rich,  another  very  poor,  and  a  third  in  a  mean.  It 
is  admitted  that  moderation  and  the  mean  are  best,  and  there- 
fore it  will  clearly  be  best  to  possess  the  gifts  of  fortune 
in  moderation  ;  for  in  that  condition  of  life  men  are  mo^t 

6  ready  to  listen  to  reason.  But  he  who  greatly  excels  in 
beauty,  strength,  birth  or  wealth,  or  on  the  other  hand  who 
is  very  poor,  or  very  weak,  or  very  much  disgraced,  finds  it 
difficult  to  follow  reason  '.  Of  these  two  the  one  sort  grow 
into  violent  and  great  criminals,  the  others  into  rogues  and 
petty  rascals.  And  two  sorts  of  offences  correspond  to  them\ 
the  one  committed  from  violence,  the  other  from  roguery. 
The  petty  rogues  are  disinclined  to  hold  office,  whether 
military  or  civil,  and  their  aversion  to  these  two  duties  is 
as  great  an  injury  to  the  state  as  their  tendency  to  crime. 

6  Again,  those  who  have  too  much  of  the  goods  of  fortune, 
strength,  wealth,  friends,  and  the  like,  are  neither  willing 
nor  able  to  submit  to  authority.  The  evil  begins  at  home: 
for  when  they  are  boys,  by  reason  of  the  luxury  in  which 
they  are  brought  up.*,  they  never  learn,  even  at  school,  the 
habit  of  obedience.     On  the  other  hand,  the  very  poor,  who 

7  are  in  the  opposite  extreme,  are  too  degraded.  So  that  the 
one  class  cannot  obey,  and  can  only  rule  despotically ;  the 
other  knows  not  how  to  command  and  must  be  ruled  like 
slaves.  Thus  arises  a  city,  not  of  freemen,  but  of  masters 
and  slaves,  the  one  despising,  the  other  envying  ;  and  nothing 

'  Cp.  iii.  3.  §§  7,  8.  2  Cp.  PI.  Rep.  iv.  421  c,  d  ff. 

°  Laws,  viii.  831  e.  *  Cp.  v.  9.  §  13. 


The  J{ule  of  the  Middle  Class      1^9 

can  be  more  fatal  to  friendship  and  good  fellowship  in  states  IV.  11 
than  this :  for  good  fellowship  tends  to  friendship ;  when  men 
are  at  enmity  with  one  another,  they  would  rather  not  even 
share  the  same  path.  But  a  city  ought  to  be  composed,  as  far  8 
as  possible,  of  equals  and  similars  ;  and  these  are  generally  the 
middle    classes.     Wherefore   the    city   which    is    composed 
of  middle-class    citizens  is  necessarily  best  governed;    they 
are,  as  we  say,  the  natural  elements  of  a  state.     And  this  is* 
the  class  of  citizens  which  is  most  secure  in  a  state,  for  they 
do  not,  like  the  poor,  covet  their  neighbours'  goods ;  nor  do  9 
others  covet  theirs,  as  the  poor  covet  the  goods  of  the  rich  ; 
and   as  they  neither  plot  against  others,  nor  are  themselves 
plotted  against,  they  pass  through  life  safely.     Wisely  then 
did  Phocylides  pray — 

'  Many  things  are  best   in   the  mean ;  I  desire  to  be  of 
a  middle  condition  in  my  city.' 

Thus  it  is  manifest  that  the  best  political  community  is  10 
formed  by  citizens  of  the  middle  class,  and  that  those  states 
are  likely  to  be  well-administered,  in  which  the  middle  class 
is  large,  and   larger  if  possible  than  both  the  other  classes, 
or  at  any  rate  than  either   singly ;    for   the  addition  of  the 
middle   class    turns  the    scale,  and  prevents   either   of  the 
extremes  from  being   dominant.     Great    then   is    the  good  11 
fortune  of  a  state  in  which  the  citizens  have  a  moderate  and 
sufficient  property ;  for  where  some  possess  much,  and  the  1296  a 
others  nothing,   there  may  arise  an  extreme  democracy,  or 
a   pure   oligarchy ;    or  a   tyranny  may   grow    out   of  either 
extreme — either  out  of  the  most  rampant  democracy,  or  out 
of  an  oligarchy  ;  but  it  is  not  so  likely  to  arise  out  of  a  middle 
and  nearly  equal  condition.     I  will  explain  the  reason  of  this  i  a 


I70    The  'Middle  Class  is  rarely  Supreme 

IV.  11  hereafter,  when  I  speak  of  the  revolutions  of  states  *.  The 
mean  condition  of  states  is  clearly  best,  for  no  other  is  free 
from  faction ;    and  where  the  middle  class   is   large,  there 

13  are  least  likely  to  be  factions  and  dissensions.  For  a  similar 
reason  large  states  are  less  liable  to  faction  than  small  ones, 
because  in  them  the  middle  class  is  large ;  whereas  in  small 
states  it  is  easy  to  divide  all  the  citizens  into  two  classes  who 
are  either  rich  or  poor,  and  to  leave  nothing  in  the  middle. 

14  And  democracies  are  safer*  and  more  permanent  than 
oligarchies,  because  they  have  a  middle  class  which  is  more 
numerous  and  has  a  greater  share  in  the  government ;  for 
when  there  is  no  middle  class,  and  the  poor  greatly  exceed 
in  number,  troubles  arise,  and  the  state    soon  comes  to  an 

15  end.  A  proof  of  the  superiority  of  the  middle  class 
is  that  the  best  legislators  have  been  of  a  middle  condi- 
tion ;  for  example,  Solon,  as  his  own  verses  testify ;  and 
Lycurgus,  for  he  was  not  a  king ;  and  Charondas,  and  almost 
all  legislators. 

r6  These  considerations  will  help  us  to  understand  why  most 
governments  are  either  democratical  or  oligarchical.  The 
reason  is  that  the  middle  class  is  seldom  numerous  in  them, 
and  whichever  party,  whether  the  rich  or  the  common  people, 
transgresses  the  mean  and  predominates,  draws  the  govern- 
ment to  itself,  and  thus  arises  either  oligarchy  or  democracy. 

1 7  There  is  another  reason — the  poor  and  the  rich  quarrel  with 
one  another,  and  whichever  side  gets  the  better,  instead  of 
establishing  a  just  or  popular  government,  regards  political 
supremacy  as  the  prize  of  victory,  and  the  one  party  sets  up 

iS  a  democracy  and  the  other  an  oligarchy.  Both  the  parties 
which  had  the  supremacy  in  Hellas  looked  only  to  the 
'  Cp.  Bk.  V.  2  Cp.  V.  I.  §  15 ;  7.  §  6. 


The  Goodwill  of  the  Stronger      171 

interest  of  their  own  form  of  government,  and  established  in  IV.  11 
states,  the  one,  democracies,  and  the  other,  oligarchies ;  they 
thought  of  their  own  advantage,  of  the  public  not  at  all.     For  19 
these  reasons  the  middle  form  of  government  has  rarely,  if 
ever,  existed,  and  among  a  very«few  only.    One  man  alone  of 
all  who  ever  ruled  in  Hellas  was  induced  to  give  this  middle 
constitution  to  states.     But  it  has  now  become  a  habit  among  1296  b 
the  citizens  of  states,  not  even  to  care  about  equality ;  all  men 
are  seeking  for  dominion,   or,   if  conquered,   are  willing  to 
submit. 

What  then  is  the  best  form  of  government,  and  what  makes  20 
it  the  best,  is  evident ;  and  of  other  states,  since  we  say  that 
there  are  many  kinds  of  democracy  and  many  of  oligarchy,  it 
is  not  difficult  to  see  which  has  the  first  and  which  the  second 
or  any  other  place  in  the  order  of  excellence,  now  that 
we  have  determined  which  is  the  best.  For  that  which  21 
is  nearest  to  the  best  must  of  necessity  be  better,  and 
that  which  is  furthest  from  it  worse,  if  we  are  judging 
absolutely  and  not  relatively  to  given  conditions :  I  say 
'  relatively  to  given  conditions,*  since  a  particular  government 
may  be  preferable  for  some,  but  another  form  may  be  better 
for  others. 

We  have  now  to  consider  what  and  what  kind  of  govern-  12 
ment  is  suitable  to  what  and  what  kind  of  men.  I  may  begin 
by  assuming,  as  a  general  principle  common  to  all  govern- 
ments, that  the  portion  of  the  state  which  desires  permanence 
ought  to  be  stronger  than  that  which  desires  the  reverse. 
Now  every  city  is  composed  of  quality  and  quantity.  By 
quality  I  mean  freedom,  wealth,  education,  good  birth,  and  by 
quantity,  superiority  of  numbers.  Quality  may  exist  in  one  of  2 
the  classes  which   make  up  the  state,   and  quantity  in  the 


172      The  Goodwill  of  the  Stronger 

IV,  12  other.  For  example,  the  meanly-born  may  be  more  in 
number  than  the  well-born,  or  the  poor  than  the  rich,  yet 
they  may  not  so  much  exceed  in  quantity  as  they  fall  short  in 

3  quality ;  and  therefore  there  must  be  a  comparison  of  quantity 
and  quality.  Where  the  number  of  the  poor  is  more  than 
proportioned  to  the  wealth  of  the  rich,  there  will  naturally  be 
a  democracy,  varying  in  form  with  the  sort  of  people  who 
compose  it  in  each  case.  If,  for  example,  the  husbandmen 
exceed  in  number,  the  first  form  of  democracy  will  then 
arise  ;  if  the  artisans  and  labouring  class,  the  last ;  and  so  with 
the  intermediate  forms.  But  where  the  rich  and  the  notables 
exceed  in  quality  more  than  they  fall  short  in  quantity,  there 
oligarchy  arises,  similarly  assuming  various  forms  according 
to  the  kind  of  superiority  possessed  by  the  oligarchs. 

4  The  legislator  should  always  include  the  middle  class  in 
his  government;  if  he  makes  his  laws  oligarchical,  to  the 
middle  class  let  him  look;  if  he  makes  them  democratical, 
he  should  equally  by  his  laws  try  ^  to  attach  this  class  to 
the  state  ^.     There  only  can  the  government  ever  be  stable 

1297  a  where  the  middle  class  exceeds  one  or  both  of  the  others,  and 

5  in  that  case  there  will^be  no  fe^  that  the  rich  will  unite  with 
the  poor  against  the  rulers.  For  neither  of  them  will  ever  be 
willing  to  serve  the  other,  and  if  they  look  for  some  form  of 
government  more  suitable  to  both,  they  will  find  none  better 
than  this,  for  the  rich  and  the  poor  will  never  consent  to  rule 
in  turn,  because  they  mistrust  one  another.  The  arbiter  is 
always  the  one  trusted,  and  he  who  is  in  the  middle  is  an 

6  arbiter.      The  more  perfect  the  admixture  of  the  political 

■■■■wwawwwiwiiiiiiii-itww— wBgilF-i. Vitmjmm*'  »  ' ■■■  — 

elements^  the  more  lasting  will  be  the  _state^     Many  even  of 

'  Or,  if  vpoff&ytffOai  can  govern  roti  yoftois,  '  to  win  this  class  over 
to  his  laws.' 


The  Policy  of  Oligarchies  173 

those  who  desire  to  form  aristocratical  governments  make  IV.  12 
a  mistake,  not  only  in  giving  too  much  power  to  the  rich,  but 
in  attempting  to  overreach  the  people.  There  comes  a  time 
when  out  of  a  false  good  there  arises  a  true  evil,  since  the 
encroachments  of  the  rich  are  more  destructive  to  the  state 
than  those  of  the  people. 

The  devices  by  which  oligarchies  deceive  the  people  are  13 
five  in  number;  they  relate  to  (l)  the  assembly;  (2)  the 
magistracies;  (3)  the  courts  of  law;  (4)  the  use  of  arms; 
(5)  gymnastic  exercises.  (l)  The  assemblies  are  thrown 
open  to  all,  but  either  the  rich  only  are  fined  for  non- 
attendance,   or  a  much   larger  fine  is   inflicted  upon    them. 

(2)  As    to    the    magistracies,    those   who   are   qualified    by  3 
property  cannot  decline  office  upon  oath,  but  the  poor  may. 

(3)  In  the  law-courts  the  rich,  and  the  rich  only,  are  fined 
if  they  do  not  serve,  the  poor  are  let  off  with  impunity,  or, 
as  in  the  laws  of  Charondas,  a  large  fine  is  inflicted  on  the 
rich,  and  a  smaller  one  on  the  poor.  In  some  states  all  3 
citizens  who  have  registered  themselves  are  allowed  to  attend 
the  assembly  and  to  try  causes ;  but  if  after  registration  they 
do  not  attend  in  the  assembly  or  at  the  courts,  heavy  fines  are 
imposed  upon  them.  The  intention  is  that  through  fear 
of  the  fines  they  may  avoid  registering  themselves,  and  then 
they     cannot    sit    in    the   law-courts   or    in    the   assembly. 

(4)  Concerning  the  possession  of  arms,  and  {5)  gynmastic  4 
exercises,  they  legislate  in  a  similar  spirit.  For  the  poor  are 
not  obliged  to  have  arms,  but  the  rich  are  fined  for  not  having 
them ;  and  in  like  manner  no  penalty  is  inflicted  on  the  poor 
for  non-attendance  at  the  gymnasium,  and  consequently, 
having  nothing  to  fear,  they  do  not  attend,  whereas  the  rich 
are  liable  to  a  fine,  and  therefore  they  take  care  to  attend. 


174  Military  Basis  of  the  Constitution 

IV.  13      These    are    the    devices    of  oligarchical    legislators,    and 

5  in  democracies  they  have  counter  devices.  They  pay  the  poor 
for  attending  the   assemblies  and  the  law-courts,  and  they 

6  inflict  no  penalty  on  the  rich  for  non-attendance.  It  is 
obvious  that  he  who  would  duly  mix  the  two  principles  should 
combine  the  practice  of  both,  and  provide  that  the  poor 
should  be  paid  to  attend,  and  the  rich  fined  if  they  do  not 
attend,  for  then  all  will  take  part ;  if  there  is  no  such  combina- 

1297  b  tion,  power  will  be  in  the  hands  of  one  party  only.     The 

7  government  should  be  confined  to  those  who  carry  arms.  As 
to  the  property  qualification,  no  absolute  rule  can  be  laid 
down,  but  we  must  see  what  is  the  highest  qualification 
sufficiently  comprehensive  to  secure  that  the  number  of  those 
who  have  the  rights  of  citizens  exceeds  the  number  of  those 

8  excluded.  Even  if  they  have  no  share  in  office,  the  poor, 
provided  only  that  they  are  not  outraged  or  deprived  of  their 
property,  will  be  quiet  enough. 

But  to  secure  gentle  treatment  for  the  poor  is  not  an  easy 

9  thing,  since  a  ruling  class  is  not  always  humane.  And  in  time 
of  war  the  poor  are  apt  to  hesitate  unless  they  are  fed  ;  when 
fed,  they  are  willing  enough  to  fight.  In  some  states  the 
government  is  vested,  not  only  in  those  who  are  actually 
serving,  but  also  in  those  who  have  served ;  among  the 
Malians,  for  example,  the  governing  body  consisted  of  the 
latter,  while  the  magistrates  were  chosen  from  those  actually 

lo  on  service.  And  the  earliest  government  which  existed  among 
the  Hellenes,  after  the  overthrow  of  the  kingly  power,  grew 
up  out  of  the  warrior  class,  and  was  originally  taken  from  the 
knights  (for  strength  and  superiority  in  war  at  that  time 
depended  on  cavalry  ^) ;  indeed,  without  discipline,  infantry 
*  Cp.  iv.  3.  §  3;  vi.  7.  §  I. 


The  Distribution  of  Political  Power  17  f 

are  useless,  and  xn  ancient  times  there  was  no  military  know-  IV.  13 
ledge  or  tactics,  and  therefore  the  strength  of  armies  lay 
in  their  cavalry.  But  when  cities  increased  and  the  heavy 
armed  grew  in  strength,  more  had  a  share  in  the  government ; 
and  this  is  the  reason  why  the  states,  which  we  call  con-  ii 
stitutional  governments,  have  been  hitherto  called  democracies. 
Ancient  constitutions,  as  might  be  expected,  were  oligarchical 
and  royal ;  their  population  being  small  they  had  no  consider- 
able middle  class ;  the  people  were  weak  in  numbers  and 
organization,  and  were  therefore  more  contented  to  be 
governed. 

I  have  explained  why  there  are  various  forms  of  govern-  1 2 
ment,  and  why  there  are  more  than  is  generally  supposed ; 
for  democracy,  as  well  as  other  constitutions,  has  more  than 
one  form  :  also  what  their  differences  are,  and  whence  they 
arise,  and  what  is  the  best  form  of  government,  speaking 
generally,  and  to  whom  the  various  forms  of  government 
are  best  suited ;  all  this  has  now  been  explained. 

Having  thus  gained  an  appropriate  basis  of  discussion  we  14 
will  proceed  to  speak  of  the  points  which  follow  next  in 
order.     We  will  consider  the  subject  not  only  in  general  but 
with  reference   to   particular  states.     All    states  have  three 
elements,  and   the   good   law-giver   has  to    regard   what  is 
expedient  for  each  state.     When  they  are  well-ordered,  the 
state  is  well-ordered,  and  as  they  differ  from  one  another, 
constitutions  differ.     What    is  the   element  first  (l)  which  2 
deliberates  about  public  affairs ;  secondly  (2)  which  is  con-  ^^'"^^  ^ 
cerned  with  the  magistrates  and  determines  what  they  should 
be,    over    whom  they    should  exercise   authority,  and  what 
should  be  the  mode  of  electing  them;  and  thirdly  (3)  which  3 
has  judicial  power  ? 


i7<J   Forms  of  the  Deliberative  Power 

IV.  14  The  deliberative  element  has  authority  in  matters  of  war 
and  peace,  in  making  and  unmaking  alliances ;  it  passes  laws, 
inflicts  death,  exile,  confiscation,  audits  the  accounts  of 
magistrates.  All  these  powers  must  be  assigned  either  to  ail 
the  citizens  or  to  some  of  them,  for  example,  to  one  or  more 
magistracies ;  or  different  causes  to  different  magistracies,  or 

4  some  of  them  to  all,  and  others  of  them  only  to  some.  That 
all  things  should  be  decided  by  all  is  characteristic  of 
democracy ;  this  is  the  sort  of  equality  which  the  people 
desire.  But  there  are  various  ways  in  which  all  may  share 
in  the  government ;  they  may  deliberate,  not  all  in  one  body, 
but  by  turns,  as  in  the  constitution  of  Telecles  the  Milesian, 
There  are  other  states  in  which  the  boards  of  magistrate? 
meet  and  deliberate,  but  come  into  office  by  turns,  and  arc 
elected  out  of  the  tribes  and  the  very  smallest  divisions  of 
the  state,  until  every  one  has  obtained  oflSice  in  hb  turn. 
The  citizens,  on  the  other  hand,  are  assembled  only  for 
the    purposes  of  legislation,  and   to  consult  about  the  con- 

5  stitution,  and  to  hear  the  edicts  of  the  magistrates.  In 
another  variety  of  democracy  the  citizens  form  one  assembly, 
but  meet  only  to  elect  magistrates,  to  pass  laws,  to  advise 
about  war  and  peace,  and  to  make  scrutinies.  Other  matters 
are  referred  seveftlly  to  special  magistrates,  who  are  elected 

6  by  vote  or  by  lot  out  of  all  the  citizens.  Or  again,  the 
citizens  meet  about  election  to  offices  and  about  scrutinies,  and 
deliberate  concerning  war  or  alliances,  while  other  matters  are 
administered  by  the  magistrates,  who,  as  far  as  is  possible,  are 
elected   by  vote  *.     I  am  speaking  of  those  magistracies  in 

7  which  special  knowledge  is  required.  A  fourth  form  of 
democracy  is  when  all  the  citizens  meet  to  deliberate  about 

*■  Cp,  vi.  2.  §  5. 


In  Democracies  and  Oligarchies     177 

everything,  and  the  magistrates  decide  nothing,  but  only  make  IV,  14 
the  preliminary  enquiries ;  and  that  is  the  way  in  which  the 
last  and  worst   form  of  democracy,   corresponding,    as   we 
maintain,   to  the  close  family  oligarchy  and  to  tyranny,  is 
at  present  administered.     All  these  modes  are  democratical. 

On  the  other  hand,  that  some  should  deliberate  about  all  is 
oligarchical.  This  again  is  a  mode  which,  like  the  demo-  8 
cratical,  has  many  forms.  When  the  deliberative  class,  being 
elected  out  of  those  who  have  a  moderate  qualification,  are 
numerous  and  they  respect  and  obey  the  law  without  alter- 
ing it,  and  any  one  who  has  the  required  qualification  shares 
in  the  government,  then,  just  because  of  this  moderation,  the 
oligarchy  inclines  towards  polity.  But  when  only  selected  in-  1298  b 
dividuals  and  not  the  whole  people  share  in  the  deliberations 
of  the  state,  then,  although,  as  in  the  former  case,  they  obser\'e 
the  law,  the  government  is  a  pure  oligarchy.  Or,  again,  9 
when  those  who  have  the  power  of  deliberation  are  self- 
elected,  and  son  succeeds  father,  and  they  and  not  the  laws 
are  supreme — the  government  is  of  necessity  oligarchical. 
Where,  again,  particular  persons  have  authority  in  particular  to 
matters — for  example,  when  the  whole  people  decide  about 
peace  and  war  and  hold  scrutinies,  but  the  magistrates  regulate 
everything  else,  and  they  are  elected  either  by  vote  or  by  lot — 
there  ^  the  form  of  government  is  an  aristocracy  or  polity '. 
And  if  some  questions  are  decided  by  magistrates  elected 
by  vote,  and  others  by  magistrates  elected  by  lot,  either 
absolutely  or  out  of  select  candidates,  or  elected  both  by 
vote  and  by  lot — these  practices  are  partly  characteristic  of  an 

*  Reading  with  several  of  the  MSS.  apiaroKparia  fj  iroXntia,  and 
omitting  ytiv.  Or,  with  Bekker's  text,  dpiaTOKparia  niv  v  voXiruo, 
'  the  government  is  an  aristocracy.' 

EAVIS  N  • 


1/8     ///  Democracies  and  Oligarchies 

IV.  14  aristocratical  government,  and  partly  of  a  pure  constitutional 
government. 

1 1  These  are  the  various  forms  of  the  deliberative  body  ;  they 
correspond  to  the  various  forms  of  government.  And  the 
government  of  each  state  is  administered  according  to  one  or 

1 2  other  of  the  principles  which  have  been  laid  down.  Now  it 
is  for  the  interest  of  democracy,  according  to  the  most 
prevalent  notion  of  it  (I  am  speaking  of  that  extreme  form  of 
democracy,  in  which  the  people  are  supreme  even  over  the 
laws),  with  a  view  to  better  deliberation  to  adopt  the  custom 
of  oligarchies  respecting  courts  of  law.  For  in  oligarchies  the 
rich  who  are  wanted  to  be  judges  are  compelled  to  attend 
under  pain  of  a  fine,  whereas  in  democracies  the  poor  are  paid 
to  attend.  And  this  practice  of  oligarchies  should  be 
adopted  by  democracies  in  their  public  assemblies,  for  they 
will  advise  better  if  they  all  deliberate  together — the  people 

13  with  the  notables  and  the  notables  with  the  people.  It  is  also 
a  good  plan  that  those  who  deliberate  should  be  elected 
by  vote  or  by  lot  in  equal  numbers  out  of  the  different 
classes  ;  and  that  if  the  people  greatly  exceed  in  number 
those  who  have  political  training,  pay  should  not  be  given  to 
all,  but  only  to  as  many  as  would  balance  the  number  of  the 
notables,  or  that  the  number  in  excess  should  be  eliminated 

14  by  lot.  But  in  oligarchies  either  certain  persons  should  be 
chosen  out  of  the  mass,  or  a  class  of  officers  should  be 
appointed  such  as  exist  in  some  states,  who  are  termed 
probuli  and  guardians  of  the  law;  and  the  citizens  shodd 
occupy  themselves  exclusively  with  matters  on  which  these 
have  previously  deliberated ;  for  so  the  people  will  have 
a  share  in  the  deliberations  of  the  state,  but  will  not  be  able 

15  to   disturb   the   principles   of  the   constitution.     Again,    in 


The  Executive  179 

oligarchies  either  the  people  ought  to  accept  the  measures  IV.  14 

of  the  government,  or  not  to  pass  anything  contrary  to  them ; 

or,  if  all  are  allowed  to  share  in  counsel,  the  decision  should 

rest  with  the  magistrates.     The  opposite  of  what  is  done  in 

constitutional  governments  should  be  the  rule  in  oligarchies; 

the  veto  of  the  majority  should  be  final,  their  assent  not  final, 

but  the  proposal  should  be  referred  back  to  the  magistrates. 

Whereas  in  constitutional  governments  they  take  the  contrary  i6 

course ;  the  few  have  the  negative  not  the  affirmative  power ; 

the  affirmation  of  everything  rests  with  the  multitude.  ]299  a 

These,  then,  are  our  conclusions  respecting  the  deliberative, 
that  is,  the  supreme  element  in  states. 

Next  we  will  proceed  to  consider  the  distribution  of  15 
offices ;  this,  too,  being  a  part  of  politics  concerning  which 
many  questions  arise  : — What  shall  their  number  be  ?  Over 
what  shall  they  preside,  and  what  shall  be  their  duration  ? 
Sometimes  they  last  for  six  months,  sometimes  for  less ; 
sometimes  they  are  annual,  whilst  in  other  cases  offices  are 
held  for  still  longer  periods.  Shall  they  be  for  life  or  for 
a  long  term  of  years ;  or,  if  for  a  short  term  only,  shall 
the  same  persons  hold  them  over  and  over  again,  or  once 
only  ?  Also  about  the  appointment  to  them — from  whom 
are  they  to  be  chosen,  by  whom,  and  how  ?  We  should  2 
first  be  in  a  position  to  say  what  are  the  possible  varieties  of 
them,  and  then  we  may  proceed  to  detemiine  which  are 
suited  to  different  forms  of  government.  But  what  are  to  be 
included  under  the  term  '  offices '  ?  That  is  a  question  not 
quite  so  easily  answered.  For  a  political  community  requires 
many  officers ;  and  not  every  one  who  is  chosen  by  vote  or 
by  lot  is  to  be  regarded  as  a  ruler.  In  the  first  place  there 
are  the  priests,  who   must  be  distinguished   from  political 

N  2 


i8o         What  Cofistitutes  an  Office f 

IV.  15  officers ;  masters  of  choruses  and  heralds,  even  ambassadors, 
3  are  elected  by  vote  [but  still  they  are  not  political  officers]. 
Some  duties  of  superintendence  again  are  political,  extending 
either  to  all  the  citizens  in  a  single  sphere  of  action,  like 
the  office  of  the  general  who  superintends  them  when  they 
are  in  the  field,  or  to  a  section  of  them  only,  like  the 
inspectorships  of  women  or  of  youth.  Other  offices  are 
concerned  with  household  management,  like  that  of  the  com 
measurers  who  exist  in  many  states  and  are  elected  officers. 
There  are  also  menial  offices  which  the  rich  have  executed  by 
their  slaves.  Speaking  generally,  they  are  to  be  called  offices 
to  which  the  duties  are  assigned  of  deliberating  about  certain 
measures  and  of  judging  and  commanding,  especially  the  last; 
for  to  command  is  the  especial  duty  of  a  magistrate.  But  the 
question  is  not  of  any  importance  in  practice ;  no  one  has  ever 
brought  into  court  the  meaning  of  the  word,  although  such 
problems  have  a  speculative  interest. 

5  What  kinds  of  offices,  and  how  many,  are  necessary  to  the 
existence  of  a  state,  and  which,  if  not  necessary,  yet  conduce 
to  its  well-being,  are  much  more  important  considerations, 

6  affecting  all  states,  but  more  especially  small  ones.  For  in 
great  states  it  is  possible,  and  indeed  necessary,  that  every 
office  should  have  a  special  function;  where  the  citizens  are 
numerous,  many  may  hold  office.  And  so  it  happens  that 
vacancies  occur  in  some  offices  only  after  long  intervals,  or 
the  office  is  held  once  only ;    and  certainly  every  work  is 

1290  b  better  done  which  receives  of  the  sole ',  and  not  the  divided, 

7  attention  of  the  worker.  But  in  small  states  it  is  necessary 
to  combine  many  offices  in  a  few  hands*,  since  the  small 
number  of  citizens  does  not  admit  of  many  holding  office  : — 

»  Cp.  ii.  2,  §  6.  =*  Cp.  vi.  8. 


what  Constitutes  an  Office 


iXi 


for  who  will  there  be  to  succeed  them  ?  And  yet  small  IV.  16 
states  at  times  require  the  same  offices  and  laws  as  large  ones ; 
the  diiference  is  that  the  one  want  them  often,  the  others  only 
after  long  intervals.  Hence  there  is  no  reason  why  the  care  8 
of  many  offices  should  not  be  imposed  on  the  same  person, 
for  they  will  not  interfere  with  each  other.  When  the 
population  is  small,  offices  should  be  like  the  spits  which  also 
serve  to  hold  a  lamp  ^  We  must  first  ascertain  how  many 
magistrates  are  necessary  in  every  state,  and  also  how  many 
are  not  exactly  necessary,  but  are  nevertheless  useful,  and 
then  there  will  be  no  difficulty  in  judging  what  offices  can  be 
combined  in  one.  We  should  also  know  when  local  tribunals  9 
are  to  have  jurisdiction  over  many  different  matters,  and  when 
authority  should  be  centralized :  for  example,  should  one 
person  keep  order  in  the  market  and  another  in  some  other 
place,  or  should  the  same  person  be  responsible  everywhere  ? 
Again,  should  offices  be  divided  according  to  the  subjects 
with  which  they  deal,  or  according  to  the  persons  with  whom 
they  deal :  I  mean  to  say,  should  one  person  see  to  good 
order  in  general,  or  one  look  after  the  boys,  another  after  the 
women,  and  so  on  ?  Further,  under  different  constitutions,  10 
should  the  magistrates  be  the  same  or  different  ?  For 
example,  in  democracy,  oligarchy,  aristocracy,  monarchy, 
should  there  be  the  same  magistrates,  although  they  are 
elected,  not  out  of  equal  or  similar  classes  of  citizens,  but 
differently  under  different  constitutions — in  aristocracies,  for 
example,  they  are  chosen  from  the  educated,  in  oligarchies 
from  the  wealthy,  and  in  democracies  from  the  free — or  are 
there  different  offices  proper  to  different  constitutions*,  and 

1  Cp.  Note  on  i.  2.  §  3.  *  See  note. 


1 82  The  Executive  under 

IV.  15  may  the  same  be  suitable  to  some,  but  unsuitable  to  others  ? 
For  in  some  states  it  may  be  convenient  that  the  same  office 
should  have  a  more  extensive,   in  other  states  a  narrower 

11  sphere.  Special  offices  are  peculiar  to  certain  forms  of 
government: — for  example,  [to  oligarchies]  that  of  probuli, 
which  is  not  a  democratic  office,  although  a  bule  or  council  is. 
There  must  be  some  body  of  men  whose  duty  is  to  prepare 
measures  for  the  people  in  order  that  they  may  not  be  diverted 
from  their  business ;  when  these  are  few  in  number,  the  state 
inclines  to  an  oligarchy :  or  rather  the  probuli  must  always  be 

12  few,  and  are  therefore  an  oligarchical  element.  But  when 
both  institutions  exist  in  a  state,  the  probuli  are  a  check 
on  the  council ;  for  the  counsellor  is  a  democratic  element, 
but  the  probuli  are  oligarchical.  Even  the  power  of  the 
council  disappears  when  democracy  has  taken  that  extreme 

1300  a  form,  in  which  the  people  themselves  are  always  meeting  and 

1 3  deliberating  about  everything.  This  is  the  case  when  the 
members  of  the  assembly  are  wealthy  or  receive  pay ;  for 
they  have  nothing  to  do  and  are  always  holding  assemblies 
and  deciding  everything  for  themselves.  A  magistracy  which 
controls  the  boys  or  the  women,  or  any  similar  office,  is 
suited  to  an  aristocracy  rather  than  to  a  democracy ;  for  how 
can  the  magistrates  prevent  the  wives  of  the  poor  from  going 
out  of  doors  ?  Neither  is  it  an  oligarchical  office ;  for  the 
wives  of  the  oligarchs  are  too  fine  to  be  controlled. 

14  Enough  of  these  matters.  I  will  now  enquire  into  the 
appointment  of  offices.  There  are  three  questions  to  be 
answered,  and  the  combinations  of  answers  give  all  possible 
differences :  first,  who  appoints  ?  secondly,  from  whom  ?  and 

15  thirdly,  how?  Each  of  these  three  may  further  differ  in 
tliree  ways:   (i)  All  the  citizens,  or  only  some,   appoint; 


Different  Constitutions  183 

(2)  Either  the  magistrates  are  chosen  out  of  all  or  out  of  IV.  15 
some  who  are  distinguished  either  by  a  property  qualification, 
or   by   birth,   or   merit,   or  for  some  special   reason,   as   at 
Megara  only  those  were  eligible  who  had  returned  from  exile 
and  fought  together  against  the  democracy;   (3)  They  may 
be  appointed  either  by  vote  or  by  lot.     Again,  these  several  16 
modes  may  be  combined ;  I  mean  that  some  officers  may  be 
elected  by  some,  others  by  all,  and  some  again  out  of  some, 
and   others   out   of  all,   and  some   by  vote  and  others   by 
lot.     Each    of  these  differences   admits    of  four  variations.  17 
(i)  Either  all   may  elect  out  of  all  by  vote,  or  all  out  of 
all  by  lot ;  and  either  out  of  all  collectively  or  by  sections,  as, 
for  example,  by  tribes,  and  wards,  and  phratries,  until  all  the 
citizens  have  been  gone  through ;  or  the  citizens  may  be  in 
all  cases  eligible  indiscriminately,  and  in  some  cases  they  may 
be  elected  by  vote,  and  in  some  by  lot.     Again,  (2)  if  only  18 
some  appoint,  they  may  apix)int  out  of  all  by  vote,  or  out 
of  all  by  lot ;  or  out  of  some  by  vote,  out  of  some  by  lot,  and 
some   offices   may  be  appointed   in   one  way  and  some  in 
another;  I  mean  if  they  are  appointed  by  all  they  may  be 
appointed  partly  by  vote  and  partly  by  lot'.     Thus  there  will 
be  twelve  forms  of  apix)intment  without  including   the  two 
combinations  in  the  mode  of  election.     Of  these  varieties  two  19 
are  democratic  forms,  namely,  when  the  choice  is  made  by  all 
the  people  out  of  all  by  vote  or  by  lot,  or  by  both,  that  is  to 
say,  some  by  lot  and  some  by  vote.    The  cases  in  which  they 
do  not  all  appoint  at  one  time,  but  some  appoint  out  of  all  or 
out  of  some  by  vote  or  by  lot  or  by  both  (I  mean  some  by 
lot  and  some  by  vote),  or  some  out  of  all  and  others  out 

»  i.  e.  partly  out  of  all  and  partly  out  of  some,  and  partly  by  vote  and 
partly  by  lot  (see  infra  c.  16.  §  6). 


184  The  Executive 

IV.  16  of  some  both  by  lot  and  vote,  are  characteristic  of  a  polity  or 

20  constitutional  government.  That  some  should  be  appointed 
out  of  all  by  vote  or  by  lot  or  by  both,  is  oligarchical,  and  still 
more  oligarchical  when  some  are  elected  from  all  and  some 
from  some.  That  some  should  be  elected  out  of  all  and 
some  out  of  some,   or  again   some  by  vote  and  others  by 

1300  b  lot,  is  characteristic   of  a  constitutional  government,   which 

21  inclines  to  an  aristocracy.  That  some  should  be  chosen  out 
of  some,  and  some  taken  by  lot  out  of  some,  is  oligarchical 
*  though  not  equally  oligarchical  ^ ;  oligarchical,  too,  is  the 
appointment  of  some  out  of  some  in  both  ways,  and  of  some 
out  of  all.  But  that  all  should  elect  by  vote  out  of  some  is 
aristocratical. 

22  ■  These  are  the  different  ways  of  constituting  magistrates, 
and  in  this  manner  officers  correspond  to  different  forms 
of  government: — which  are  proper  to  which,  or  how  they 
ought  to  be  established,  will  be  evident  when  we  determine 
the  nature  of  their  powers  ^.  By  powers  I  mean  such  power 
as  a  magistrate  exercises  over  the  revenue  or  in  defence  of 
the  country ;  for  there  are  various  kinds  of  power  :  the  power 
of  the  general,  for  example,  is  not  the  same  with  that  which 
regulates  contracts  in  the  market. 

16  Of  the  three  parts  of  government,  the  judicial  remains 
to  be  considered,  and  this  we  shall  divide  on  the  same 
principle.  There  are  three  points  on  which  the  varieties 
of  law-courts  depend — the  persons  from  whom  they  are 
appointed,  the  matters  with  which  they  are  concerned,  and  the 
manner  of  their  appointment.  I  mean,  (i)  are  the  judges 
taken  from  all,  or  from  some  only  ?    (2)  how  many  kinds  of 

'  These  words  are  bracketed  by  Bekker  in  both  editions. 
'^  Omitting  «at  with  some  MSS.  and  the  old  translator. 


Different  Modes  of  Appointing  Judges  i  8  f 

law-courts  are  there  ?  (3)  are  the  judges  chosen  by  vote  or  IV.  16 
by  lot  ? 

First,  let  me  determine  how  many  kinds  of  law-courts  a 
there  are.  They  are  eight  in  number :  One  is  the  court  of 
audits  or  scrutinies ;  a  second  takes  cognizance  of  [ordinary] 
offences  against  the  state ;  a  third  is  concerned  with  treason 
against  the  government ;  the  fourth  determines  disputes  re- 
specting penalties,  whether  raised  by  magistrates  or  by  private 
persons ;  the  fifth  decides  the  more  important  civil  cases ; 
the  sixth  tries  cases  of  homicide,  which  are  of  various  kinds,  3 
(a)  premeditated,  (6)  unpremeditated,  (c)  cases  in  which  the 
guilt  is  confessed  but  the  justice  is  disputed ;  and  there  may 
be  a  fourth  court  (d)  in  which  murderers  who  have  fled  from 
justice  are  tried  after  their  return  ;  such  as  the  Court  of 
Phreatto  is  said  to  be  at  Athens.  But  cases  of  this  sort 
rarely  happen  at  all  even  in  large  cities.  The  different  kinds 
of  homicide  may  be  tried  either  by  the  same  or  by  different 
courts.  (7)  There  are  courts  for  strangers  : — of  these  there  4 
are  two  subdivisions,  (a)  for  the  settlement  of  their  disputes 
with  one  another,  (ft)  for  the  settlement  of  disputes  between 
them  and  the  citizens.  And  besides  all  these  there  must  be 
(8)  courts  for  small  suits  about  sums  of  a  drachma  up  to  five 
drachmas,  or  a  little  more,  which  have  to  be  determined,  but 
they  do  not  require  many  judges. 

Nothing  more  need  be  said  of  these  small  suits,  nor  of  the  5 
courts  for  homicide  and  for  strangers  : — I  would  rather  speak 
of  political  cases,  which,  when  mismanaged,  create  division  and 
disturbances  in  states. 

Now  if  all  the  citizens  judge,  in  all  the  different  cases 
which  I  have  distinguished,  they  may  be  appointed  by  vote 
or  by  lot,  or  sometimes  by  lot  and  sometimes  by  vote.     Or 


I  8  <^    Different  IModes  of  Appointing  Judges 

IV.  16  when  a  certain  class  of  causes  are  tried,  the  judges  who  de- 
cide them  may  be  appointed,  some  by  vote,  and  some  by  lot. 
1301  a  These  then  are  the  four  modes  of  appointing  judges  from  the 

6  whole  people,  and  there  will  be  likewise  four  modes,  if  they 
are  elected  from  a  part  only ;  for  they  may  be  appointed  from 
some  by  vote  and  judge  in  all  causes;  or  they  may  be 
appointed  from  some  by  lot  and  judge  in  all  causes ;  or  they 
may  be  elected  in  some  cases  by  vote,  and  in  some  cases  taken 
by  lot,  or  some  courts,  even  when  judging  the  same  causes, 
may  be  composed  of  members  some  appointed  by  vote  and 
some  by  lot.  These  then  are  the  ways  in  which  the  aforesaid 
judges  may  be  appointed. 

7  Once  more,  the  modes  of  appointment  may  be  combined, 
I  mean,  that  some  may  be  chosen  out  of  the  whole  people, 
others  out  of  some,  some  out  of  both  ;  for  example,  the 
same  tribunal  may  be  composed  of  some  who  were  elected 
out  of  all,  and  of  others  who  were  elected  out  of  some,  either 
by  vote  or  by  lot  or  by  both. 

>^  In  how  many  forms  law-courts  can  be  established  has  now 
been  considered.  The  first  form,  viz.  that  in  which  the 
judges  are  taken  from  all  the  citizens,  and  in  which  all 
causes  are  tried,  is  democratical ;  the  second,  which  is  com- 
posed of  a  few  only  who  try  all  causes,  oligarchical ;  the 
third,  in  which  some  courts  are  taken  from  all  classes,  and 
some  from  certain  classes  only,  aristocratical  and  constitu- 
tional. 


BOOK  V 

The  design  which  we  proposed  to  ourselves  is  now  nearly  V.  1 
completed  ^  Next  in  order  follow  the  causes  of  revolution 
in  states,  how  many,  and  of  what  nature  they  are ;  what 
elements  work  min  in  particular  states,  and  out  of  what,  and 
into  what  they  mostly  change  ;  also  what  are  the  elements  of 
preservation  in  states  generally,  or  in  a  particular  state,  and 
by  what  means  each  state  may  be  best  preserved :  these 
questions  remain  to  be  considered. 

In  the  first  place  we  must  assume  as  our  starting-point  2 
that  in  the  many  forms  of  government  which  have  sprung  up 
there  has  always  been  an  acknowledgement  of  justice  and  ^ 
proportionate  equality,  although  mankind  fail  in  attaining 
them,  as  indeed  I  have  already  explained '.  Democracy,  3 
for  example,  arises  out  of  the  notion  that  those  who  are 
equal  in  any  respect  are  equal  in  all  respects ;  because  men 
are  equally  free,  they  claim  to  be  absolutely  equal.  Oligarchy 
is  based  on  the  notion  that  those  who  are  unequal  in  one 
respect  are  in  all  respects  unequal ;  being  unequal,  that  is,  in 
property,  they  suppose  themselves  to  be  unequal  absolutely. 
The  democrats  think  that  as  they  are  equal  they  ought  to  be  4 

*  Cp.  iv.  c.  2. 

'^  Reading  kou  with  the  MSS.  and  Bekker's  ist  ed. 

'  Cp.  iii.  9.  §§  1-4. 


i88  J^evolutions  :  their  Causes 

V.  1  equal  in  all  things ;  while  the  oligarchs,  under  the  idea  that 
they  are  unequal,  claim  too  much,  which  is  one  form  of 
6  inequality.  All  these  forms  of  government  have  a  kind  of 
justice,  but,  tried  by  an  absolute  standard,  they  are  faulty ; 
and,  therefore,  both  parties,  whenever  their  share  in  the 
government  does  not  accord  with  their  preconceived  ideas, 

6  stir  up  revolution.     Those  who  excel  in  virtue  have  the  best 
1301  b  right  of  all  to  rebel  (for  they  alone  can  with  reason  be  deemed 

absolutely  unequal)  \  but  then  they  are  of  all  men  the  least 

7  inclined  to  do  so  ^.  There  is  also  a  superiority  which  is 
claimed  by  men  of  rank ;  for  they  are  thought  noble  because 
they  spring  from   wealthy  and    virtuous   ancestors  ^.     Here 

8  then,  so  to  speak,  are  opened  the  very  springs  and  fountains 
of  revolution  ;  and  hence  arise  two  sorts  of  changes  in  govern- 
ments ;  the  one  affecting  the  constitution,  when  men  seek  to 
change  from  an  existing  form  into  some  other,  for  example, 
from  democracy  into  oligarchy,  and  from  oligarchy  into  demo- 
cracy, or  from  either  of  them  into  constitutional  government  or 
aristocracy,  and  conversely  ;  the  other  not  affecting  the  con- 
stitution, when,  without  disturbing  the  form  of  government, 
whether  oligarchy,  or  monarchy,  or  any  otlier,  they  try  to  get 

9  the  administration  into  their  own  hands  *.  Further,  there  is 
a  question  of  degree ;  an  oligarchy,  for  example,  may  become 
more  or  less  oligarchical,  and  a  democracy  more  or  less  demo- 
cratical ;  and  in  like  manner  the  characteristics  of  the  other 
forms  of  government  may  be  more  or  less  strictly  maintained. 

lo  Or,  the  revolution  may  be  directed  against  a  portion  of  the 
constitution  only,  e.g.  the  establishment  or  overthrow  of 
a   particular  office :    as  at  Sparta  it  is  said  that  Lysander 

^  Cp.  iii.  13.  §  25.  =•  Cp.  c.  4.  §  12. 

■'  Cp.  iv.  8.  §  9.  ♦  Cp.  iv.  6.  §  3. 


The  Desire  of  Equality  189 

attempted  to  overthrow  the  monarchy,  and  king  Pausanias  ^  V.  1 
the  ephoralty.  At  Epidamnus,  too,  the  change  was  partial. 
For  instead  of  phylarchs  or  heads  of  tribes,  a  council  was 
appointed ;  but  to  this  day  the  magistrates  are  the  only  1 1 
members  of  the  ruling  class  who  are  compelled  to  go  to  the 
Heliaea  when  an  election  takes  place,  and  the  office  of  the 
single  archon  '  [survives,  which]  is  another  oligarchical  feature. 
Everywhere  inequality  is  a  cause  of  revolution,  but  an  in- 
equality in  which  there  is  no  proportion,  for  instance,  a  per- 
petual monarchy  among  equals  j  and  always  it  is  the  desire  of 
equality  which  rises  in  rebellion. 

Now  equality  is  of  two  kinds,  numerical  and  proportional ;  i  a 
by  the  first  I  mean  sameness  or  equality  in  number  or  size ; 
by  the  second,  equality  of  ratios.    For  example,  the  excess  of 
three   over  two   is  equal   to  the  excess  of  two  over   one ; 
whereas  four  exceeds  two  in  the  same  ratio  in  which  two 
exceeds  one,  for  two  is  the  same  part  of  four  that  one  is  of 
two,  namely,  the  half.     As  I  was  saying  before  ^,  men  agree  13 
about  justice  in  the  abstract,  that  it  is  treating  others  according 
to  their  deserts,  but  there  is  a  difference  of  opinion  about  the 
application  of  the  principle ;  some  think  that  if  they  are  equal 
in  any  respect  they  are  equal  absolutely,  others  that  if  they  are 
unequal  in  any  respect  they  are  unequal  in  all.     Hence  there  14 
are  two  principal  forms  of  government,  democracy  and  oli- 
garchy ;  for  good  birth  and  virtue  are  rare,  but  wealth  and  1302  a 
numbers  are  more  common.     In  what   city  shall    we   find 
a  hundred  persons  of  good  birth  and  of  virtue  ?  whereas  the 
poor  everywhere  abound.     That  a  state  should  be  ordered, 
simply  and  wholly,  according  to  either  kind  of  equality,  is  not 

*  Cp,  vii.  14.  §  20.  ^  Cp.  iii.  16.  §  I. 

3  Cp.  §  2  ;  iii.  9.J§§  1-4. 


190     The  Great  Source  of  T^evolution 

V.  1  a  good  thing  ;  the  proof  is  the  fact  that  such  forms  of  govem- 

15  ment  never  last.  They  are  originally  based  on  a  mistake,  and, 
as  they  begin  badly,  cannot  fail  to  end  badly.  The  inference 
is  that  both  kinds  of  equality  should  be  employed  ;  numerical 
in  some  cases,  and  proportionate  in  others. 

Still  democracy  appears  to  be  safer  and  less  liable  to  revo- 

16  lution  than  oligarchy  '.  For  in  oligarchies  ^  there  is  the  double 
danger  of  the  oligarchs  falling  out  among  themselves  and  also 
with  the  people ;  but  in  democracies '  there  is  only  the  danger 
of  a  quarrel  with  the  oligarchs.  No  dissension  worth  men- 
tioning arises  among  the  people  themselves.  And  we  may 
fiuther  remark  that  a  government  which  is  composed  of  the 
middle  class  more  nearly  approximates  to  democracy  than  to 
oligarchy*,  and  is  the  safest  of  the  imperfect  forms  of 
government. 

2  In  considering  how  dissensions  and  political  revolutions 
arise,  we  must  first  of  all  ascertain  the  beginnings  and  causes 
of  them  which  affect  constitutions  generally.  They  may  be 
said  to  be  three  in  number ;  and  we  have  now  to  give  an  out- 
line of  each.  We  want  to  know  (i)  what  is  the  feeling? 
and  (2)  what  are   the  motives  of  those  who  make  them  ? 

3(3)  whence  arise  political  disturbances  and  quarrels  ?  The 
universal  and  chief  cause  of  this  revolutionary  feeling  has  been 
already  mentioned ;  viz.  the  desire  of  equality,  when  men  think 
that  they  are  equal  to  others  who  have  more  than  themselves ; 
or,  again,  the  desire  of  inequality  and  superiority,  when  con- 
ceiving themselves  to  be  superior  they  think  that  they  have 

3  not  more  but  the  same  or  less  than  their  inferiors ;  pretensions 
which  may  and  may  not  be  just.     Inferiors  revolt  in  order 

»  Cp.  iv.  II.  §  14.  *  Cp.  c.  6. 

*  Cp.  c.  5.  *  Omitting  ^  before  rSiv  ohirfow. 


Involutions  191 

that  they  may  be  equal,  and  equals  that  they  may  be  superior,  v.  2 
Such  is  the  state  of  mind  which  creates  revolutions.     The 
motives  for  making  them  are  the  desire  of  gain  and  honour, 
or  the  fear  of  dishonour  and  loss  ;  the  authors  of  them  want 
to  divert  punishment  or  dishonour  from  themselves  or  their 
friends.     The  causes  and  reasons  of  these  motives  and  dis-  4 
positions  which  are  excited  in  men,  about  the  things  which 
I  have  mentioned,  viewed  in  one  way,  may  be  regarded  as 
seven,  and  in  another  as  more  than  seven.     Two  of  them  5 
have   been    already  noticed  ^ ;    but   they  act  in   a   different 
manner,  for  men  are  excited  against  one  another  by  the  love 
of  gain  and  honour — not,  as  in  the  case  which  I  have  just 
supposed,  in  order  to  obtain  them  for  jthemselves,  but  at  seeing  1302  b 
others,  justly  or  unjustly,  engrossing  them.     Other  causes  are  6 
insolence,  fear,  love  of  superiority,  contempt,  disproportionate 
increase  in  some  part  of  the  state  ;  causes  of  another  sort  are 
election  intrigues,  carelessness,  neglect  about  trifles,  dissimi- 
larity of  elements. 

What  share  insolence  and  avarice  have  in  creating  revolu-  3 
tions,   and    how    they   work,   is   plain   enough.     When  the 
magistrates  are  insolent  and  grasping  they  conspire  against 
one  another  and  also  against  the  constitution  from  which  they 
derive  their  power,  making  their  gains  either  at  the  expense  of 
individuals  or  of  the  public.     It  is  evident,  again,  what  an  2 
influence  honour  exerts  and  how  it  is  a  cause  of  revolution.  Men 
who  are  themselves  dishonoured  and  who  see  others  obtaining 
honours  rise  in  rebellion ;  the  honour  or  dishonour  when  un- 
deserved   is   unjust,    and  just   when  awarded   according   to 
merit.     Again,  superiority  is  a  cause  of  revolution  when  one  3 
or  more  persons  have  a  power  which  is  too  much  for  the 
»  Supra  §§  2,  3. 


T  9  2  Causes  of  Involutions 

V.  3  state  and  the  power  of  the  government ;  this  is  a  condition  of 
affairs  out  of  which  there  arises  a  monarchy,  or  a  family 
oligarchy.  And,  therefore,  in  some  places,  as  at  Athens 
and  Argos,  they  have  recourse  to  ostracism '.  But  how 
much  better  to  provide  from  the  first  that  there  should  be 
no  such  pre-eminent  individuals  instead  of  letting  them  come 
into  existence  and  then  finding  a  remedy. 

4  Another  cause  of  revolution  is  fear.  Either  men  have 
committed  wrong,  and  are  afraid  of  punishment,  or  they  are 
expecting  to  suffer  wrong  and  are  desirous  of  anticipating 
their  enemy '^.  Thus  at  Rhodes  the  notables  conspired 
against  the  people  through  fear  of  the  suits  that  were  brought 

5  against  them.  Contempt  is  also  a  cause  of  insurrection  and 
revolution ;  for  example,  in  oligarchies — when  those  who 
have  no  share  in  the  state  are  the  majority,  they  revolt, 
because  they  think  that  they  are  the  stronger.  Or,  again,  in 
democracies,  the  rich  despise  the  disorder  and  anarchy  of  the 
state ;  at  Thebes,  for  example,  where,  after  the  battle  of 
Oenophyta,  the  bad  administration  of  the  democracy  led  to 
its  ruin.  At  Megara  the  fall  of  the  democracy  was  due 
to  a  defeat  occasioned  by  disorder  and  anarchy.  And  at 
Syracuse  the  democracy  was  overthrown  before  the  tyranny 
of  Gelo  arose  ;  at  Rhodes  before  the  insurrection. 

6  Political  revolutions  also  spring  from  a  disproportionate 
increase  in  any  part  of  the  state.  For  as  a  body  is  made 
up  of  many  members,  and  every  member  ought  to  grow 
in  proportion ',  that  symmetry  may  be  preserved,  but  loses 
its  nature  if  the  foot  be  four  cubits  long  and  the  rest  of  the 

130.3a  body  two  spans;  and,  should  the  abnormal  increase  be  one  of 

^  Cp.  iii.  13.  §  15.  "  Cp.  c.  5.  §  2. 

'  Cp.  iii.  13.  §  21. 


Occasions  of  Involutions  193 

quality  as  well  as  of  quantity,  may  even  take  the  form  of  V.  3 
another  animal :  even  so  a  state  has  many  parts,  of  which 
some  one  may  often  grow  imperceptibly ;  for  example,  the 
number  of  poor  in  democracies  and  in  constitutional  states. 
And  this  disproportion  may  sometimes  happen  by  an  accident,  7 
as  at  Tarentum,  from  a  defeat  in  which  many  of  the  notables 
were  slain  in  a  battle  with  the  lapygians  just  after  the 
Persian  War,  the  constitutional  government  in  consequence 
becoming  a  democracy ;  or,  as  was  the  case  at  Argos,  where 
after  the  losses  inflicted  in  '  the  Battle  of  the  Seventh  Day ' 
by  Cleomenes  the  Lacedaemonian,  the  Argives  were  com- 
pelled to  admit  to  citizenship  some  of  their  perioeci :  and  at 
Athens,  when,  after  frequent  defeats  of  their  infantry  in  the 
times  of  the  Peloponnesian  War,  the  notables  were  reduced 
in  number,  because  the  soldiers  had  to  be  taken  from  the 
roll  of  citizens.  Revolutions  arise  from  this  cause  in  8 
democracies  as  well  as  in  other  forms  of  government,  but  not 
to  so  great  an  extent.  When  the  rich  *  grow  numerous  or 
properties  increase,  the  form  of  government  changes  into  an 
oligarchy  or  a  government  of  families.  Forms  of  government  9 
also  change — sometimes  even  without  revolution,  owing  to 
election  contests,  as  at  Heraea  (where,  instead  of  electing 
their  magistrates,  they  took  them  by  lot,  because  the  electors 
were  in  the  habit  of  choosing  their  own  partisans) ;  or  owing 
to  carelessness,  when  disloyal  persons  are  allowed  to  find 
their  way  into  the  highest  offices,  as  at  Oreum,  where,  upon 
the  accession  of  Heracleodorus  to  office,  the  oligarchy  was 
overthrown,  and  changed  by  him  into  a  constitutional  and 
democratical  government. 

*  Reading  tvitopoiv. 

DAVIS  O 


194  Occasions  of  J^volutions 

V.  3  Again,  the  revolution  may  be  accomplished  by  small 
^o  degrees;  I  mean  that  a  great  change  may  sometimes  slip 
into  the  constitution  through  neglect  of  a  small  matter ;  at 
Ambracia,  for  instance,  the  qualification  for  office,  small 
at  first,  was  eventually  reduced  to  nothing.  For  the 
Ambraciots  thought  that  a  small  qualification  was  much  the 
same  as  none  at  all. 

1 1  Another  cause  of  revolution  is  difference  of  races  which  do 
not  at  once  acquire  a  common  spirit ;  for  a  state  is  not  the 
growth  of  a  day,  neither  is  it  a  multitude  brought  together 
by  accident.  Hence  the  reception  of  strangers  in  colonies, . 
either  at  the  time  of  their  foundation  or  afterwards,  has 
generally  produced  revolution ;  for  example,  the  Achaeans 
who  joined  the  Troezenians  in  the  foundation  of  Sybaris, 
being  the  more  numerous,  afterwards  expelled  them  ;  hence 

1 2  the  curse  fell  upon  Sybaris.  At  Thurii  the  Sybarites 
quarrelled  with  their  fellow-colonists  ;  thinking  that  the  land 
belonged  to  them,  they  wanted  too  much  of  it  and  were 
driven  out.  At  Byzantium  the  new  colonists  were  detected 
in  a  conspiracy,  and  were  expelled  by  force  of  arms;  the 
people  of  Antissa,  who  had  received  the  Chian  exiles,  fought 
with  them,  and  drove  them  out;  and  the  Zancleans,  after 
having  received  the  Samians,   were  driven  by  them  out  of 

13  their  own  city.  The  citizens  of  ApoUonia  on  the  Euxine, 
after  the  introduction  of  a  fresh  body  of  colonists,  had  a 
revolution ;    the    Syracusans,    after   the     expulsion    of  their 

1303  b  tyrants,   having  admitted   strangers  and  mercenaries  to   the 

rights   of   citizenship,    quarrelled   and    came   to  blows;  the 

people  of  AmphiiKjlis,  having  received  Chalcidian  colonists, 

were  nearly  all  expelled  by  them. 

'4      Now,  in  oligarchies  the  masses  make  revolution  under  the 


Occasions  of  Revolutions  1 9  y 

idea  that  they  are  unjustly  treated,  because,  as  I  said  before,  V. 
they    are   equals,    and   have    not   an    equal    share,    and    in 
democracies  the  notables  revolt,  because  they  are  not  equals, 
and  yet  have  only  an  equal  share. 

Again,  the  situation  of  cities  is  a  cause  of  revolution  when  15 
the  country  is  not  naturally  adapted  to  preserve  the  unity 
of  the  state.  For  example,  the  Chytrians  at  Clazomenae  did 
not  agree  with  the  people  of  the  island ;  and  the  people  of 
Colophon  quarrelled  with  the  Notians;  at  Athens,  too,  the 
inhabitants  of  the  Piraeus  are  more  democratic  than  those  who 
live  in  the  city.  For  just  as  in  war,  the  impediment  of  16 
a  ditch,  though  ever  so  small,  may  break,  a  regiment,  so  every 
cause  of  difference,  however  slight,  makes  a  breach  in  a 
city.  The  greatest  opposition  is  confessedly  that  of  virtue 
and  vice ;  next  comes  that  of  wealth  and  poverty ;  and 
there  are  other  antagonistic  elements,  greater  or  less,  of  which 
one  is  this  difference  of  place. 

In   revolutions  the    occasions   may    be   trifling,  but   great  4 
•nterests    are    at   stake.     Trifles  are    most   important  when 
they  concern  the  rulers,  as  was  the  case  of  old  at  Syracuse  ; 
for  the  Syracusan  constitution  was  once  changed  by  a  love- 
quarrel  of  two  young    men,  who  were   in  the  government. 
The  story  is  that  while  one  of  them  was  away  from  home  2 
his  beloved  was   gained  over  by  his  companion,  and  he   to 
revenge  himself  seduced  the  other's  wife.     They  then  drew 
all  the  members  of  the  ruling  class  into   their  quarrel  and 
made  a  revolution.     We  learn  from  this  story  that  we  should  3 
be  on  our  guard  against  the  beginnings  of  such  evils,  and 
should  put  an  end  to  the  quarrels  of  chiefs  and  mighty  men. 
The   mistake   lies    in    the    beginning — as    the  proverb  says, 
•  Well  begun  is   half  done ' — so  an  error  at  the  beginnmg, 
o  2 


1^6  Occasions  of  Revolutions^ 

V.  4  though  quite  small,  has  the  proportion  of  a  half  to  the  whole 

4  matter.  In  general,  when  the  notables  quarrel,  the  whole  city 
is  involved,  as  happened  in  Hestiaea  after  the  Persian  War. 
The  occasion  was  the  division  of  an  inheritance ;  one  of 
two  brothers  refused  to  give  an  account  of  their  father's 
property  and  the  treasure  which  he  had  found :  so  the  poorer 
of  the  two  quarrelled  with  him  and  enlisted  in  his  cause 
the  popular  party,  the  other,  who  was  very  rich,  the  wealthy 
classes. 

5  At  Delphi,    again,  a  quarrel   about  a  marriage  was  the 
1304  a  beginning  of  all  the  troubles  which  followed.  In  this  case  the 

bridegroom,  fancying  some  occurrence  to  be  of  evil  omen, 
came  to  the  bride,  and  went  away  without  taking  her. 
Whereupon  her  relations,  thinking  that  they  were  insulted 
by  him,  put  some  of  the  sacred  treasure  [among  his  offerings] 
while  he  was  sacrificing,  and  then  slew  him,  pretending  that 

6  he  had  been  robbing  the  temple.  At  Mitylene,  too,  a  dis- 
pute about  heiresses  was  the  beginning  of  many  misfortunes, 
and  led  to  the  war  with  the  Athenians  in  which  Paches  took 
their  city.  A  wealthy  citizen,  named  Timophanes,  left  two 
daughters;  Doxander,  another  citizen,  wanted  to  obtain  them 
for  his  sons,  but  he  was  rejected  in  his  suit,  whereupon 
he  stirred  up  a  revolution,  and  instigated  the  Athenians  (of 

7  whom  he  was  proxenus)  to  interfere.  A  similar  quarrel  about 
an  heiress  arose  at  Phocis  between  Mnaseas  the  father  of 
Mnason,  and  Euthycrates  the  father  of  Onomarchus ;  this 
was  the  beginning  of  the  Sacred  War.  A  marriage-quarrel 
was  also  the  cause  of  a  change  in  the  government  of 
Epidamnus.  A  certain  man  bethrothed  his  daughter  secretly 
to  a  person  whose  father,  having  been  made  a  magistrate, 
fined  the  father  of  the  girl,  and  the  latter,  stung  by  the  insult, 


and  the  Manner  of  Effecting  Them    197 

conspired  with  the  unenfranchised  classes  to  overthrow  the  V.  4 
state. 

Governments  also  change  into  oligarchy  or  into  democracy  8 
or  into  a  constitutional  government  because  the  magistrates,  or 
some  other  section  of  the  state,  increase  in  power  or  renown. 
Thus  at  Athens  the  reputation  gained  by  the  court  of 
the  Areopagus,  in  the  Persian  War,  seemed  to  tighten  the 
reins  of  government.  On  the  other  hand,  the  victory  of 
Salamis  \  which  was  gained  by  the  common  people  who 
served  in  the  fleet,  and  won  for  the  Athenians  the  empire  of 
the  sea,  strengthened  the  democracy.  At  Argos,  the  notables,  9 
having  distinguished  themselves  against  the  Lacedaemonians 
in  the  battle  of  Mantinea,  attempted  to  put  down  the  demo- 
cracy. At  Syracuse,  the  people  having  been  the  chief 
authors  of  the  victory  in  the  war  with  the  Athenians,  changed 
the  constitutional  government  into  democracy.  At  Chalcis, 
the  people,  uniting  with  the  notables,  killed  Phoxus  the 
tyrant,  and  then  seized  the  government.  At  Ambracia  ^,  the 
people,  in  like  manner,  having  joined  with  the  conspirators  in 
expelling  the  tyrant  Periander,  transferred  the  government  to 
themselves.  And  generally,  it  should  be  remembered  that  10 
those  who  have  secured  power  to  the  state,  whether  private 
citizens,  or  magistrates,  or  tribes,  or  any  other  part  or 
section  of  the  state,  are  apt  to  cause  revolutions.  For  either 
envy  of  their  greatness  draws  others  into  rebellion,  or  they 
themselves,  in  their  pride  of  superiority,  are  unwilling  to 
remain  on  a  level  with  others. 

Revolutions  break  out  when  opposite  parties,  e.g.  the  rich  r  i 
and  the  poor,   are    equally  balanced,  and  there   is  little   or  1304  b 

1  Cp.  ii.  12.  §  5;  viii.  6.  §  il. 

2  Cp.  supra  c.  3.  §  10,  and  infra  c.  10.  §  16. 


198  Occasions  of  Revolutions 

V.  4  nothing  between  them ;   for,  if  either  party  were  manifestly 

12  superior,  the  other  would  not  risk  an  attack  upon  them.  And, 
for  this  reason,  those  who  are  eminent  in  virtue  do  not  stir  up 
insurrections,  being  always  a  minority.  Such  are  the  beginnings 
and  causes  of  the  disturbances  and  revolutions  to  which  every 
form  of  government  is  liable. 

Revolutions  are   effected  in  two  ways,  by  force   and  by 
fraud.    Force  may  be  applied  either  at  the  time  of  making  the 

13  revolution  or  afterwards.  Fraud,  again,  is  of  two  kinds  ;  for 
(i)  sometimes  the  citizens  are  deceived  into  a  change  of 
government,  and.  afterwards  they  are  held  in  subjection  against 
their  will.  This  was  what  happened  in  the  case  of  the  Four 
Hundred,  who  deceived  the  people  by  telling  them  that  the 
king  would  provide  money  for  the  war  against  the  l>ace- 
daemonians,  and  when  the  deception  was  over,  still  endeavoured 
to  retain  the  government.  (2)  In  other  cases  the  people  are 
persuaded  at  first,  and  afterwards,  by  a  repetition  of  the 
persuasion,  their  goodwill  and  allegiance  are  retained.  The 
revolutions  which  affect  constitutions  generally  spring  from 
the  above-mentioned  causes  ^ 

5       And  now,  taking  each  constitution  separately,  we  must  see 
what  follows  from  the  principles  already  laid  down. 

Revolutions  in  democracies  are  generally  caused  by  the  in- 
temperance of  demagogues,  who  either  in  their  private  capacity 
lay  information  against  rich  men  until  they  compel  them 
to  combine  (for  a  common  danger  unites  even  the  bitterest 
enemies),  or  coming  forward  in  public  they  stir  up  the  people 
against  them.  The  truth  of  this  remark  is  proved  by  a 
2  variety  of  examples.  At  Cos  the  democracy  was  overthrown 
because  wicked  demagogues  arose,  and  the  notables  combined. 
'  Cp.  supra  c.  a.  §  I. 


T{ez>oItitions  in  Democracies  199 

At  Rhodes  the  demagogues  not  only  provided  pay  for  the  V.  5 
multitude,    but   prevented    them    from    making   good    to  the 
trierarchs  the    sums  which  had    been    expended    by    them ; 
and  they,  in  consequence  of  the   suits  which  were  brought 
against  them,  were  compelled  to  combine  and  put  down  the 
democracy  '.     The  democracy  at  Heraclea  was  overthrown  3 
shortly  after  the  foundation  of  the  colony  by  the  injustice  of 
the  demagogues,  which  drove  out   the  notables,  who  came 
back  in  a  body  and  put  an  end  to  the  democracy.     Much  in  4 
the  same  manner  the  democracy  at  Megara  ^  was  overturned ; 
there  the  demagogues   drove  out   many   of  the  notables  in 
order  that  they  might  be  able  to  confiscate  their  property.  At 
length  the  exiles,  becoming  numerous,  returned,  and  engaging 
and  defeating  the  people,  established  an  oligarchy.    The  same  1305  a 
thing  happened  with  the  democracy  of  Cyme  which  was  over- 
thrown by  Thrasymachus.  And  we  may  observe  that  in  most  5 
states  the  changes  have  been  of  this  character.  For  sometimes 
the  demagogues,   in  order  to  curry  favour  with  the  people, 
wrong  the  notables  and  so  force  them  to  combine ; — either 
they    make    a  division  of  their    property,  or  diminish  their 
incomes  by  the  imposition  of  public  services,  and  sometimes 
they  bring  accusations  against  the  rich  that  they  may  have 
their  wealth  to  confiscate  ^. 

Of  old,  the  demagogue  was  also  a  general,  and  then  demo-  6 
cracles  changed  into  tyrannies.     Most  of  the  ancient  tyrants 
were  originally  demagogues  S     They  are  not  so  now,   but  7  , 
they  were  then  ;  and  the  reason  is  that  they  were  generals 
and  not  orators,  for  oratory  had  not  yet  come  into  fashion. 
Whereas  in  our  day,  when  the  art  of  rhetoric  has  made  such 

1  Cp.  supra  c.  3.  §  4.  ^  Cp.  c.  3,  §  5,  and  iv    15.  §  15. 

3  Cp.  iufra  c.  8.  §  20.         *  Cp.  c.  10.  §  4 ;  Plato,  Rep.  vm.  565  d. 


2  00      The  Demagogue  and  the  Tyrant 

V.  5  progress,  the  orators  lead  the  people,  but  their  ignorance  of 
military  matters  prevents  them  from  usurping  power  ;  at  any 

8  rate  instances  to  the  contrary  are  few  and  slight.  Formerly 
tyrannies  were  more  common  than  they  are  now,  because 
great  power  was  often  placed  in  the  hands  of  individuals ; 
thus  a  tyranny  arose  at  Miletus  out  of  the  office  of  the  Pry- 
tanis,  who  had  supreme  authority  in  many  important  matters*. 
Moreover,  in  those  days,  when  cities  were  not  large,  the 
people  dwelt  in  the  fields,  busy  at  their  work  ;  and  their  chiefs, 

9  if  they  possessed  any  military  talent,  seized  the  opportunity, 
and  winning  the  confidence  of  the  masses  by  professing  their 
hatred  of  the  wealthy,  they  succeeded  in  obtaining  the  tyranny. 
Thus  at  Athens  Peisistratus  led  a  faction  against  the  men  of 
the  plain  ^,  and  Theagenes  at  Megara  slaughtered  the  cattle 
of  the  wealthy,  which  he  found  by  the  river  side  where  they 

10  had  put  them  to  graze.  Dionysius,  again,  was  thought  worthy 
of  the  tyranny  because  he  denounced  Daphnaeus  and  the  rich  ; 
his  enmity  to  the  notables  won  for  him  the  confidence  of  the 
people.  Changes  also  take  place  from  the  ancient  to  the* 
latest  form  of  democracy ;  for  where  there  is  a  popular  elec- 
tion of  the  magistrates  and  no  property  qualification,  the 
aspirants  for  office  get  hold  of  the  people,  and  contrive  at 

11  last  even  to  set  them  above  the  laws.  A  more  or  less  com- 
plete cure  for  this  state  of  things  is  for  the  separate  tribes, 
and  not  the  whole  people,  to  elect  the  magistrates. 

These  are  the  principal   causes  of  revolutions  in   demo- 
cracies. 
6      There  are  two  patent  causes  of  revolutions  in  oligarchies 
[one  coming  from  without,  the  other  from  within  the  govern- 
ment] :   (i)  First,    when   the  oligarchs  oppress  the  jieople, 
'  Cp.  infra  c.  lO.  §  5.  ^  See  Herod,  i.  59. 


Revolutions  in  Oligarchies  201 

for   then   anybody    is  good   enough   to   be   their  champion,  V.  6 
especially    if  he  be  himself  a  member    of  the  oligarchy,    as  1305  b 
Lygdamis  at  Naxos,  who  afterwards  came  to  be  tyrant.     But  2 
revolutions  which  commence  outside  the  governing  class  may 
be  further  subdivided.     Sometimes,  when  the  government  is 
very  exclusive,  the  revolution  is  brought  about  by  persons  of 
the  wealthy  class  who  are  excluded,  as  happened  at  Massalia 
and  Istros  and  Heraclea,  and  other  cities.     Those  who  had  3 
no  share  in  the  government  created  a  disturbance,  until  first 
the  elder  brothers,  and  then  the  younger,  were  admitted ;  for 
in  some  places  father  and  son,  in  others  elder  and  younger 
brothers,  do  not  hold  office  together.     At  Massalia  the  oli- 
garchy became  more  like  a  constitutional  government,  but  at 
Istros  ended  in  a  democracy,  and  at  Heraclea  was  enlarged 
to  600.     At  Cnidos,  again,  the  oligarchy  underwent  a  con-  4 
siderable  change.    For  the  notables  fell  out  among  themselves, 
because  only  a  few  shared  in  the  government ;  there  existed 
among  them  the  rule  already  mentioned,  that  father  and  son 
could   not  hold  office  together,    and,    if  there  were  several 
brothers,   only  the  eldest  was  admitted.     The  people  took 
advantage  of  the  quarrel,  and  choosing  one  of  the  notables  to 
be  their  leader,  attacked  and  conquered  the  oligarchs,  who 
were  divided,  and  division  is  always  a  source  of  weakness. 
The  city  of  Erythrae,  too,  in  old  times  was  ruled,  and  ruled  5 
well,  by  the  Basilidae,   but  the  people  took  offence  at  the 
narrowness  of  the  oligarchy  and  changed  the  government. 

(2)  Of  internal  causes  of  revolutions  in  oligarchies  one  is 
the  personal  rivalry  of  the  oligarchs,  which   leads  them  to 
play  the  demagogue.     Now,  the  oligarchical  demagogue  is  of  6 
two  sorts  :  either  (i)  he  practises  upon  the  oligarchs  them- 
selves (for,  although  the  oligarchy  are  quite  a  small  number, 


202    Their  Causes  External  and  Internal 

V.  6  there  may  be  a  demagogue  among  them,  as  at  Athens  the 
party  of  Charicles  predominated  among  the  Thirty,  that  of 
Phrynichus  in  the  Four  Hundred)  ;  or  {2)  the  oligarchs  may 
play  the  demagogue  with  the  people.  This  was  the  case  at 
Larissa,  where  the  guardians  of  the  citizens  endeavoured  to 
gain  over  the  people  because  they  were  elected  by  them ;  and 
such  is  the  fate  of  all  oligarchies  in  which  the  magistrates  are 
elected,  as  at  Abydos,  not  by  the  class  to  which  they  belong, 
but  by  the  heavy-armed  or  by  the  jjeople,  although  they  may 
be  required  to  have  a  high  qualification,  or  to  be  members  of 

7  a  political  club ;  or,  again,  where  the  law-courts  are  inde- 
pendent of  the  government,  the  oligarchs  flatter  the  people  in 
order  to  obtain  a  decision  in  their  own  favour,  and  so  they 
change  the  constitution  ;  this  happened  at  Heraclea  in  Pontus. 
Again,  oligarchies  change  whenever  any  attempt  is  made  to 
narrow  them  ;  for  then  those  who  desire  equal  rights  are  com- 

8  pelled  to  call  in  the  people.  Changes  in  the  oligarchy  also 
occur  when  the  oligarchs  waste  their  private  property  by 
extravagant   living ;    for    then   they  want   to    innovate,   and 

1306  a  either  try  to  make  themselves  tyrants,  or  install  some  one  else 
in  the  tyranny,  as  Hipparinus  did  Dionysius  at  Syracuse,  and 
as  at  Amphipolis  ^  a  man  named  Cleotimus  introduced  Chal- 
cidian  colonists,   and  when  they  arrived,   stirred   them   up 

9  against  the  rich.  For  a  like  reason  in  Aegina  the  person 
who  carried  on  the  negotiation  with  Chares  endeavoured  to 
revolutionize  the  state.  Sometimes  a  party  among  the  oli- 
garchs try  to  create  a  political  change ;  sometimes  they  rob 
the  treasury,  and  then,  either  the  other  oligarchs  quarrel  with 
the  thieves,  as  happened  at  Apollonia  in  Pontus,  or  they  with 
the  other   oligarchs.     But  an   oligarchy   which    is  at  unity 

1  Cp.  c.  3.  §  13. 


oligarchy^  Dangers  in  "Peace  and  War  203 

with  itself  is  not  easily  destroyed  from  within ;  of  this  we  V.  6 
may  see  an  example  at  Pharsalus,  for  there,   although  the  lo 
rulers  are  few  in  number,  they  govern  a  large  city,  because 
they  have  a  good  understanding  among  themselves. 

Oligarchies,  again,  are  overthrown  when  another  oligarchy 
is  created  within  the  original  one,  that  is  to  say,  when  the  n 
whole  governing  body  is  small  and  yet  they  do  not  all  share 
in  the  highest  offices.     Thus  at  Elis  the  governing  body  was 
a  small  senate ;  and  very  few  ever  found  their  way  into"  it, 
because,  although  in  number  ninety,  the  senators  were  elected 
for  life  and  out  of  certain  families  in  a  manner  similar  to  the 
Lacedaemonian  elders.     Oligarchy  is   liable   to    revolutions  12 
alike  in  war  and  in  peace ;  in  war  because,  not  being  able  to 
trust  the  people,  the   oligarchs  are  compelled  to  hire  mer- 
cenaries, and  the  general  who  is  in  command  of  them  often 
ends  in  becoming  a  tyrant,  as  Timophanes  did  at  Corinth  ;  or 
if  there  are  more  generals  than  one  they  make  themselves  into 
a  company  of  tyrants  ^     Sometimes  the  oligarchs,   fearing 
this  danger,  give  the  people  a  share  in  the  government  because 
their  services  are  necessary  to  them.     And  in  time  of  peace,  13 
from  mutual  distrust,  the  two  parties  hand  over  the  defence 
of  the  state  to  the  army  and  to  an  arbiter  between  the  two 
factions  who  often  ends  the  master  of  both.     This  happened 
at  Larissa  when  Simos  and  the  Aleuadae  had  the  government, 
and  at  Abydos  in  the  days  of  Iphiades  and  the  political  clubs. 
Revolutions  also  arise  out  of  marriages  or  lawsuits  which  lead  14 
to  the  overthrow  of  one  party  among  the  oligarchs  by  another. 
Of  quarrels  about  marriages  I  have  already  mentioned  ^  some 
instances  ;  another  occurred  at  Eretria,  where  Diagoras  over- 
turned the  oligarchy  of  the   knights  because  he   had  been 
1  hvvaayi'ia.  "  Cp.  c.  4.  §§  5-7. 


204  Revolutions  in  Oligarchies 

V.  e  wronged  about  a  marriage.     A  revolution  at  Heraclea,  and 

^5  another  at  Thebes,  both  arose  out  of  decisions  of  law-courts 

upon  a  charge  of  adultery ;  in  both  cases  the  punishment  was 

just,  but  executed  in  the  spirit  of  party,  at  Heraclea  upon 

1306  b  Eurytion,  and  at  Thebes  upon  Archias  ;  for  their  enemies 
were   jealous    of  them    and    so  had  them    pilloried    in    the 

1 6  agora.  Many  oligarchies  have  been  destroyed  by  some 
members  of  the  ruling  class  taking  offence  at  their  excessive 
despotism ;  for  example,  the  oligarchy  at  Cnidus  and  at 
Chios. 

Changes  of  constitutional  governments,  and  also  of  oli- 
garchies which  limit  the  office  of  counsellor,  judge,  or  other 
magistrate  to  persons   having  a  certain   money  qualification, 

17  often  occur  by  accident.  The  qualification  may  have  been 
originally  fixed  according  to  the  circumstances  of  the  time,  in 
such  a  manner  as  to  include  in  an  oligarchy  a  few  only,  or 
in  a  constitutional  government  the  middle  class.  But  after 
a  time  of  prosperity,  whether  arising  from  peace  or  some 
other  good  fortune,  the  same  property  becomes  many  times 
as  large,  and  then  everybody  participates  in  every  office ;  this 
happens  sometimes  gradually  and  insensibly,  and  sometimes 

1 8  quickly.  These  are  the  causes  of  changes  and  revolutions  in 
oligarchies. 

We  must  remark  generally,  both  of  democracies  and  oli- 
garchies, that  they  sometimes  change,  not  into  the  opposite 
forms  of  government,  but  only  into  another  variety  of_the 
same  class ;  I  mean  to  say,  from  those  forms  of  democracy 
and  oligarchy  which  are  regulated  by  law  into  those  which  are 
arbitrary,  and  conversely. 
7  In  aristocracies  revolutions  are  stirred  up  when  a  few  only 
share  in  the  honours  of  the  state ;  a  cause  which  has  been 


T{evoluttons  in  Oligarchies  205* 

already  shown  to  affect  oligarchies ;    for  an  aristocracy  is  V.  7 
a  sort  of  oligarchy,  and,  like  an  oligarchy,  is  the  government 
of  a  few,   although  the   few  are  the   virtuous  and  not  the 
wealthy ;   hence  the  two  are  often  confounded.     And  revo-  2 
lutions  will  be  most  likely  to  happen,  and  must  happen,  when 
the  majority  of  the  people  are  high-spirited,  and  have  a  notion 
that  they  are  as  good  as  their  rulers.     Thus  at  Lacedaemon 
the  so-called  Partheniae,  who  were  the  [illegitimate]  sons  of 
the  Spartan  peers,  attempted  a  revolution,  and,  being  detected, 
were  sent  away  to  colonize  Tarentum.     Again,  revolutions 
occur  when  great  men  who  are  at  least  of  equal  merit  are 
dishonoured  by  those  higher  in  office,  as  Lysander  was  by  3 
the  kings  of  Sparta  :  or,  when  a  brave  man  is  excluded  from 
the  honours  of  the  state,  like  Cinadon,  who  conspired  against 
the  Spartans  under  Agesilaus ;  or,  again,  when  some  are  very 
poor  and  others  very  rich,  a  state  of  society  which  is  most 
often  the  result  of  war,  as  at  Lacedaemon  in  the  days  of  the 
Messenian  War ;  this  is  proved  from  the  poem  of  Tyrtaeus,  4 
entitled  '  Good  Order' ;  for  he  speaks  of  certain  citizens  who  1307  a 
were  ruined  by  the  war  and  wanted  to  have  a  redistribution  of 
the  land.     Again,  revolutions  arise  when  an  individual  who 
is  great,  and  might  be  greater,  wants  to  rule  alone,  as  at  Lace- 
daemon, Pausanias,  who  was  general  in  the  Persian  War,  or 
like  Hanno  at  Carthage. 

Constitutional  governments  and  aristocracies  are  commonly  5 
overthrown  owing  to  some  deviation  from  justice  in  the  con- 
stitution itself;  the  cause  of  the  downfall  is,  in  the  former, 
the  ill-mingling  of  the  two  elements  democracy  and  oligarchy  ; 
in  the  latter,  of  the  three  elements,  democracy,  oligarchy,  and 
virtue,  but  especially  democracy  and  oligarchy.  For  to  com- 
bine these  is  the  endeavour  of  constitutional  governments; 


2o5     Involutions  in  Aristocracies^  etc. 

V.  7  and  most  of  the  so-called  aristocracies  have  a  like  aim  ^,  but 
6  differ  from  polities  by  the  addition  of  virtue ;  hence  some  of 
them  are  more  and  some  less  permanent.  Those  which 
incline  more  to  oligarchy  are  called  aristocracies,  and  those 
which  incline  to  democracy  constitutional  governments.  And 
therefore  the  latter  are  the  safer  of  the  two ;  for  the  greater 
the  number,  the  greater  the  strength,  and  when  men  are  equal 
1  they  are  contented.  But  the  rich,  if  the  government  gives 
them  power,  are  apt  to  be  insolent  and  avaricious ;  and,  in 
general,  whichever  way  the  constitution  inclines,  in  that  direc- 
tion it  changes  as  either  party  gains  strength,  a  constitutional 
government  becoming  a  democracy,   an  aristocracy,  an  oli- 

8  garchy.  But  the  process  may  be  reversed,  and  aristocracy 
may  change  into  democracy.  This  happens  when  the  poor, 
under  the  idea  that  they  are  being  wronged,  force  the  consti- 
tution to  take  an  opposite  form.  In  like  manner  constitutional 
governments  change  into  oligarchies.  The  only  stable  prin- 
ciple of  government  is  equality  according  to  proportion,  and 
for  every  man  to  enjoy  his  own. 

9  What  I  have  just  mentioned  actually  happened  at  Thurii  ^, 
where  the  qualification  for  office,  though  at  first  high,  was 
reduced,  and  the  magistrates  increased  in  number.  The 
notables  had  previously  acquired  the  whole  of  the  land 
contrary  to  law ;  for  the  government  tended  to  oligarchy,  and 
they  were  able  to  encroach.  But  the  people,  who  had  been 
trained  by  war,  soon  got  the  better  of  the  guards  kept  by  the 
oligarchs,  until  those  who  had  too  much  gave  up  their  land. 

10       Again,  since  all  aristocratical  governments  incline  to  oli- 
garchy, the  notables  are  apt  to  be  grasping ;  thus  at  Lacedae- 
mon,  where  property  has  passed  into  few  hands  ^,  the  notables 
'  Cp.  iv.  c.  7.  -  Cp.  c.  3.  §  12.  ^  Cp.  ii.  9.  §  14. 


J^evolutions  in  Mixed  Governments     207 

can  do  too  much  as  they  like,  and  are  allowed  to  marry  whom  v.  7 
they  please.     The  city  of  Locri  was  ruined  by  a  marriage 
connexion  with  Dionysius,  but  such  a  thing  could  never  have 
happened  in  a  democracy,  or  in  a  well-balanced  aristocracy. 

I  have  already  remarked  that  in  all  states  revolutions  are  n 
occasioned  by  trifles^.     In  aristocracies,  above  all,  they  are  of  1307  b 
a  gradual  and  imperceptible  nature.     The  citizens  begin  by 
giving  up  some  part  of  the  constitution,  and  so  with  greater 
ease  the  government  change  something  else  which  is  a  little 
more  important,  until  they  have  undermined  the  whole  fabric 
of  the  state.     At  Thurii  there  was  a  law  that  generals  should  1 2 
only  be  re-elected  after  an  interval  of  five  years,  and  some 
high-spirited  young  men  who  were  popular  with  the  soldiers 
of  the  guard,  despising  the  magistrates  and  thinking  that  they 
would  easily  gain  their  pui-pose,  wanted  to  abolish  this  law  and 
allow  their  generals  to  hold  perpetual  commands ;  for  they 
well  knew  that  the  people  would  be  glad  enough  to  elect  them. 
Whereupon  the  magistrates  who  had  charge  of  these  matters,  13 
and  who  are  called  councillors,  at  first  determined  to  resist, 
but  they  afterwards  consented,  thinking  that,  if  only  this  one 
law  was  changed,  no  further  inroad  would  be  made  on  the 
constitution.     But  other  changes  soon  followed  which  they  in 
vain  attempted  to  oppose ;  and  the  state  passed  into  the  hands 
of  the  revolutionists  who  established  a  dynastic  oligarchy. 

All  constitutions  are  overthrown  either  from  within  or  from  14 
without ;  the  latter,  when  there  is  some  government  close  at 
hand  having  an  opposite  interest,  or  at  a  distance,  but  powerful. 
This  was  exemplified  in  the  old  times  of  the  Athenian  and 
the  Lacedaemonian  supremacies;   the  Athenians  everywhere 

.    '  c.  4.  §  I. 


2o8         The  Preservation  of  States 

V,  7  put    down    the    oligarchies,    and   the    Lacedaemonians    the 
democracies  ^. 

1  have  now  explained  what  are  the  chief  causes  of  revolu- 
tions and  dissensions  in  states. 
8  We  have  next  to  consider  what  means  there  are  of  pre- 
serving states  in  general,  and  also  in  particular  cases.  In -the 
first  place  it  is  evident  that  if  we  know  the  causes  which 
destroy  states,  we  shall  also  know  the  causes  which  preserve 
them  ;  for  opposites  produce  opposites,  and  destruction  is  the 
opposite  of  preservation  ^. 

2  In  all  well-attempered  governments  there  is  nothing  which 
should  be  more  jealously  maintained  than  the  spirit  of 
obedience  to  law,  more  especially  in  small  matters ;  for 
transgression  creeps  in  unperceived  and  at  last  ruins  the  state, 
just  as  the  constant  recurrence  of  small  expenses  in  time  eats 

3  up  a  fortune.  The  change  does  not  take  place  all  at  once, 
and  therefore  is  not  observed ;  the  mind  is  deceived,  as  in  the 
fallacy  which  says  that  '  if  each  part  is  little,  then  the  whole 
is  little.'  And  this  is  true  in  one  way,  but  not  in  another,  for 
the  whole  and  the  all  are  not  little,  although  they  are  made  up 
of  littles. 

4  In  the  first  place,  then,  men  should  guard  against  the 
beginning  of  change,  and  in  the  second  place  they  should  not 

1308  a  rely  upon  the   political    devices   of  which    I    have    already 
spoken^,  invented  only  tp  deceive  the  people,  for  they  are 

5  proved  by  experience  to  be  useless.  Further  we  note  that 
oligarchies  as  well  as  aristocracies  may  last,  not  from  any 
inherent  stability  in  such  forms  of  government,  but  because  the 
rulers  are  on  good  terras  both  with  the  unenfranchised  and 

•  Cp.  iv.  II.  §  i8.  '■'  Cp.  Nic.  Eth.  v.  i.  §  4. 

»  Cp.  iv.  13.  §  I. 


How  to  avoid  Involution  209 

v/itli  the  goveining  classes,  not  maltreating  any  who  are  V. 8 
excluded  from  the  government,  but  introducing  into  it  the 
leading  spirits  among  them  ^  They  should  never  wrong  the 
ambitious  in  a  matter  of  honour,  or  the  common  people  in 
a  matter  of  money ;  and  they  should  treat  one  another  and 
their  fellow-citizens  in  a  spirit  of  equality.  The  equality  6 
which  the  friends  of  democracy  seek  to  establish  for  the 
multitude  is  not  only  just  but  likewise  expedient  among  equals. 
Hence,  if  the  governing  class  are  numerous,  many  democratic 
institutions  are  useful ;  for  example,  the  restriction  of  the 
tenure  of  offices  to  six  months,  that  all  those  who  are  of 
equal  rank  may  share  in  them.  Indeed,  equals  or  peers  when 
they  are  numerous  become  a  kind  of  democracy,  and  therefore 
demagogues  are  very  likely  to  arise  among  them,  as  I  have 
already  remarked  ^  The  short  tenure  of  office  prevents  oli-  7 
garchies  and  aristocracies  from  falling  into  the  hands  of 
families ;  it  is  not  easy  for  a  person  to  do  any  great  harm 
when  his  tenure  of  office  is  short,  whereas  long  possession 
begets  tyranny  in  oligarchies  and  democracies.  For  the 
aspirants  to  tyranny  are  either  the  principal  men  of  the  state, 
who  in  democracies  are  demagogues  and  in  oligarchies 
members  of  ruling  houses,  or  those  who  hold  great  offices, 
and  have  a  long  tenure  of  them  ^. 

States  are  preserved  when  their  destroyers  are  at  a  distance,  8 
and  sometimes  also  because  they  are  near,  for  the  fear  of  them 
makes  the  government  keep  in  hand  the  state.  Wherefore  the 
ruler  who  has  a  care  of  the  state  should  invent  terrors,  and 
bring  distant  dangers  near,  in  order  that  the  citizens  may  be  on 
their  guard,  and,  like  sentinels  in  a  night-watch,  never  relax 
their  attention.  He  should  endeavour  too  by  help  of  the  laws  9 
1  vi.  7.  §  4.       .  '      *  Supra  c.  6.  ^6.  '  Cp.  c.  5.  §  6, 

DAVIS  I  P 


2  r  o       Horv  to  avoid  Involution  in 

V.  8  to  control  the  contentions  and  quarrels  of  the  notables,  and  to 
prevent  those  who  have  not  hitherto  taken  part  in  them  from 
being  drawn  in.  No  ordinary  man  can  discern  the  beginning 
of  evil  \  but  only  the  true  statesman. 

10  As  to  the  change  produced  in  oligarchies  and  constitutional 
governments  '^  by  the  alteration  of  the  qualification,  when  this 
arises,  not  out  of  any  variation  in  the  census  but  only  out  of 
the  increase  of  money,  it  is  well  to  compare  the  general 
valuation  of  property  with  that  of  past  years,  annually  in  those 
cities  in  which  the  census  is  taken  annually,   and  in  larger 

1308  b  cities  every  third  or  fifth  year.  If  the  whole  is  many  times 
greater  or  many  times  less  than  when  the  rates  were  fixed  at 
the  previous  census,  there  should  be  power  given  by  law  to 
raise  or  lower  the  qualification  as  the  amount  is  greater  or  less. 

11  Where  in  the  absence  of  any  such  provision  the  standard  is 
raised,  a  constitutional  government  passes  into  an  oligarchy, 
and  an  oligarchy  is  narrowed  to  a  rule  of  families ;  where 
the  standard  is  lowered,  constitutional  government  becomes 
democracy,  and  oligarchy  either  constitutional  government  or 
democracy. 

12  It  is  a  principle  common  to  democracy,  oligarchy^,  and 
every  other  form  of  government  not  to  allow  the  dispropor- 
tionate increase  of  any  citizen,  but  to  give  moderate  honour  for 
a  long  time  rather  than  great  honour  for  a  short  time.  For 
men  are  easily  spoilt ;  not  every  one  can  bear  prosperity.  But 
if  this  rule  is  not  observed,  at  any  rate  the  honours  which  are 
given  all  at  once  should  be  taken  away  by  degrees  and  not  all 
at  once.     Especially  should  the  laws  provide  against  any  one 

»  Cp.  c.  4.  §§  1-3.  *  Cp.  c.  3.  §  8 ;  c.  6.  §§  i6~i8. 

*  Or,    adding    Kal    fiovapxi^,    *  monarchy,'   with    many    MSS.    and 
Bekker's  first  edition. 


Oligarchy  and  Democracy 


21  I 


having  too  much   power,  whether  derived   from   friends  or  V .  8 
money ;  if  he  has,  he  and  his  followers  should  be  sent  out  of 
the  country*.     And  since  innovations  creep  in  through  the  13 
private  life  of  individuals,  there  ought  to  be  a  magistracy  which 
will  have  an  eye  to  those  whose  life  is  not  in  harmony  with 
the  government,  whether  oligarchy  or  democracy  or  any  other. 
And  for  a  like  reason  an  increase  of  prosperity  in  any  part  of 
the  state  should  be  carefully  watched.     The  proper  remedy  14 
for  this  evil  is  always  to  give  the  management  of  affairs  and 
offices  of  state  to  opposite  elements ;  such  opposites  are  the 
virtuous  and  the  many,  or  the  rich  and  the  poor.     Another 
way  is  to  combine  the  poor  and  the  rich  in  one  body,  or  to 
increase  the  middle  class :    thus  an  end  will  be  put  to  the 
revolutions  which  arise  from  inequality. 

But  above  all  every  state  should  be  so  administered  and  so  15 
regulated  by  law  that  its  magistrates  cannot  possibly  make 
money  ^.     In  oligarchies  special  precautions  should  be  used 
against  this  evil.     For  the  people  do   not  take  any  great  16 
offence  at  being  kept  out  of  the  government — indeed  they  are 
rather  pleased  than  otherwise  at  having  leisure  for  their  private 
business — but  what  irritates  them  is  to  think  that  their  rulers 
are  stealing  the  public  money  ;  then  they  are  doubly  annoyed ; 
for  they  lose  both  honour  and  profit.     If  office  brought  no  17 
profit,  then  and  then  only  could  democracy  and  aristocracy  be 
combined ;    for  both   notables  and  people  might  have  their  1309  a 
wishes  gratified.     All  would  be  able  to  hold  office,  which  is 
the  aim  of  democracy,  and  the  notables  would  be  magistrates, 
which   is  the  aim  of  aristocracy.     And  this  result  may  be  18 
accomplished  when  there  is  no  possibility  of  making  money 

»  Cp.  c.  3.  §  3;  iii.  13.  §  15.  2  Cp.  c.  12.  §  14, 

P  2 


212 


Oligarchy  and  Democracy  Preserved 


V.  8  out  of  the  offices ;  for  the  poor  will  not  want  to  have  them 
when  there  is  nothing  to  be  gained  from  them — they  would 
rather  be  attending  to  their  own  concerns ;  and  the  rich,  who 
do  not  want  money  from  the  public  treasury,  will  be  able  to 
take  them ;  and  so  the  poor  will  keep  to  their  work  and  grow 
rich,  and  the  notables  will  not  be  governed  by  the  lower  class. 

19  In  order  to  avoid  peculation  of  the  public  money,  the  transfer 
of  the  revenue  should  be  made  at  a  general  assembly  of  the 
citizens,  and  duplicates  of  the  accounts  deposited  with  the 
different  brotherhoods,  companies,  and  tribes.  And  honours 
should  be  given  by  law  to  magistrates  who  have  the  reputation 

20  of  being  incorruptible.  In  democracies  the  rich  should  be 
spared ;  not  only  should  their  property  not  be  divided,  but 

■  their  incomes  also,  which  in  some  states  are  taken  from  them 
imperceptibly,  should  be  protected.  It  is  a  good  thing  to 
prevent  the  wealthy  citizens,  even  if  they  are  willing,  from 
undertaking  expensive  and  useless  public  services,  such  as  the 
giving  of  choruses,  torch-races,  and  the  like.  In  an  oligarchy, 
on  the  other  hand,  great  care  should  be  taken  of  the  poor,  and 
lucrative  offices  should  go  to  them ;  if  any  of  the  wealthy 
classes  insult  them,  the  offender  should  be  punished  more 
severely  'than  one  of  their  own  class  for  a  like  offence*. 
Provision  should  be  made  that  estates  pass  by  inheritance  and 
not  by  gift,  and  no  person  should  have  more  than  one  inheri- 
tance ;  for  in  this  way  properties  will  be  equalized,  and  more 

21  of  the  poor  rise  to  competency.  It  is  also  expedient  both  in 
a  democracy  and  in  an  oligarchy  to  assign  to  those  who  have 
less  share  in  the  government  (for  example,  to  the  rich  in 
.1  democracy  and  to  the  poor  in  an  oligarchy)  an  equality  or 
preference  in  all  but  the  principal  offices  of  state.     The  latter 

^  Or,  '  than  if  he  had  wronged  one  of  his  own  class.' 


by  Loyalty  and  Moderation         213 

should  be  entrusted  chiefly  or  only  to  members  of  the  govern-  V.  8 
ing  class. 

There  are  three  qualifications  required  in  those  who  have 
to  fill    the  highest   offices — (i)  first  of  all,    loyalty  to  the  9 
established    constitution;     (2)    the    greatest    administrative 
capacity ;  (3)  virtue  and  justice  of  the  kind  proper  to  each 
form  of  government ;  for,  if  what  is  just  is  not  the  same  in  all 
governments,  the  quality  of  justice  must  also  differ.     There 
may  be  a  doubt  however,  when  all  these  qualities  do  not  meet  2 
in  the  same  person,  how  the  selection  is  to  be  made ;  suppose, 
for  example,  a  good  general  is  a  bad  man  and  not  a  friend  to  1309  b 
the   constitution,  and  another  man  is  loyal  and  just,  which 
should  we  choose  ?     In  making  the  election  ought  we  not 
to  consider  two  points  ?  what  qualities  are  common,  and  what 
are  rare.     Thus  in  the  choice  of  a  general,  we  should  regard 
his  skill  rather  than  his  virtue ;  for  few  have  military  skill,  3 
but  many  have  virtue.     In  keeping  watch  or  in  any  office  of 
stewardship,  on  the  other  hand,  the  opposite  rule  should  be 
observed ;    for  more  virtue  than  ordinary  is  required  in  the 
holder  of  such  an  office,  but  the  necessary  knowledge  is  of 
a  sort  which  all  men  possess. 

It  may,  however,  be  asked  what  a  man  wants  with  virtue  if  4 
he  have  political  ability  and  is  loyal,  since  these  two  qualities 
alone  will  make  him  do  what  is  for  the  public  interest.  But 
may  not  men  have  both  of  them  and  yet  be  deficient  in  self- 
control  ?  If,  knowing  and  loving  their  own  interests,  they  do 
not  always  attend  to  them,  may  they  not  be  equally  negligent 
of  the  interests  of  the  public  ? 

Speaking  generally,  we  may  say  that  whatever  legal  enact-  5 
ments  are  held  to  be  for  the  interest  of  states,  all  these  preserve 
states.     And  the  great  preserving  principle  is  the  one  which 


2  14  Preservatives  of 

V.  9  has  been  repeatedly  mentioned ' — to  have  a  care  that  the  loyal 

6  citizens  should  outnumber  the  disloyal.  Neither  should  we 
forget  the  mean,  which  at  the  present  day  is  lost  sight  of  in 
perverted  forms  of  government :  for  many  practices  which 
appear  to  be  democratical  are  the  ruin  of  democracies,  and 
many  which  appear  to  be  oligarchical  are  the  ruin  of  oligarchies. 

7  Those  who  think  that  all  virtue  is  to  be  found  in  their  own 
party  principles  push  matters  to  extremes ;  they  do  not  con- 
sider that  disproportion  destroys  a  state.  A  nose  which  varies 
from  the  ideal  of  straightness  to  a  hook  or  snub  may  still  be 
of  good  shape  and  agreeable  to  the  eye  ;  but  if  the  excess  be 
very  great,  all  symmetry  is  lost,  and  the  nose  at  last  ceases  to 
be  a  nose  at  all  on  account  of  some  excess  in  one  direction  or 
defect  in  the  other ;  and  this  is  true  of  every  other  part  of  the 

8  human  body.  The  same  law  of  proportion  equally  holds  in 
states.  Oligarchy  or  democracy,  although  a  departure  from 
the  most  perfect  form,  may  yet  be  a  good  enough  government, 
but  if  any  one  attempts  to  push  the  principles  of  either  to  an 
extreme,  he  will  begin  by  spoiling  the  government  and  end  by 

9  having  none  at  all.  Wherefore  the  legislator  and  the  states- 
man ought  to  know  what  democratical  measures  save  and 
what  destroy  a  democracy,  and  what  oligarchical  measures  save 
or  destroy  an  oligarchy.  For  neither  the  one  nor  the  other 
can  exist  or  continue  to  exist  unless  both  rich  and  poor  are 
included  in  it.     If  equality  of  property  is  introduced,  the  state 

1310  a  must  of  necessity  take  another  form ;  for  when  by  laws  carried 
to  excess  one  or  other  element  in  the  state  is  ruined,  the  con- 
stitution is  ruined, 
lo      There  is  an  error  common   both   to   oligarchies  and  to 
democracies: — in  the  latter  the  demagogues,  when  the  multi- 
'  Cp.  iv.  12.  §  I ;  vi,  6.  §  2. 


Oligarchy  and  Democracy  215- 

tude  are  above  the  law,  are  always  cutting  the  city  in  two  by  V.  8 
quarrels  with  the  rich,  whereas  they  should  always  profess  to 
be  maintaining  their  cause  ;  just  as  in  oligarchies,  the  oligarchs 
should  profess  to  maintain  the  cause  of  the  people,  and  should 
take  oaths  the  opposite  of  those  which  they  now  take.  For  ii 
there  are  cities  in  which  they  swear — '  I  will  be  an  enemy  to 
the  people,  and  will  devise  all  the  harm  against  them  which 
I  can ; '  but  they  ought  to  exhibit  and  to  entertain  the  very 
opposite  feeling ;  in  the  form  of  their  oath  there  should  be  an 
express  declaration — '  I  will  do  no  wrong  to  the  people.' 

But  of  all  the  things  which  I  have  mentioned,  that  which 
most  contributes  to  the  permanence  of  constitutions  is  the 
adaptation  of  education  to  the  form  of  government  ^,  and  yet 
in  our  own  day  this  principle  is  universally  neglected.  The  12 
best  laws,  though  sanctioned  by  every  citizen  of  the  state, 
will  be  of  no  avail  unless  the  young  are  trained  by  habit  and 
education  in  the  spirit  of  the  constitution,  if  the  laws  are 
democratical,  democratically,  or  oligarchically  if  the  laws  are 
oligarchical.  For  there  may  be  a  want  of  self-discipline  in 
states  as  well  as  in  individuals.  Now,  to  have  been  educated  13 
in  the  spirit  of  the  constitution  is  not  to  perform  the  actions  in 
which  oligarchs  or  democrats  delight,  but  those  by  which  the 
existence  of  an  oligarchy  or  of  a  democracy  is  made  possible. 
Whereas  among  ourselves  the  sons  of  the  ruling  class  in  an 
oligarchy  live  in  luxury  ^,  but  the  sons  of  the  poor  are  hardened 
by  exercise  and  toil,  and  hence  they  are  both  more  inclined 
and  better  able  to  make  a  revolution '.  And  in  democracies  14 
of  the  more  extreme  type  there  has  arisen  a  false  idea  of 
freedom  which  is  contradictory  to  the  true  interests  of  the 

»  Cp.  i.  13.  §  15.  =*  Cp.  iv.  II.  §  6. 

'  Cp.  PI.  Rep.  viii.  556  d. 


2i6  Origin  of  Tyranny 


V.  9  state.  For  two  principles  are  characteristic  of  democracy,  the 
15  government  of  the  majority  and  freedom.  Men  think  that 
what  is  just  is  equal ;  and  that  equality  is  the  supremacy  of 
the  popular  will ;  and  that  freedom  and  equality  mean  the 
doing  what  a  man  likes.  In  such  democracies  every  one  lives 
as  he  pleases,  or  in  the  words  of  Euripides,  '  according  to  his 
fancy.'  But  this  is  all  wrong ;  men  should  not  think  it 
slavery  to  live  according  to  the  rule  of  ;the  constitution ;  for  it 
is  their  salvation. 

I  have  now  discussed  generally  the  causes  of  the  revolution 

and  destruction  of  states,  and  the  means  of  their  preseiTation 

and  continuance. 

10       I  have  still  to  speak  of  monarchy,  and  the  causes  of  its 

destruction   and   preservation.     What    I    have    said   already 

1310  b  respecting  other  forms  of  government  applies  almost  equally 

2  to  royal  and  to  tyrannical  rule.  For  royal  rule  is  of  the 
nature  of  an  aristocracy,  and  a  tyranny  is  a  compound  of 
oligarchy  and  democracy  in  their  most  extreme  forms  ;•  it  is 
therefore  most  injurious  to  its  subjects,  being  made  up  of  two 
evil  forms  of  government,   and  having  the  perversions  and 

3  errors  of  both.  These  two  forms  of  monarchy  differ  in  their 
very  origin.  The  appointment  of  a  king  is  the  resource  of 
the  better  classes  against  the  j^eople,  and  he  is  elected  by 
them  out  of  their  own  number,  because  either  he  himself  or 
his  family  excel  in  virtue  and  virtuous  actions;  whereas  a 
tyrant  is  chosen  from  the  people  to  be  their  protector  against 
the  notables,  and  in  order  to  prevent  them  from  being  injured. 

4  History  shows  that  almost  all  tyrants  have  been  demagogues 
who  gained  the  favour  of  the  people  by  their  accusation  of  the 

5  notables  ^.     At  any  rate  this  was  the  manner  in  which  the 

•  Cp.  c.  5.  §  6 ;  Plato,  Rep.  565  d. 


Origin  of  Tyranny  217 

tyrannies  arose  in  the  days  when  cities  had  increased  in  power.  V.  10 
Others  which  were  older  originated  in  the  ambition  of  kings 
wanting  to  overstep  the  limits  of  their  hereditary  power  and 
become  despots.  Others  again  grew  out  of  the  class  which 
were  chosen  to  be  chief  magistrates ;  for  in  ancient  times  the 
jieople  who  elected  them  gave  the  magistrates,  whether  civil  or 
religious,  a  long  tenure.  Others  arose  out  of  the  custom 
which  oligarchies  had  of  making  some  individual  supreme  over 
the  highest  offices.  In  any  of  these  ^  ways  an  ambitious  man  6 
had  no  difficulty,  if  he  desired,  in  creating  a  tyranny,  since  he 
had  the  power  in  his  hands  already,  either  as  king  or  as  one  of 
the  officers  of  state  ^.  Thus  Pheidon  at  Argos  and  several 
others  were  originally  kings,  and  ended  by  becoming  tyrants ; 
Phalaris,  on  the  other  hand,  and  the  Ionian  tyrants,  acquired 
the  tyranny  by  holding  great  offices.  Whereas  Panaetius  at 
Leontini,  Cypselus  at  Corinth,  Peisistratus  at  Athens,  Diony- 
sius  at  Syracuse,  and  several  others  who  afterwards  became 
tyrants,  were  at  first  demagogues. 

And  so,  as  I  was  saying,  royalty  ranks  with  aristocracy,  for  7 
it  is  based  upon  merit,  whether  of  the  individual  or  of  his 
family,  or  on   benefits  conferred^,  or  on  these  claims  with 
power  added  to  them.    For  all  who  have  obtained  this  honour  8 
have  benefited,  or  had  in  their  power  to  benefit,  states  and 
nations ;  some,  like  Codrus,  have  prevented  the  state  from 
being  enslaved  in  war;  others,  like  Cyrus,  have  given  their 
country  freedom,  or  have  settled  or  gained  a  territory,  like  the 
Lacedaemonian,   Macedonian,  and  Molossian  kings*.     The  9 
idea  of  a  king  is  to  be  a  protector  of  the  rich  against  unjust  1311  a 

'  Retaining  Tourots,  which  is  omitted  in  Bekker's  second  edition, 
apparently  by  mistake. 

-  Cp.  c.  5.  §  8,  '      ^  Cp.  iii.  14.  §  12.  *  Cp.  c.  II.  §  2. 


21 8       Tyranny^  Oligarchy^  Democracy 

V.  10  treatment,  of  the  people  against  insult  and  oppression.  Whereas 
a  tyrant,  as  has  often  been  repeated,  has  no  regard  to  any 
public  interest,  but  only  to  his  private  ends ;  his  aim  is  plea- 

10  sur^,  the  aim  of  a  king,  honour.  Wherefore  also  in  their 
desires  they  differ ;  the  tyrant  is  desirous  of  riches,  the  king, 
of  what  brings  honour.  And  the  guards  of  a  king  are  citizens, 
but  of  a  tyrant  mercenaries  '. 

11  That  tyranny  has  all  the  vices  both  of  democracy  and 
oligarchy  is  evident.  As  of  oligarchy  so  of  tyranny,  the  end 
is  wealth ;  (for  by  wealth  only  can  the  tyrant  maintain  either 
his  guard  or  his  luxury).  Both  mistrust  the  people,  and 
therefore  deprive  them  of  their  arms.  Both  agree  too  in 
injuring   the  people  and  driving   them   out  of  the  city  and 

12  dispersing  them.  From  democracy  tyrants  have  borrowed  the 
art  of  making  war  upon  the  notables  and  destroying  them 
secretly  or  openly,  or  of  exiling  them  because  they  are  rivals 
and  stand  in  the  way  of  their  power ;  and  also  because  plots 
against  them  are  contrived  by  men  of  this  class,  who  either 

13  want  to  rule  or  escape  subjection.  Hence  Periander  advised 
Thrasybulus  '^  to  cut  off  the  tops  of  the  tallest  ears  of  com, 
meaning  that  he  must  always  put  out  of  the  way  the  citizens 
who  overtop  the  rest.  And  so,  as  I  have  already  intimated, 
the  beginnings  of  change  are  the  same  in  monarchies  as  in 
other  forms  of  government ;  subjects  attack  their  sovereigns 
out  of  fear  or  contempt,  or  because  they  have  been  unjustly 
treated  by  them.  And  of  injustice,  the  most  common  form 
is  insult,  another  is  confiscation  of  property. 

^^4      The    ends    sought    by    conspiracies    against    monarchies, 
whether  tyrannies  or    royalties,   are  the   same  as  the  ends 
sought  by  conspiracies  against  other  forms  of  government. 
'  Cp.  Hi.  14.  §  7.  *  Cp.  iii.  13.  §  16. 


The  Overthrow  of  Monarchies      219 

Monarchs  have  great  wealth  and  honour  which  are  objects  of  V.  10 
desire  to  all  mankind.  The  attacks  are  made  sometimes 
against  their  lives,  sometimes  against  the  office ;  where  the 
sense  of  insult  is  the  motive,  against  their  lives.  Any  sort  of  15 
insult  (and  there  are  many)  may  stir  up  anger,  and  when  men 
are  angry,  they  commonly  act  out  of  revenge,  and  not  from 
ambition.  For  example,  the  attempt  made  upon  the  Peisis- 
tratidae  arose  out  of  the  public  dishonour  offered  to  the  sister 
of  Harmodius  and  the  insult  to  himself.  He  attacked  the 
tyrant  for  his  sister's  sake,  and  Aristogeiton  joined  in  the 
attack  for  the  sake  of  Harmodius.  A  conspiracy  was  also  16 
formed  against  Periander,  the  tyrant  of  Ambracia,  because, 
when  drinking  with  a  favourite  youth,  he  asked  him  whether  1311  b 
by  this  time  he  was  not  with  child  by  him.  Philip,  too,  was 
attacked  by  Pausanias  because  he  permitted  him  to  be  insulted 
by  Attalus  and  his  friends,  and  Amyntas  the  little,  by  Derdas, 
because  he  boasted  of  having  enjoyed  his  youth.  Evagoras  of 
Cyprus,  again,  was  slain  by  the  eunuch  to  revenge  an  insult ; 
for  his  wife  had  been  carried  off  by  Evagoras'  son.  Many  17 
conspiracies  have  originated  in  shameful  attempts  made  by 
sovereigns  on  the  persons  of  their  subjects.  Such  was  the 
attack  of  Crataeus  upon  Archelaus  ;  he  had  always  hated  the 
connexion  with  him,  and  so,  when  Archelaus,  having  promised 
him  one  of  his  two  daughters  in  marriage,  did  not  give  him 
either  of  them,  but  broke  his  word  and  married  the  elder  to 
the  king  of  Elymaea,  when  he  was  hard  pressed  in  a  war 
against  Sirrhas  and  Arrhibaeus,  and  the  younger  to  his  own 
son  Amyntas,  under  the  idea  that  he  would  then  be  less  likely 
to  quarrel  with  the  son  of  Cleopatra — Crataeus  made  this 
slight  a  pretext  for  attacking  Archelaus,  though  even  a  less 
reason  would  have  sufficed,  for  the  real  cause  of  the  estrange- 


2  20      The  Overthrow  of  Monarchies 

V,  10  ment  was  the  disgust  which  he  felt  at  his  connexion  with  the 

1 8  king.  And  from  a  like  motive  Hellanocrates  of  Larissa  con- 
spired with  him  ;  for  when  Archelaus,  who  was  his  lover,  did 
not  fulfil  his  promise  of  restoring  him  to  his  country,  he 
thought  that  the  connexion  between  them  had  originated,  not 
in  affection,  but  in  the  wantonness  of  power.  Parrhon,  too, 
and  Heracleides  of  Aenos,  slew  Cotys  in  order  to  avenge 
their  father,  and  Adamas  revolted  from  Cotys  in  revenge  for 
the  wanton  outrage  which  he  had  committed  in  mutilating  him 
when  a  child. 

19  ^Many,  too,  irritated  at  blows  inflicted  on  the  person  which 
they  deemed  an  insult,  have  either  killed  or  attempted  to  kill 
officers  of  state  and  royal  princes  by  whom  they  have  been 
injured  ^  JThus,  at  Mitylene,  Megacles  and  his  friends 
attacked  and  slew  the  Penthalidae,  as  they  were  going  about 

I  and  striking  people  with  clubs.  At  a  later  date  Smerdis,  who 
had  been  beaten  and  torn  away  from  his  wife  by  Penthilus, 

20  slew  him.  In  the  conspiracy  against  Archelaus,  Decamnichus 
stimulated  the  fuiy  of  the  assassins  and  led  the  attack ;  he  was 
enraged  because  Archelaus  had  delivered  him  to  Euripides  to 
be  scourged ;  for  the  poet  had  been  irritated  at  some  remark 
made  by  Decamnichus  on  the  foulness  of  his  breath.  Many 
other  examples  might  be  cited  of  murders  and  conspiracies 
which  have  arisen  from  similar  causes. 

21  Fear  is  another  motive  which  has  caused  conspiracies  as 
well  in  monarchies  as  in  more  popular  forms  of  government. 
Thus  Artapanes  conspired  against  Xerxes  and  slew  him, 
fearing  that  he  would  be  accused  of  hanging  Darius  against 
his  orders— he  being  under  the  impression  that  Xerxes  would 

'  Or :  '  Many  persons  too,  even  of  those  connected  with  the  govern- 
ment or  the  royal  family,'  taking  twv  vtpi,  etc.  with  the  subject. 


caused  by  Insult^  Fear^  Contempt    221 

forget  what  he  had  said  in  the  middle  of  a  meal,  and  that  the  V.  10 

offence  would  be  forgiven. 

.  .  1312  a 

Another  motive  is  contempt,  as  in  the  case  of  Sardanapulus,  ^3 

whom  some  one  saw  carding  wool  with  his  women,  if  the 
story-tellers  say  truly ;  and  the  tale  may  be  true,  if  not  of  him, 
of  some  one  else  \  Dion  attacked  the  younger  Dionysius  23 
because  he  despised  him,  and  saw  that  he  was  equally  despised 
by  his  own  subjects,  and  that  he  was  always  drunk.  Even 
the  friends  of  a  tyrant  will  sometimes  attack  him  out  of  con- 
tempt ;  for  the  confidence  which  he  reposes  in  them  breeds 
contempt,  and  they  think  that  tliey  will  not  be  found  out. 
The  expectation  of  success  is  likewise  a  sort  of  contempt ;  24 
the  assailants  are  ready  to  strike,  and  think  nothing  of  the 
danger,  because  they  seem  to  have  the  power  in  their  hands. 
Thus  generals  of  armies  attack  monarchs ;  &s,  for  example, 
Cyrus  attacked  Astyages,  despising  the  effeminacy  of  his  life, 
and  believing  that  his  power  was  worn  out.  Thus,  again, 
Seuthes  the  Thracian  conspired  against  Amadocus,  whose 
general  he  was. 

And  sometimes  men  are  actuated"  by  more  than  one  motive,  25 
like  Mithridates,  who  conspired  against  Ariobarzanes,  partly 
out  of  contempt  and  partly  from  the  love  of  gain. 

Bold  natures,  placed  by  their  sovereigns  in  a  high  military 
position,  are  most  likely  to  make  the  attempt  in  the  expecta- 
tion of  success ;  for  courage  is  emboldened  by  power,  and  the 
union  of  the  two  inspires  them  with  the  hope  of  an  easy 
victory. 

Attempts  of  which  the  motive  is  ambition  arise  from  other 
causes.     There  are  men  who  will  not  risk  their  lives  in  the  26 
hope  of  gains  and  rewards  however  great,  but  who  nevertheless 
*  Cp.  i.  II.  §  8. 


222 


Overthrow  of  Monarchies 


V.  10  regard  the  killing  of  a  tyrant  simply  as  an  extraordinary  action 
which  will  make  them  famous  and  honourable  in  the  world ; 

27  they  wish  to  acquire,  not  a  kingdom,  but  a  name.  It  is  rare, 
however,  to  find  such  men ;  he  who  would  kill  a  tyrant  must 

28  be  prepared  to  lose  his  life  if  he  fail.  He  must  have  the 
resolution  of  Dion,  who,  when  he  made  war  upon  Dionysius, 
took  with  him  very  few  troops,  saying,  '  that  whatever  measure 
of  success  he  might  attain  would  be  enough  for  him,  even  if 
he  were  to  die  the  moment  he  landed ;  such  a  death  would  be 
welcome  to  him.'  But  this  is  a  temper  to  which  few  can 
attain. 

29  Once    more,   tyrannies,    like   all    other   governments,    are 
1312  b  destroyed  from  without  by  some  opposite  and  more  powerful 

form  of  government.     That  such  a  government  will  have  the 
will  to  attack  them   is  clear ;    for  the  two  are  opposed  in 

30  principle ;  and  all  men,  if  they  can,  do  what  they  will. 
Democracy  is  also  antagonistic  to  tyranny,  on  the  principle  of 
Hesiod,  '  Potter  hates  Potter,'  because  they  are  nearly  akin, 
for  the  extreme  form  of  democracy  is  tyranny ,  and  royalty 
and  aristocracy  are  both  alike  opposed  to  tyranny,  because 
they  are  constitutions  of  a  different  type.  And  therefore  the 
Lacedaemonians  put  down  most  of  the  tyrannies,  and  so 
did  the  Syracusans  during  the  time  when  they  weie  well 
governed. 

31  Again,  tyrannies  are  destroyed  from  within,  when  the 
reigning  family  are  divided  among  themselves,  as  that  of 
Gelo  was,  and  more  recently  that  of  Dionysius  ;  in  the  case  of 
Gelo  because  Thrasybulus,  the  brother  of  Hiero,  flattened  the 
son  of  Gelo  and  led  him  into  excesses  in  order  that  he  might 
rule  in  his  name.  Whereupon  the  family  conspired  to  get  rid 
of  Thrasybulus  and  save  the  tyranny ;  but  the  party  who  con- 


Especially  of  Tyrannies  223 

spired  ^  with  them  seized  the  opportunity  and  drove  them  all  V.  10 
out.     In    the   case   of  Dionysius,   Dion,   his   own   relative,  32 
attacked  and  expelled  him  with  the  assistance  of  the  people ; 
he  afterwards  perished  himself. 

There  are  two  chief  motives  which  induce  men  to  attack 
tyrannies — hatred  and  contempt.  Hatred  of  tyrants  is 
inevitable,  and  contempt  is  also  a  frequent  cause  of  their 
destruction.  Thus  we  see  that  most  of  those  who  have  33 
acquired,  have  retained  their  power,  but  those  who  have 
inherited  ^,  have  lost  it,  almost  at  once ;  for  living  in  luxurious 
ease,  they  have  become  contemptible,  and  offer  many  oppor- 
tunities to  their  assailants.  Anger,  too,  must  be  included 
under  hatred,  and  produces  the  same  effects.  It  is  oftentimes  34 
even  more  ready  to  strike — the  angry  are  more  impetuous  in 
making  an  attack,  for  they  do  not  listen  to  reason.  And  men 
are  very  apt  to  give  way  to  their  passions  when  they  are 
insulted.  To  this  cause  is  to  be  attributed  the  fall  of  the 
Peisistratidae  and  of  many  others.  Hatred  is  more  reasonable,  35 
but  anger  is  accompanied  by  pain,  which  is  an  impediment  to 
reason,  whereas  hatred  is  painless  ^. 

In  a  word,  all  the  causes  which  I  have  mentioned  as 
destroying  the  last  and  most  unmixed  form  of  oligarchy,  and 
the  extreme  form  of  democracy,  may  be  assumed  to  affect 
tyranny  ;  indeed  the  extreme  forms  of  both  are  only  tyrannies 
distributed  among  several  persons.  Kingly  rule  is  little  36 
affected  by  external  causes,  and  is,  therefore,  lasting;  it  is 
generally  destroyed  from  within.  And  there  are  two  ways 
in  which  the  destruction  may  come  about;    (i)  when  the  1313  a 

*  Omitting  Kar  inserted  by  Bekker  in  2nd  ed. 
"^  Cp,  Plato,  Laws,  iii.  695. 
^  Cp.  Rhetoric,  ii.  4.  §  31. 


2  24  Over  throw  of  Monarchies 

V.  10  members  of  the  royal  family  quarrel  among  themselves,  and 
(2)  when  the  kings  attempt  to  administer  the  state  too  much 

37  after  the  fashion  of  a  tyranny,  and  to  extend  their  authority 
contrary  to  the  law.  There  are  now  no  royalties  ;  monarchies, 
where  they  exist,  are  ^  tyrannies.  For  the  rule  of  a  king  is 
over  voluntary  subjects,  and  he  is  supreme  in  all  important 
matters ;  but  in  our  own  day  men  are  more  upon  an  equality, 
and  no  one  is  so  immeasurably  superior  to  others  as  to  repre- 
sent adequately  the  greatness  and  dignity  of  the  office.  Hence 
mankind  will  not,  if  they  can  help,  endure  it,  and  any  one  who 
obtains  power  by  force  or  fraud  is  at  once  thought  to  be 

38  a  tyrant.  In  hereditary  monarchies  a  further  cause  of  destruc- 
tion is  the  fact  that  kings  often  fall  into  contempt,  and, 
although  possessing  not  tyrannical  but  only  royal  power,  are 
apt  to  outrage  others.  Their  overthrow  is  then  readily 
efi^ected ;  for  there  is  an  end  to  the  king  when  his  subjects 
do  not  want  to  have  him,  but  the  tyrant  lasts,  whether  they 
like  him  or  not. 

The  destruction  of  monarchies  is  to  be  attributed  to  these 
and  the  like  causes. 
11       And  they  are  preserved,  to  speak  generally,  by  the  opposite 
causes;    or,  if  we  consider  them  separately,   (l)  royalty  is 
preserved  by  the   limitation  of  its  powers.     The  more   re- 
stricted the  functions  of  kings,  the  longer  their  power  will  last 
unimpaired ;    for  then   they  are  more  moderate  and  not  so 
despotic  in  their  ways;    and  they  are  less  envied  by  their 
2  subjects.     This  is  the  reason  why  the  kingly  office  has  lasted 
so  long  among  the  Molossians.     And  for  a  similar  reason  it 
has  continued  among  the  Lacedaemonians,  because  there  it 
was    always    divided  between   two,    and    afterwards  further 
'  Omitting  Kai  with  Btkker's  2n(l  ed. 


Preservattofi  of  Monarchies        225" 

limited  by  Theopompus  in  various  respects,  more  particularly  V.  11 
by  the  establishment  of  the  Ephoralty.  He  diminished  the 
power  of  the  kings,  but  established  on  a  more  lasting  basis 
the  kingly  office,  which  was  thus  made  in  a  certain  sense  not 
less,  but  greater.  There  is  a  story  that  when  his  wife  once  3 
asked  him  whether  he  was  not  ashamed  to  leave  to  his  sons 
a  royal  power  which  was  less  than  he  had  inherited  from  his 
father,  he  replied,  '  No  indeed,  for  the  power  which  I  leave 
to  them  will  be  more  lasting.* 

As    to   (2)  tyrannies,    they    are   preserved   in  two  most  4 
opposite  ways.     One  of  them  is  the  old  traditional  method  in 
which  most  tyrants  administer  their  government.     Of  such 
arts    Periander  of  Corinth  is  said   to  have   been  the  great 
master,  and  many  similar  devices  may  be  gathered  from  the 
Persians  in  the  administration  of  their  government.     There  5 
are   also   the  ancient   prescriptions    for    the    preservation    of 
a  tyranny,  in  so  far  as  this  is  possible ;  viz.  that  the  tyrant 
should  lop  off  those  who  are  too  high  ;  he  must  put  to  death 
men    oi    spirit :    he   must  not  allow  common  meals,   clubs, 
education,  and  the  like ;  he  must  be  upon  his  guard  against  1313  b 
anything  which  is  likely  to  inspire  either  courage  or  confidence 
among  his  subjects ;  he  must  prohibit  literary  assemblies  or 
other  meetings  for  discussion,  and  he  must  take  every  means 
to  prevent  people  from  knowing  one  another  (for  acquaintance 
begets    mutual   confidence).     Further,   he  must  compel   the  6 
inhabitants  to  appear  in  public  and  live  ^  at  his  gates  ^ ;  then 
he  will  know  what  they  are  doing ;  if  they  are  always  kept 
under,  they  will  learn  to  be  humble.     In  short,  he  should 
practise  these  and  the  like  Persian  and  barbaric  arts  which  all 
have  the  same  object.     A  tyrant  should  also  endeavour  to  7 
'  Or,  *  at  their  doors.' 

DAVIS  Q 


2.26  'The  Devices  of  Tyranny 

V.  11  know  what  each  of  his  subjects  says  or  does,  and  should 
employ  spies,  like  the  '  female  detectives '  at  Syracuse,  and 
the  eavesdroppers  whom  Hiero  was  in  the  habit  of  sending  to 
any  place  of  resort  or  meeting ;  for  the  fear  of  informers 
prevents  people  from  speaking  their  minds,  and  if  they  do, 

8  they  are  more  easily  found  out.  Another  art  of  the  tyrant  is 
to  sow  quarrels  among  the  citizens ;  friends  should  be 
embroiled  with  friends,  the  people  with  the  notables,  and  the 
rich  with  one  another.  Also  he  should  impoverish  his 
subjects ;  he  thus  provides  money  for  the  support  of  his 
guards ',  and  the  people,  having  to  keep  hard  at  work,  are 

9  ])revented  from  conspiring.  The  Pyramids  of  Egypt  afford 
an  example  of  this  policy ;  also  the  offerings  of  the  family  of 
Cypselus,  and  the  building  of  the  temple  of  Olympian  Zeus 
by  the  Peisistratidae,  and  the  great  Polycratean  monuments  at 
Samos ;  all  these  works  were  alike  intended  to  occupy  the 

10  ]ieople  and  keep  them  poor.  Another  practice  of  tyrants  is 
to  multiply  taxes,  after  the  manner  of  Dionysius  at  Syracuse, 
who  contrived  that  within  five  years  his  subjects  should  bring 
into  the  treasury  their  whole  property.  The  tyrant  is  also 
fond  of  making  war  in  order  that  his  subjects  may  have  some- 
thing to  do  and  be  always  in  want  of  a  leader.  And  whereas 
the  power  of  a  king  is  preserved  by  his  friends,  the  character- 
istic of  a  tyrant  is  to  distrust  hi»  friends,  because  he  knows 
that  all  men  want  to  overthrow  him,  and  they  above  all  have 
the  power  ^. 

'  Reading  ^  re  with  Bekker's  2nd  ed. 

^  This,  which  is  probably  the  meaning  of  the  passage,  cannot  be 
elicited  from  the  text  as  it  stands.  The  addition  is  required  of  jomc 
such  phrase  as  avjov  KaOeXftv,  which  is  not  wholly  without  manuscript 
authority. 


The  Ways  of  Tyranny  and  of  Tyrants  227 

Again,  the  evil  practices  of  the  last  and  worst  forms  of  V.  11 
democracy  are  all  found  in  tyrannies.     Such  are  the  power  '  • 
given  to  women  in  their  families  in  the  hope  that  they  will 
inform  against  their  husbands,  and  the  licence  which  is  allowed 
to  slaves  in  order  that  they  may  betray  their  masters ;  for 
slaves  and  women  do  not  conspire  against  tyrants ;  and  they 
are  of  course  friendly  to  tyrannies  and  also  to  democracies, 
since  under  them  they  have  a  good  time.     For  the  people  too 
would  fain  be  a  monarch,  and  therefore  by  them,  as  well  as  by  12 
the  tyrant,  the  flatterer  is  held  in  honour ;  in  democracies  he 
is  the  demagogue ;  and  the  tyrant  also  has  his  humble  com- 
panions who  flatter  him.  1314  a 

Hence  tyrants  are  always  fond  of  bad  men,  because  they 
love  to  be  flattered,  but  no  man  who  has  the  spirit  of  a  free- 
■  man  in  him  will  demean  himself  by  flattery ;  good  men  love 
others,  but  they  do  not  flatter  anybody.  Moreover  the  bad  13 
are  useful  for  bad  purposes ;  '  nail  knocks  out  nail,'  as  the 
proverb  says.  It  is  characteristic  of  a  tyrant  to  dislike  every 
one  who  has  dignity  or  independence  ;  he  wants  to  be  alone  in 
his  glory,  but  any  one  who  claims  a  like  dignity  or  asserts  his 
independence  encroaches  upon  his  prerogative,  and  is  hated  by 
him  as  an  enemy  to  his  power.  Another  mark  of  a  tyrant  is  14 
that  he  likes  foreigners  better  than  citizens,  and  lives  with 
them  and  invites  them  to  his  table ;  for  the  one  are  enemies, 
but  the  others  enter  into  no  rivalry  with  him. 

Such  are  the  notes  of  the  tyrant  and  the  arts  by  which  he 
preserves  his  power  ;  there  is  no  wickedness  too  great  for  him. 
All  that  we  have  said  may  be  summed  up  under  three  heads, 
which  answer  to  the  three  aims  of  the  tyrant.  These  are,  15 
( I )  the  humiliation  of  his  subjects ;  he  knows  that  a  mean- 
spirited  man  will  not  conspire  against  anybody:  (2)  the  crea- 
Q  2 


2  28  Preservation  of  Tyranny 

V.  11  ti9n  of  mistrust  among  them  ;  for  a  tyrant  is  not  overthrown 
until  men  begin  to  have  confidence  in  one  another ;  and  this 
is  the  reason  why  tyrants  are  at  war  with  the  good ;  they  are 
under  the  idea  that  their  |X)wer  is  endangered  by  them,  not 
only  because  they  will  not  be  loiled  despotically,  but  also 
because  they  are  loyal  to  one  another,  and  to  other  men,  and 
do   not  inform   against  one  another  or  against  other  men : 

16  (3)  the  tyrant  desires  that  his  subjects  shall  be  incapable  of 
action,  for  no  one  attempts  what  is  impossible,  and  they  will 
not  attempt  to  overthrow  a  tyranny,  if  they  are  powerless. 
Under  these  three  heads  the  whole  policy  of  a  tyrant  may  be 
summed  up,  and  to  one  or  other  of  them  all  his  ideas  may  be 
referred:  (l)  he  sows  distrust  among  his  subjects;  (2)  he 
takes  away  their  power ;  (3)  he  humbles  them. 

17  This  then  is  one  of  the  two  methods  by  which  tyrannies 
are  preserved ;    and   there   is  another  which  proceeds  upon 

18  a  different  principle  of  action.  The  nature  of  this  latter 
method  may  be  gathered  from  a  comparison  of  the  causes 
which  destroy  kingdoms,  for  as  one  mode  of  destroying 
kingly  power  is  to  make  the  office  of  king  more  tyrannical,  so 
the  salvation  of  a  tyranny  is  to  make  it  more  like  the  rule  of 
a  king.  But  of  one  thing  the  tyrant  must  be  careful ;  he 
must  keep  power  enough  to  rule  over  his  subjects,  whether 
they  like  him  or  not,  for  if  he  once  gives  this  up  he  gives  up 

19  his  tyranny.  But  though  power  must  be  retained  as  the 
foundation,  in  all  else  the  tyrant  should  act  or  appear  to  act  in 

1314  b  the  character  of  a  king.  In  the  first  place  he  should  pretend 
a  care  of  the  public  revenues,  and  not  waste  money  in  making 
presents  of  a  sort  at  which  the  common  people  get  excited 
when  they  see  their  miserable  earnings  taken  from  them  and 
lavished  on  courtesans  and  strangers  and  artists.     He  sliould 


The  Beneficent  Despot  229 

give  an  account  of  what  he  receives  and  of  what  he  spends  V.  11 
(a  practice  which  has  been  adopted  by  some  tyrants) ;  for 
then  he  will  seem  to  be  the  manager  of  a  household  rather 
than  a  tyrant ;  nor  need  he  fear  that,  while  he  is  the  lord  of  20 
the  city,  he  will  ever  be  in  want  of  money.  Such  a  policy  is 
much  more  advantageous  for  the  tyrant  when  he  goes  from 
home,  than  to  leave  behind  him  a  hoard,  for  then  the  garrison 
who  remain  in  the  city  will  be  less  likely  to  attack,  his  power ; 
and  a  tyrant,  when  he  is  absent  from  home,  has  more  reason 
to  fear  the  guardians  of  his  treasure  than  the  citizens,  for  the 
one  accompany  him,  but  the  others  remain  behind.  In  the  21 
second  place,  he  should  appear  to  collect  taxes  and  to  require 
public  services  only  for  state  purposes ;  and  that  he  may  form 
a  fund  in  case  of  war,  he  ought  to  make  himself  the  guardian 
and  treasurer  of  them,  as  if  they  belonged,  not  to  him,  but  to 
the  public.  He  should  appear,  not  harsh,  but  dignified,  and 
when  men  meet  him  they  should  look  upon  him  with  reverence, 
and  not  with  fear.  Yet  it  is  hard  for  him  to  be  respected  if  23 
he  inspires  no  respect,  and  therefore  whatever  virtues  he  may 
neglect,  at  least  he  should  maintain  the  character  of  a  states- 
man, and  produce  the  impression  that  he  is  one.  Neither  he 
nor  any  of  his  associates  should  ever  be  guilty  of  the  least 
offence  against  modesty  towards  the  young  of  either  sex  who 
are  his  subjects,  and  the  women  of  his  family  should  observe  23 
a  like  self-control  towards  other  women ;  the  insolence  of 
women  has  ruined  many  tyrannies.  In  the  indulgence  of 
pleasures  he  should  be  the  opposite  of  our  modern  tyrants, 
who  not  only  begin  at  dawn  and  pass  whole  days  in  sensuality, 
but  want  other  men  to  see  them,  that  they  may  admire  their 
happy  and  blessed  lot.  In  these  things  a  tyrant  should  be  24 
especially  moderate,  or  at  any  rate  should  not  parade  his  vices 


230  Preservation  of  Tyranny 

V.  11  to  the  world ;  for  a  drunken  and  drowsy  tyrant  is  soon 
despised  and  attacked ;  not  so  he  who  is  temperate  and  wide 
awake.  His  conduct  should  be  the  very  reverse  of  nearly 
everything  which  has  been  said  before  about  tyrants.  He 
ought  to  adorn  and  improve  his  city,  as  though  he  were  not 

25  a  tyrant,  but  the   guardian  of  the  state.     Also   he  should 
1315  a  appear  to  be  particularly  earnest  in  the  service  of  the  Gods  ; 

for  if  men  think  that  a  ruler  is  religious  and  has  a  reverence 
for  the  Gods,  they  are  less  afraid  of  suffering  injustice  at  his 
hands,  and  they  are  less  disposed  to  conspire  against  him, 
because  they  believe  him  to  have  the  very  Gods  fighting  on 

26  his  side.  At  the  same  time  his  religion  must  not  be  thought 
foolish.  And  he  should  honour  men  of  merit,  and  make 
them  think  that  they  would  not  be  held  in  more  honour  by 
the  citizens  if  they  had  a  free  government.  The  honour  he 
should  distribute  himself,  but  the  punishment  should  be  in- 

27  flicted  by  officers  and  courts  of  law.  It  is  a  precaution  which 
is  taken  by  all  monarchs  not  to  make  one  person  great ;  but  it 
one,  then  two  or  more  should  be  raised,  that  they  may  look 
sharply  after  one  another.  If  after  all  some  one  has  to  be 
made  great,  he  should  not  be  a  man  of  bold  spirit ;  for  such 
dispositions  are  ever  most  inclined  to  strike.  And  if  any  one 
is  to  be  deprived  of  his  power,  let  it  be  diminished  gradually, 

28  not  taken  from  him  all  at  once  *.  The  tyrant  should  abstain 
from  all  outrage;  in  particular  from  personal  violence  and 
from  wanton  conduct  towards  the  young.  He  should  be 
especially  careful  of  his  behaviour  to  men  who  are  lovers  of 
honour ;  for  as  the  lovers  of  money  are  offended  when  their 
property  is  touched,   so  are  the   lovers  of  honour  and   the 

29  virtuous  when  their  honour  is  affected.     Therefore  a  tyrant 

'  Cp.  c.  8.  §  12. 


The  Beneficent  Despot  231 

ought  either  not  to  use  foice  at  all,  or  he  should  be  thought  V.  11 
only  to  employ  fatherly  correction,  and  not  to  trample  upon 
others ;  and  his  acquaintance  with  youth  should  be  supposed 
to  arise  from  affection,  and  not  from  the  insolence  of  power, 
and  in  general  he  should  compensate  the  appearance  of  dis- 
honour by  the  increase  of  honour. 

Of  those  who  attempt  assassination  they  are  the  most  30 
dangerous,  and  require  to  be  most  carefully  watched  who  do 
not  care  to  sui^vive,  if  they  effect  their  purpose.  Therefore  31 
special  precaution  should  be  taken  about  any  who  think  that 
either  they  or  their  relatives  have  been  insulted ;  for  when 
men  are  led  away  by  passion  to  assault  others  they  are  regard- 
less of  themselves.  As  Heracleitus  says,  '  It  is  difficult  to 
fight  against  anger;  for  a  rhan  will  buy  revenge  with  Hfe'.' 

And  whereas  states  consist  of  two  classes,  of  poor  men  32 
and  of  rich,  the  tyrant  should  lead  both  to  imagine  that  they 
are  preserved  and  prevented  from  harming  one  another  by  his 
rule,  and  whichever  of  the  two  is  stronger  he  should  attach 
to  his  government ;  for,  having  this  advantage,  he  has  no 
need  either  to  emancipate  slaves  or  to  disarm  the  citizens; 
either  party  added  to  the  force  which  he  already  has,  will 
make  him  stronger  than  his  assailants. 

But  enough  of  these  details; — what  should  be  the  general  33 
policy  of  the  tyrant  is  obvious.     He  ought  to  show  himself  to 
his  subjects  in  the  light,  not  of  a  tyrant,  but  of  the  master  of 
a  household  and  of  a  king.     He  should  not  appropriate  what  1315  b 
is  theirs,  but  should  be  their  guardian  ;  he  should  be  moderate, 
not  extravagant  in  his  way  of  life ;  he  should  be  the  com- 
panion of  the  notables,  and  the  hero  of  the  multitude.     For  34 
then  his  rule  will  of  necessity  be  nobler  and  happier,  because 
'  Fragni.  69  (ed.   Mullach). 


2^2       Short  Duration  of  Tyrannies 

V.  11  he  will  nile  over  better  men '  whose  spirits  are  not  crushed, 
over  men  to  whom  he  himself  is  not  an  object  of  hatred,  and 
of  whom  he  is  not  afraid.  His  power  too  will  be  more 
lasting.  Let  his  disposition  be  virtuous,  or  at  least  half 
virtuous ;  and  if  he  must  be  wicked,  let  him  be  half  wicked 
only. 
12  Yet  no  forms  of  government  are  so  short-lived  as  oligarchy 
and  tyranny.  The  tyranny  which  lasted  longest  was  that  of 
Orthagoras  and  his  sons  at  Sicyon ;  this  continued  for  a  hun- 
dred years.  The  reason  was  that  they  treated  their  subjects 
with  moderation,  and  to  a  great  extent  observed  the  laws ; 
and  in  various  ways  gained  the  favour  of  the  people  by  the 
care  which  they  took  of  them.     Cleisthenes,  in  particular, 

2  was  respected  for  his  military  ability.  If  report  may  be 
believed,  he  crowned  the  judge  who  decided  against  him  in 
the  games ;  and,  as  some  say,  the  sitting  statue  in  the  Agora 
of  Sicyon  is  the  likeness  of  this  person.  A  similar  story  is 
told  of  Peisistratus,  who  is  said  on  one  occasion  to  have 
allowed  himself  to  be  summoned  and  tried  before  the  Areo- 
pagus. 

3  Next  in  duration  to  the  tyranny  of  Orthagoras  was  that  of 
the  Cypselidae  at  Corinth,  which  lasted  seventy-three  years 
and  six  months :  Cypselus  reigned  thirty  years,  Periander 
forty-four,    and    Psammetichus   the   son  of  Gordius    three. 

4  Their  continuance  was  due  to  similar  causes :  Cypselus  was 
a  popular  man,  who  during  the  whole  time  of  his  rule  never 
had  a  body-guard ;  and  Periander,  although  he  was  a  tyrant, 

5  was  a  great  soldier.  Third  in  duration  was  the  rule  of  the 
Peisistratidae  at  Athens,  but  it  was  interrupted ;  for  Peisis- 
tratus was  twice  driven  out,  so  that  during  three-and-thirty 

»  Cp.  i.  5.  §  2. 


Criticism  of  Plato  233 

years  he  reigned  only  seventeen ;  and  his  sons  reigned  V.  12 
eighteen — altogether  thirty-five  years.  Of  other  tyrannies, 
that  of  Hiero  and  Gelo  at  Syracuse  was  the  most  lasting 
Even  this,  however,  was  short,  not  more  than  eighteen  years  6 
in  all ;  for  Gelo  continued  tyrant  for  seven  years,  and  died  in 
the  eighth ;  Hiero  reigned  for  ten  years,  and  Thrasybulus 
was  driven  out  in  the  eleventh  month.  In  fact,  tyrannies 
generally  have  been  of  quite  short  duration. 

I  have  now  gone  through  all  the  causes  by  which  consti-  7 
tutional  governments  and  monarchies  are  either  destroyed  or  1316  a 
preserved. 

In  the  Republic  of  Plato  ^,  Socrates  treats  of  revolutions, 
but  not  well,  for  he  mentions  no  cause  of  change  which 
peculiarly  affects  the  first  or  perfect  state.  He  only  says  8, 
that  nothing  is  abiding,  but  that  all  things  change  in  a  certain 
cycle  ;  and  that  the  origin  of  the  change  is  a  base  of  numbers 
which  are  in  the  ratio  of  four  to  three,  and  this  when  com- 
bined with  a  figure  of  five  gives  two  harmonies — (he  means 
when  the  number  of  this  figure  becomes  solid) ;  he  conceives 
that  nature  will  then  produce  bad  men  who  will  not  submit 
to  education ;  in  which  latter  particular  he  may  very  likely 
be  not  far  wrong,  for  there  may  well  be  some  men  who 
cannot  be  educated  and  made  virtuous.  But  why  is  such  9 
a  cause  of  change  peculiar  to  his  ideal  state,  and  not  rather 
common  to  all  states,  nay  to  everything  which  comes  into 
being  at  all  ?  '^  Or  how  is  the  state  specially  changed  by 
the  agency  of  time,  which,  as  he  declares,  makes  all  things 
change  ?  And  things  which  did  not  begin  together,  change 
together  "^^  for  example,  if  something  has  come  into  being  the 

'  Rep.  viii.  546, 

*  Placing  a    note    of   interrogation    after   fifrafiaXXtiv.     Or :    *  And 


234  Criticism  of  Plato 

V.  12  day  before  the  completion  of  the  cycle,  it  will  change  with  it. 
Further,  why  should  the  |)erfect  state  change  into  the  Spartan  ? 

10  for  governments  more  often  take  an  opposite  form  than 
one  akin  to  them.  The  same  remark  is  applicable  to  the 
other  changes ;  he  says  that  the  Spartan  constitution  changes 
into  an  oligarchy,  and  this  into  a  democracy,  and  this  again 

1 1  into  a  tyranny.  And  yet  the  contrary  happens  quite  as  often  ; 
for  a  democracy  is  even  more  likely  to  change  into  an  oligarchy 
than  into  a  monarchy.  Further,  he  never  says  whether 
tyranny  is,  or  is  not,  liable  to  revolutions,  and  if  it  is,  what 
is  the  cause  of  them,  or  into  what  form  it  changes.  And 
the  reason  is,  that  he  could  not  very  well  have  told :  for  there 
is  no  rule ;  according  to  him  it  should  revert  to  the  first  and 

12  best,  and  then  there  would  be  a  complete  cycle.  But  in  point 
of  fact  a  tyranny  often  changes  into  a  tyranny,  as  that  at 
Sicyon  changed  from  the  tyranny  of  Myron  into  that  of 
Cleisthenes ;  into  oligarchy,  as  the  tyranny  of  Antileon  did  at 
Chalcis ;  into  democracy,  as  that  of  Gelo  did  at  Syracuse ; 
into  aristocracy,  as  at  Carthage,  and  the  tyranny  of  Charilaus 

13  at  Lacedaemon.  Often  an  oligarchy  changes  into  a  tyranny, 
like  most  of  the  ancient  oligarchies  in  Sicily;  for  example, 
the  oligarchy  at  Leontini  changed  into  the  tyranny  of  Panae- 
tius ;  that  at  Gela  into  the  tyranny  of  Cleander ;  that  at 
Rhegium  into  the  tyranny  of  Anaxilaus ;  the  same  thing  has 

14  happened  in  many  other  states.  And  it  is  absurd  to  suppose 
that  the  state  changes  into  oligarchy  merely  because  [as  Plato 

in  the  period  of  time  which,  as  he  says,  makes  all  things  change,  things 
which  did  not  begin  together  change  together.' 

Bekker  in  his  2nd  edition  has  altered  the  reading  of  the  MSS.  tia  rt 
TOW  xpovov  to  5«i  76  riv  xP^^o^-  The  rendering  of  the  text  agrees 
with  either  reading ;  that  of  the  note  with  the  reading  of  the  MSS,  only. 


Criticism  of  Plato  235- 

says  ^]  the  ruling  class  are   lovers   and    makers    of  money,  V.  12 
and  not  because  the  very  rich  think  it  unfair  that  the  very  poor  1316  b 
should  have  an  equal  share  in  the  government  with  themselves. 
Moreover,  in  many  oligarchies  there  are  laws  against  making 
money  in  trade.     But  at  Carthage,  which  is  a  democracy, 
there  is  no  such  prohibition ;  and  yet  to  this  day  the  Cartha- 
ginians have  never  had  a  revolution.     It  is  absurd  too  for  him  15 
to  say  that  an  oligarchy  is  two  cities,  one  of  the  rich,  and  the 
other  of  the  poor  ^.     Is  not  this  just  as  much  the  case  in  the 
Spartan  constitution,  or  in  any  other  in  which  either  all  do 
not  possess  equal  property,  or  in  which  all  are  not  equally 
good  men  ?     Nobody  need  be  any  poorer  than  he  was  before,  16 
and  yet  the  oligarchy  may  change  all  the  same  into  a  demo- 
cracy, if  the  poor  form  the  majority ;  and  a  democracy  may    ^ 
change  into  an  oligarchy,  if  the  wealthy  class  are  stronger 
than  the  people,   and   the  one  are  energetic,   the   other  in- 
different.    Once  more,  although  the  causes  of  revolutions  are  17 
very  numerous,  he  mentions  only  one^,  which  is,  that  the 
citizens  become  poor  through  dissipation  and  debt,  as  though 
he  thought  that  all,  or  the  majority  of  them,  were  originally 
rich.     This  is  not  true :    though  it  is  true  that  when  any 
of  the  leaders  lose  their  property  they  are  ripe  for  revolution ; 
but,   when  anybody  else,  it   is   no   great  matter.     And  an  ig 
oligarchy  does  not  more  often  pass  into  a  democracy  than  into 
any  other  form  of  government.     Again,  if  men  are  deprived 
of  the  honours  of  state,  and  are  wronged,  and  insulted,  they 
make   revolutions,   and  change    forms  of  government,   even 
although  they  have  not  wasted  their  substance  because  they 


'  Rep.  viii.  550  E.  "^  Rep.  viii.  551  d. 

^  Rep.  viii.  555  d. 


2  3<s  Criticism  of  Plato 

V,  12  might  do  what  they  liked — of  which  extravagance  he  declares 
excessive  freedom  to  be  the  cause  ^. 

Finally,  although  there  are  many  forms  of  oligarchies  and 
democracies,  Socrates  speaks  of  their  revolutions  as  though 
there  were  only  one  form  of  either  of  them. 

'  Rep.  viii.  564. 


BOOK    VI 

We  have  now  considered  the  varieties  of  the  deliberative  VI.  1 
or  supreme  power  in  states,  and  the  various  arrangements  of 
law-courts  and  state  offices,  and  which  of  them  are  adapted 
to  different  forms  of  government  \  We  have  also  spoken  of 
the  destruction  and  preservation  of  states,  how  and  from  what 
causes  they  arise  ^. 

Of  democracy  and  all  other  forms  of  government  there  are  a 
many  kinds ;  and  it  will  be  well  to  assign  to  them  severally 
the  modes  of  organization  which  are  proper  and  advantageous 
to  each,  adding  what  remains  to  be  said  about  them.  More-  3 
over,  we  ought  to  consider -the  various  combinations  of  these 
modes  themselves  ^ ;  for  such  combinations  make  constitutions 
overlap  one  another,  so  that  aristocracies  have  an  oligarchical 
character,  and  constitutional  governments  incline  to  demo- 
cracies *. 

When  I  speak  of  the  combinations  which  remain  to  be  4 
considered,  and  thus  far  have  not  been  considered  by  us, 
r  mean  such  as  these: — when  the  deliberative  part  of  the 
government  and  the  election  of  officers  is  constituted  oligar- 
chically,  and  the  law-courts  aristocratically,  or  when  the 
courts  and  the  deliberative  part  of  the  state  are  oligarchical, 
and  the  election  to  offices  aristocratical,  or  when  in  any  other 
way  there  is  a  want  of  harmony  in  the  composition  of  a  state. 

I  have  shown  already  what  forms  of  democracy  are  suited  5 

'  Bk.  iv.  14-16.  ^  Bk.  V. 

3  cp,  Bk.  iv.  7-9.  ♦  Cp.  iv.  8.  §  3. 


238         The  Elements  of  Democracy 

VI.  1  to  particular  cities,  and  what  of  oligarchy  to  particular  peoples, 
and  to  whom  each  of  the  other  forms  of  government  is  suited. 

6  Further,  we  must  not  only  show  which  of  these  governments 
is  the  best  for  each  state,  but  also  briefly  proceed  to  con- 
sider ^  how  these  and  other  forms  of  government  are  to 
be  established. 

First  of  all  let  us  speak  of  democracy,  which  will  also 
bring  to  light  the  opposite  form   of  government  commonly 

7  called  oligarchy.  For  the  purposes  of  this  enquiry  we  need 
to  ascertain  all  the  elements  and  characteristics  of  democracy, 
since  from  the  combinations  of  these  the  varieties  of  demo- 

8  cratic  government  arise.  There  are  several  of  these  differing 
from  each  other,  and  the  difference  is  due  to  two  causes. 
One  (l)  has  been  already  mentioned'^ — differences  of  popu- 
lation ;  for  the  |X)pular  element  may  consist  of  husbandmen, 
or  of  mechanics,  or  of  labourers,  and  if  the  first  of  these 

■  be  added  to  the  second,  or  the  third  to  the  two  others, 
not  only  does  the  democracy  become  better  or  worse,  but  its 

9  very  nature  is  changed.  A  second  cause  (2)  remains  to 
be  mentioned :  the  various  properties  and  characteristics  of 
democracy,  when  variously  combined,  make  a  difference. 
For  one  democracy  will  have  less  and  another  will  have  more, 
and  another  will  have  all  of  these  characteristics.  There 
is  an  advantage  in  knowing  them  all,  whether  a  man  wishes 
to  establish  some  new  form  of  democracy,  or  only  to  remodel 

10  an  existing  one '.  Founders  of  states  try  to  bring  together 
all  the  elements  which  accord  with  the  ideas  of  the  several 
constitutions ;  but  this  is  a  mistake  of  theirs,  as  I  have  already 
remarked  *  when  speaking  of  the  destruction  and  preservation 

'  Cp.  iv.  2.  §  5.  *  Cp.  iv.  4.  §  31 

3  Cp.  iv.  I.  §  7.  *  V.  9.  §  7. 


The  Nature  of  Democracy  239 

of  states.     We  will  now  set  forth  the  requirements,  ethical  VI.  1 
character,  and  aims  of  such  states. 

l^he  basis  of  a  democratic  state  is  liberty ;  which,  according  2 
to  the  common  opinion  of  men,  can  only  be  enjoyed  in  such  1317  b 
a  state — this  they  affirm  to  be  the  great  end  of  every  demo- 
cracy '.     One  principle  of  liberty  is  for  all  to  rule  and  be  2 
ruled  in  turn,  and  indeed  democratic  justice  is  the  application 
of  numerical  not  proportionate  equality ;    whence  it  follows 
that  the  majority  must  be  supreme,  and  that  whatever  the 
majority  approve  must  be  the  end  and  the  just.    Every  citizen, 
it  is  said,  must  have  equality,  and  therefore  in  a  democracy 
the  poor  have  more  power  than  the  rich,  because  there  are 
more  of  them,  and  the  will  of  the  majority  is  supreme.    This,  3 
then,    is  one  note  of  liberty  which   all  democrats  affirm  to 
be  the  principle  of  their  state.     Another  is  that  a  man  should 
live  as  he  likes  ^    This,  they  say,  is  the  privilege  of  a  freeman  ; 
and,  on  the  other  hand,  not  to  live  as  a  man  likes  is  the  mark 
of  a  slave.     This  is  the  second  characteristic  of  democracy,  4 
whence  has  arisen  the  claim   of  men  to  be  ruled  by  none, 
if  possible,   or,   if  this  is  impossible,   to   rule  and  be  ruled 
in  turns ;  and  so  it  coincides  with  the  freedom  based  upon 
equality  [which  was  the  first  characteristic]. 

^  Such  being   our  foundation  and  such  the  nature  of  de-  5 
mocracy,   its  characteristics  are  as  follows  ^ : — the  election 
of  officers  by  all  out  of  all ;  and  that  all  should  rule  over 
each,  and  each  in  his  turn  over  all ;    that  the  appointment 
to  all  offices,  or  to  all  but  those  which  require  experience  and 

'  Cp.  Plato  Rep.  viii.  557  foil.  ^  Cp.  v.  9.  §  15. 

"  Or  (taking  apXH  •"  the  sense  of  'beginning'),  'Such  being  our 
foundation,  and  such  being  the  principle  from  which  we  start,  the 
characteristics  of  democracy  are  as  follows.' 


240      T^he  Characteristics  of  Democracy 

VI.  2  skill  ^,  should  be  made  by  lot ;  that  no  property  qualification 
should  be  required  for  offices,  or  only  a  very  low  one ;  that 
no  one  should  hold  the  same  office  twice,  or  not  often,  except 
in  the  case  of  military  offices ;  that  the  tenure  of  all  offices, 
or  of  as  many  as  possible,  should  be  brief;  that  all  men 
should  sit  in  judgment,  or  that  judges  selected  out  of  all  should 
judge  in  all  matters,  or  in  most,  or  in  the  greatest  and  most 
important — such  as  the  scrutiny  of  accounts,  the  constitution, 
and  private  contracts ;  that  the  assembly  should  be  supreme 
over  all  causes,  or  at  any  rate  over  the  most  important,  and 

6  the  magistrates  over  none  or  only  over  a  very  few  ^.     Of  all 
institutions,  a  council  is  the  most  democratic'  when  there  is 
not  the  means  of  paying  all  the  citizens,  but  when  they  are 
paid  even  this  is  robbed  of  its  power;  for  the  people  then' 
draw  all  cases  to  themselves,  as  I  said  in  the  previous  dis- 

7  cussion  *.  The  next  characteristic  of  democracy  is  payment 
for  services;  assembly,  law-courts,  magistrates,  everybody 
receives  pay,  when  it  is  to  be  had;  or  when  it  is  not  to 
be  had  for  all,  then  it  is  given  to  the  law-courts  and  to  the 
stated  assemblies,  to  the  council  and  to  the  magistrates,  or  at 
least  to  any  of  them  who  are  compelled  to  have  their  meals 
together.  And  whereas  oligarchy  is  characterized  by  birth, 
wealth,  and  education,  the  notes  of  democracy  appear  to  be 

8  the  opposite  of  these — low  birth,  poverty,  mean  employment. 
Another  note  is  that  no  magistracy  is  perpetual,  but  if  any 

1318  a  such  have  survived  some  ancient  change  in  the  constitution  it 
should  be  stripped  of  its  power,  and  the  holders  should  be 
elected  by  lot  and  no  longer  by  vote.  These  are  points 
common  to  all  democracies;    but  democracy  and  demos  in 

'  Cp.  iv.  14.  §  6.  ^  See  note. 

=*  Cp.  iv.  15.  §  II.  *  Cp.  iv.  6.  §  5. 


Democratical  Justice  241 

their  truest  form  are  based  upon  the  recognized  principle  of  VI.  2 
democratic  justice,  that  all  should  count  equally ;  for  equality 
implies  that  the  rich  should  have  no  more  share  in  the  govern- 
ment than  the  poor  \  and  should  not  be  the  only  rulers,  but 
that  all  should  rule  equally  according  to  their  numbers  '.  And 
in  this  way  men  think  that  they  will  secure  equality  and 
freedom  in  their  state. 

Next  comes  the  question,  How  is  this  equality  to  be  ob-  3 
tained  ?  Is  the  qualification  to  be  so  distributed  that  five 
hundred  rich  shall  be  equal  to  a  thousand  poor  ?  and  shall  we 
give  the  thousand  a  power  equal  to  that  of  the  five  hundred  ? 
or,  if  this  is  not  to  be  the  mode,  ought  we,  still  retaining  the 
same  ratio,  to  take  equal  numbers  from  each  and  give  them 
the  control  of  the  elections  ^  and  of  the  courts  ? — Which,  a 
according  to  the  democratical  notion,  is  the  juster  form  of  the 
constitution — this  or  one  based  on  numbers  only  ?  Demo- 
crats say  that  justice  is  that  to  which  the  majority  agree, 
oligarchs  that  to  which  the  wealthier  class ;  in  their  opinion 
the  decision  should  be  given  according  to  the  amount  of 
property.  In  both  principles  there  is  some  inequality  and  3 
injustice.  For  if  justice  is  the  will  of  the  few,  any  one 
person  who  has  more  wealth  than  all  the  rest  of  his  class  put 
together,  ought,  upon  the  oligarchical  principle,  to  have  the 
sole  power — but  this  would  be  tyranny ;  or  if  justice  is  the 
will  of  the  majority,  as  I  was  before  saying  *,  they  will 
unjustly  confiscate  the  property  of  the  wealthy  minority.     To  4 

*  Transposing  diropous  and  (vvopovs,  with  Bekker's  2nd  ed. 
^  Cp.  iv.  4.  §  2  2. 

^  Reading   with    Bekker's    2nd    ed.    aipiatuv   from    conjecture   for 
Siaipiafon',  which  is  the  reading  of  the  MSS.     See  note, 

*  Cp,  iii.  10.  §  I. 

PAVI3  ^ 


242  Democratical  Justice 

VI,  3  find  a  principle  of  equality  in  which  they  both  agree  we  must 
enquire  into  their  resj)ective  ideas  of  justice. 

Now  they  agree  in  saying  that  whatever  is  decided  by  the 
majority  of  the  citizens  is  to  be  deemed  law.  Granted : — but . 
not  without  some  reserve ;  since  there  are  two  classes  out  of 
which  a  state  is  composed, — the  poor  and  the  rich, — that 
is  to  be  deemed  law  on  which  both  or  the  greater  part 
of  both  agree ;  and  if  they  disagree,  that  which  is  approved 
by  the  majority,  that  is  by  those  who  have  the  higher  qualifi- 

5  cation.  For  example,  suppose  that  there  are  ten  rich  and 
twenty  poor,  and  some  measure  is  approved  by  six  of  the  rich 
and  is  disapproved  by  fifteen  of  the  poor,  and  the  remaining 
four  of  the  rich  join  with  the  party  of  the  poor,  and  the 
remaining  five  of  the  poor  with  that  of  the  rich ;  in  such 
a  case  the  will  of  those  whose  qualifications,  when  both  sides 

6  are  added  up,  are  the  greatest,  should  prevail.  If  they  turn 
out  to  be  equal,  there  is  no  greater  difficulty  than  at  present, 
when,   if  the  assembly  or  the  courts  are  divided,  recourse 

1318  b  is  had  to  the  lot,  or  to  some  similar  expedient.  But,  although 
it  may  be  difficult  in  theory  to  know  what  is  just  and  equal, 
the  practical  difficulty  of  inducing  those  to  forbear  who  can, 
if  they  like,  encroach,  is  far  greater,  for  the  weaker  are 
always  asking  for  equality  and  justice,  but  the  stronger  '  care 
for  none  of  these  things  ^ 
4  Of  the  four  kinds  of  democracy,  as  was  said  in  the  previous 
discussion  *,  the  best  is  that  which  comes  first  in  order ;  it  is 
also  the  oldest  of  them  all.  I  am  speaking  of  them  according 
to  the  natural  classification  of  their  inhabitants.  For  the  best 
material  of  democracy  is  an  agricultural  population ' ;  there  is 

'  Or,  'care  nothing  for  the  weaker.'  ^  Cp.  iv.  4.  §  22. 

'  Cp.  iv.  6.  §  2. 


The  best  Kjnd  of  Democracy       243 

no  difficulty  in  forming  a  democracy  where  the  mass  of  the  VI.  4 
|)eople  live  by  agriculture  or  tending  of  cattle.  Being  poor,  2 
they  have  no  leisure,  and  therefore  do  not  often  attend  the 
assembly,  and  not  having  the  necessaries  of  life  they  are  always 
at  work,  and  do  not  covet  the  property  of  others.  Indeed, 
they  find  their  employment  pleasanter  than  the  cares  of  govern- 
ment or  office  where  no  great  gains  can  be  made  out  of  them, 
for  the  many  are  more  desirous  of  gain  than  of  honour  ^ 
A  proof  is  that  even  the  ancient  tyrannies  were  patiently  endured  3 
by  them,  as  they  still  endure  oligarchies,  if  they  are  allowed 
to  work  and  are  not  deprived  of  their  property ;  for  some  of 
them  grow  quickly  rich  and  the  others  are  well  enough  off. 
Moreover  they  have  the  power  of  electing  the  magistrates  4 
and  calling  them  to  account  ^ ;  their  ambition,  if  they  have 
any,  is  thus  satisfied ;  and  in  some  democracies,  although  they 
do  not  all  share  in  the  appointment  of  offices,  except  through 
representatives  elected  in  turn  out  of  the  whole  people,  as  at 
Mantinea,  yet,  if  they  have  the  power  of  deliberating,  the 
many  are  contented.  Even  this  form  of  government  may  be  5 
regarded  as  a  democracy,  and  was  such  at  Mantinea.  Hence 
it  is  both  expedient  and  customary  in  such  a  democracy  that 
all  should  elect  to  offices,  and  conduct  scrutinies,  and  sit  in 
the  law-courts,  but  that  the  great  offices  should  be  filled  up  by 
election  and  from  persons  having  a  qualification ;  the  greater 
requiring  a  greater  qualification,  or,  if  there  be  no  offices  for 
which  a  qualification  is  required,  then  those  who  are  marked 
out  by  special  ability  should  be  appointed.  Under  such  a  6 
form  of  government  the  citizens  are  sure  to  be  governed  well 
(for  the  offices  will  always  be  held  by  the  best  persons ;  the 
people  are  willing  enough  to  elect  them  and  are  not  jealous  of 
*  iv.  13.  §  8.  2  Cp.  ii.  12.  §  5. 

R  2 


244         T^he  ^g^ri cultural  Democracy 

VI,  4  the  good).  The  good  and  the  notables  will  then  be  satisfied, 
for  they  will  not  be  governed  by  men  who  are  their  inferiors, 
and  the  persons  elected  will  rule  justly,  because  others  will  call 

7  them  to  account.  Every  man  should  be  responsible  to  others, 
nor  should  any  one  be  allowed  to  do  just  as  he  pleases ;  for 
where  absolute  freedom  is  allowed  there  is  nothing  to  restrain 

1319  a  the  evil  which  is  inherent  in  every  man.  But  the  principle  of 
responsibility  secures  that  which  is  the  greatest  good  in  states  ; 
the  right  persons  rule  and  are  prevented  from  doing  wrong, 

8  and  the  people  have  their  due.  It  is  evident  that  this  is  the 
best  kind  of  democracy,  and  why?  because  the  people  are  drawn 
from  a  certain  class.  The  ancient  laws  of  many  states  which 
aimed  at  making  the  people  husbandmen  were  excellent.  They 
provided  either  that  no  one  should  possess  more  than  a  certain 
quantity  of  land,  or  that,  if  he  did,  the  land  should  not  be 
within  a  certain  distance   from  the   town  or  the  acropolis. 

9  Formerly  in  many  states  there  was  a  law  forbidding  any  one 
to  sell  his  original  allotment  of  land  ^.  There  is  a  similar  law 
attributed  to  Oxylus,  which  is  to  the  effect  that  there  should 
be  a  certain  portion  of  every  man's  property  on  which  he  could 

10  not  borrow  money.  A  useful  corrective  to  the  evil  of  which 
I  am  speaking  would  be  the  law  of  the  Aphytaeans,  who, 
although  they  are  numerous,  and  do  not  possess  much  land,  are 
all  of  them  husbandmen.  For  their  properties  are  reckoned  in 
the  census,  not  entire,  but  only  in  such  small  portions  ^  that 
even  the  poor  may  have  more  than  the  amount  required  '. 

11  Next  best  to  an  agricultural,  and  in  many  respects  similar, 
are  a  pastoral  people,  who  live  by  their  flocks ;  they  are  the 

»  Cp.  ii.  7.  §  7. 

"  Or,  '  that  the  qualification  of  the  poor  may  exceed  that  of  the 
rich.' 


The  inferior  Kjnds  of  Democracy    z^y 

best  trained  of  any  for  war,  robust  in  body  and  able  to  camp  VI.  4 
out.     The  people  of  whom  other  democracies  consist  are  far  1 2 
inferior  to  them,  for  their  life  is  inferior  ;  there  is  no  room  for 
moral  excellence  in  any  of  their  employments,  whether  they 
be  mechanics  or  traders  or  labourers.     Besides,  people  of  this  13 
class  can  readily  come  to  the  assembly,  because  they  are  con- 
tinually moving  about  in  the  city  and  in  the  agora ;  whereas 
husbandmen  are  scattered  over  the  country  and  do  not  meet, 
or  equally  feel  the  want  of  assembling  together.     Where  the  14 
territory  extends   to  a  distance   from   the  city,  there  is  no 
difficulty  in  making  an  excellent  democracy  or  constitutional 
government,   for  the    people  are  compelled   to  settle  in  the 
country ;  and  even  if  there  is  a  town  population  the  assembly 
ought  not  to  meet  when  the  country  people  cannot  come.     We  15 
have  thus  explained  how  the  first  and  best  form  of  democracy 
should  be  constituted;  it  is  clear  that  the  other  or  inferior 
sorts  will  deviate  in  a  regular  order,  and  the  population  which  1319  b 
is  excluded  will  at  each  stage  be  of  a  lower  kind. 

The  last  form  of  democracy,  that  in  which  all  share  alike,  is 
one  which  cannot  be  borne  by  all  states,  and  will  not  last  long 
unless  well  regulated  by  laws  and  customs.  The  more  general 
causes  which  tend  to  destroy  this  or  other  kinds  of  government 
have  now  been  pretty  fully  considered  '.  In  order  to  constitute  16 
such  a  democracy  and  strengthen  the  people,  the  leaders  have 
been  in  the  habit  of  including  as  many  as  they  can,  and  making 
citizens  not  only  of  those  who  are  legitimate,  but  even  of  the 
illegitimate,  and  of  those  who  have  only  one  parent  a  citizen, 
whether  father  or  mother  ^  ;  for  nothing  of  this  sort  comes 
amiss  to  such  a  democracy.  This  is  the  way  in  which  dema-  1 7 
gogues  proceed  ;  whereas  the  right  thing  would  be  to  make 
1  Cp.  V.  5.  •■'  Cp.  iii.  5.  §  7. 


24<^  The  Construction  and 

VI.  4  no  more  additions  when  the  number  of  the  commonalty  exceeds 
that  of  the  notables  or  of  the  middle  class, — beyond  this  not 
to  go.  When  in  excess  of  this  point  the  state  becomes  dis- 
orderly, and  the  notables  grow  excited  and  impatient  of  the 
democracy,  as  in  the  insurrection  at  Cyrene ;  for  no  notice  is 
taken  of  a  little  evil,  but  when  it  increases  it  strikes  the  eye. 

1 8  Measures  like  those  which  Cleisthenes^  passed  when  he  wanted 
to  increase  the  power  of  the  democracy  at  Athens,  or  such 
as  were  taken  by  the  founders  of  popular  government  at  Cyrene, 

19  are  useful  in  the  extreme  form  of  democracy.  Fresh  tribes 
and  brotherhoods  should  be  established ;  the  private  rites  of 
families  should  be  restricted  and  converted  into  public  ones ; 
in  short,  every  contrivance  should  be  adopted  which  will  mingle 
the  citizens  with  one  another  and  get  rid  of  old  connexions. 

20  Again,  the  measures  which  are  taken  by  tyrants  appear  all  of 
them  to  be  democratic  ;  such,  for  instance,  as  the  licence  per- 
mitted to  slaves  (which  may  be  to  a  certain  extent  advantageous) 
and  also  that  of  women  and  children,  and  the  allowing  every- 
body to  live  as  he  likes  ^.  Such  a  government  will  have  many 
supporters,  for  most  persons  would  rather  live  in  a  disorderly 
than  in  a  sober  manner. 

5  The  mere  establishment  of  a  democracy  is  not  the  only  or 
principal  business  of  the  legislator,  or  of  those  who  wish  to 
create  such  a  state,  for  any  state,  however  badly  constituted, 
may  last  one,  two,  or  three  days ;  a  far  greater  difficulty  is  the 
2  preservation  of  it.  The  legislator  should  therefore  endeavour  to 
have  a  firm  foundation  according  to  the  principles  already  laid 
down  concerning  the  preservation  and  destruction  of  states'; 
he  should  guard  against  the  destructive  elements,  and  should 

'  Cp.  iii.  2.  §3;  V.  3.  §  5.  2  Cp.  V.  11.  §  II. 

3  Cp.  Bk.  V. 


Preservation  of  Democracy  247 

make  laws,  whether  written  or  unwritten,  which  will  contain  VI,  5 
all  the  preservatives  of  states.     He  must  not  think  thc-tculy  1320  a 
democratical  or  oligarchical  measure  to  be  that  which  will  give 
the  greatest  amount  of  democracy  or  oligarchy,  but  that  which 
will  make  them  last  longest  ^     The  demagogues  of  our  own  3 
day  often  get  property  confiscated  ^  in  the  law-courts  in  order 
to  please  the  people.     But  those  who  have  the  welfare  of  the 
state  at  heart  should  counteract  them,  and  make  a  law  that  the 
property  of  the  condemned  which  goes  into  the  treasury  should 
not  be  public  but  sacred.     Thus  offenders  will  be  as  much 
afraid,  for  they  will  be  punished  all  the  same,  and  the  people, 
having  nothing  to  gain,  will  not  be  so  ready  to  condemn  the 
accused.     Care  should  also  be  taken  that  state  trials  are  as  4 
few  as  possible,  and  heavy  penalties  should  be  inflicted  on 
those  who  bring  groundless  accusations ;  for  it  is  the  practice 
to  indict,  not  members  of  the  popular  party,  but  the  notables, 
although  the  citizens  ought  to  be  all  equally  attached  to  the 
state,  or  at  any  rate  should  not  regard  their  rulers  as  enemies.  , 

Now,  since  in  the  last  and  worst  form  of  democracy  the  5 
citizens  are  very  numerous,  and  can  hardly  be  made  to  assemble 
unless  they  are  paid,  and  to  pay  them  when  there  are  no 
revenues  presses  hardly  upon  the  notables  (for  the  money 
must  be  obtained  by  a  property-tax  and  confiscations  and  cor- 
.  nipt  practices  of  the  courts,  things  which  have  before  now 
overthrown  many  democracies) ;  where,  I  say,  there  are  no 
revenues,  the  government  should  hold  few  assemblies,  and  the 
law-courts  should  consist  of  many  persons,  but  sit  for  a  few 
days  only.  This  system  has  two  advantages :  first,  the  rich  6 
do  not  fear  the  expense,  even  although  they  are  unpaid  them- 
selves when  the  poor  are  paid ;  and  secondly,  causes  are  better 
^  Cp.v.  II.  §§  2,  3.  *  Cp.  V.  5.  §  5. 


248  A  Patriotic  Nobility 

VI.  5  tried,   for  wealthy  j)ersons,  although  they  do  not  like  to  be 
long  absent  from  their  own  affairs,  do  not  mind  going  for  a  few 

7  days  to  the  law-courts.  Where  there  are  revenues  the  dema- 
gogues should  not  be  allowed  after  their  manner  to  distribute 
the  surplus  ;  the  poor  are  always  receiving  and  always  wanting 
more  and  more,  for  such  help  is  like  water  poured  into  a  leaky 
cask.  Yet  the  true  friend  of  the  people  should  see  that  they 
be  not  too  poor,  for  extreme  poverty  lowers  the  character  of 

8  the  democracy  ;  measures  also  should  be  taken  which  will 
give  them  lasting  prosperity  ;  and  as  this  is  equally  the  interest 
of  all  classes,  the  proceeds  of  the  public  revenues  should  be 
accumulated  and  distributed  among  them,  if  possible,  in  such 
quantities  as  may  enable  them  to  purchase  a  little  farm,  or,  at  any 

1320  b  rate,  make  a  beginning  in  trade  and  husbandry.     And  if  this 

9  benevolence  cannot  be  extended  to  all,  money  should  be  dis- 
tributed in  turn  according  to  tribes  or  other  divisions,  and  in 
the  meantime  the  rich  should  pay  the  fee  for  the  attendance  of 

•  the  poor  at  the  necessary  assemblies ;  and  should  in  return  be 

excused  from  useless  public  services.  By  administering  the 
state  in  this  spirit  the  Carthaginians  retain  the  affections  of  the 
))eople  ;  their  policy  is  from  time  to  time  to  send  some  of 

10  them  into  their  dependent  towns,  where  they  grow  rich '.  It 
is  also  worthy  of  a  generous  and  sensible  nobility  to  divide  the 
poor  amongst  them,  and  give  them  the  means  of  going  to  work. 
The  example  of  the  people  of  Tarentum  is  also  well  deserving 
of  imitation,  for,  by  sharing  the  use  of  their  own  property  with 

1 1  the  poor,  they  gain  their  good  will  \  Moreover,  they  divide 
all  their  offices  into  two  classes,  one-half  of  them  being  elected 
by  vote,  the  other  by  lot;  the  latter,  that  the  people  may 
participate  in  them,  and  the  former,  that  the  state  may  be  better 

'  Cp.  ii.  II.  §  15.  -  Cp.  ii,  5.  §  8, 


T^he  various  Kjnds  of  Oligarchies  249 

administered.     A  like  result  may  be  gained  by  dividing  the  VI.  5 
same  offices  *,  so  as  to  have  two  classes  of  magistrates,  one 
chosen  by  vote,  the  other  by  lot. 

Enough  has  been  said  of  the  manner  in  which  democracies  6 
ought  to  be  constituted. 

From  these  considerations  there  will  be  no  difficulty  in  see- 
ing what  should  be  the  constitution  of  oligarchies.  We  must 
put  together  in  our  minds  each  form  of  oligarchy  by  reasoning 
from  its  opposite,  calculating  the  structure  of  each  in  relation 
to  that  of  the  opposite  democracy. 

The  first  and  best  attempered  of  oligarchies  is  akin  to  a  con-  2 
stitutional  government.   In  this  there  ought  to  be  two  standards 
of  qualification ;    the  one  high,   the  other  low — the   lower 
qualifying  for  the  humbler  yet  indispensable  offices  and  the 
higher  for  the  superior  ones.    He  who  acquires  the  prescribed 
qualification  should  have  the  rights  of  citizenship.     The  nature 
of  those  admitted  should  be  such  as  will  make  the  entire  3 
governing  body  stronger  than  those  who  are  excluded,  and  the 
new  citizen  should  be  always  taken  out  of  the  better  class  of  the 
people.     The  principle,  narrowed  a  little,  gives  another  form 
of  oligarchy ;  until  at  length  we  reach  the  most  cliquish  and 
tyrannical  of  them  all,  answering  to  the  extreme  democracy, 
which,  being  the  worst,  requires  vigilance  in  proportion  to  its  4 
badness.     For  as  healthy  bodies  and  ships  well  provided  with 
sailors  may  undergo  many  mishaps  and  survive  them,  whereas 
sickly  constitutions  and  rotten  ill-manned  ships  are  ruined  by 
the  very  least  mistake,  so  do  the  worst  forms  of  government  1321  a 
require  the  greatest  care.     The  populousness  of  democracies  5 
generally  preserves  them  (for  number  is  to  democracy  in  the 
place  of  justice  based  on  proportion)  ;  whereas  the  preservation 
*  Reading  t^s  aiiTf/s  dpxfjs  with  Bekker's  2nd  ed. 


2fo      How  to  Organic  an  Oligarchy 

VI.  6  of  an  oligarchy  clearly  depends  on  an  opposite  principle,  viz. 
good  order. 
7  As  there  are  four  chief  divisions  of  the  common  people — 
husbandmen,  mechanics,  retail  traders,  labourers ;  so  also 
there  are  four  kinds  of  military  forces — the  cavalry,  the  heavy 
infantry,  the  light-armed  troops,  the  navy  ^.  When  the 
country  is  adapted  for  cavalry,  then  a  strong  oligarchy  is  likely 
to  be  established.  For  the  security  of  the  inhabitants  depends 
upon  a  force  of  this  sort,  and  only  rich  men  caa  afford  to  keep 
horses.  The  second  form  of  oligarchy  prevails  when  there 
are  heavy  infantry  ^  ;  for  this  service  is  better  suited  to  the  rich 

2  than  to  the  poor.  But  the  light-armed  and  the  naval  element 
are  wholly  democratic ;  and  nowadays,  when  they  are  so 
numerous,  if  the  two  parties  quarrel,  the  oligarchy  are  often 
worsted  by  them  in  the  struggle.  A  remedy  for  this  state  of 
things  may  be  found  in  the  practice  of  generals  who  combine 
a  proper  contingent  of  light-armed  troops  with  cavalry  and 

3  heavy-armed.  And  this  is  the  way  in  which  the  poor  get  the 
better  of  the  rich  in  civil  contests ;  being  lightly  armed,  they 
fight  with  advantage  against  cavaliy  and  heavy  infantry.  An 
oligarchy  which  raises  such  a  force  out  of  the  lower  classes 
raises  a  power  against  itself.  And  therefore,  since  the  ages 
of  the  citizens  vary  and  some  are  older  and  some  younger,  the 
fathers  should  have  their  own  sons,  while  they  are  still  young, 
taught  the  agile  movements  of  light-armed  troops ;  and  some, 
when  they  grow  up,  should  be  selected  out  of  the  youth,  and 

4  become  light-armed  warriors  in  reality.  The  oligarchy  should 
also  yield  a  share  in  the  government  to  the  people,  either,  as  I 
said  before,  to  those  who  have  a  property  qualification  ',  or,  as 

*  Cp.  iv.  3.  §§  2,  3.  '  Reading  ovXirrfv  with  Btkker's  1st  ed. 

'■"  Cp.  c.  6.  §  3. 


The  Necessary  Offices  of  State      2^1 

in  the  case  of  Thebes  ',  to  those  who  have  abstained  for  a  VI.  7 
certain  number  of  years  from  mean  employments,  or,  as   at 
Massalia,  to  men  of  merit  who  are  selected  for  their  worthi- 
ness, whether  [previously]  citizens  or  not.     The  magistracies  5 
of  the  highest  rank,  which  ought  to  be  in  the  hands  of  the 
goveraing  body,  should  have  expensive  duties  attached  to  them, 
and  then  the  people  will  not  desire  them  and  will  take  no 
offence  at  the  privileges  of  their  rulers  when  they  see  that 
they  pay  a  heavy  fine  for  their  dignity.     It  is  fitting  also  that  6 
the  magistrates   on  entering   ofiice   should  offer  magnificent 
sacrifices  or  erect  some  public  edifice,  and  then  the  people  who 
participate   in  the  entertainments,   and  like   to   see  the  city 
decorated  with  votive  offerings  and  buildings,  will  not  desire 
an  alteration  in  the  government,  and  the  notables  will  have 
memorials  of  their  munificence.     This,  however,  is  anything  7 
but  the  fashion  of  our  modem  oligarchs,  who  are  as  covetous 
of  gain  as  they  are  of  honour  ;  oligarchies  like  theirs  may  be 
well  described  as  petty  democracies.     Enough  of  the  manner  1321  b 
in  which  democracies  and  oligarchies  should  be  organized. 

Next  in  order  follows  the  right  distribution  of  offices,  their  8 
number,  their  nature,  their  duties,  of  which  indeed  we  have 
already  spoken  ^.  No  state  can  exist  not  having  the  necessary 
offices,  and  no  state  can  be  well  administered  not  having  the 
offices  which  tend  to  preserve  harmony  and  good  order.  In  2 
small  states,  as  we  have  already  remarked  ^,  there  need  not  be 
many  of  them,  but  in  larger  there  must  be  a  larger  number, 
and  we  should  carefully  consider  which  offices  may  properly 
be  united  and  which  separated. 

First  among  necessary  offices  is  that  which  has  the  care  of  3 

iCp.  Hi.  5.  §7.  ^Cp.  iv.'is. 

3  cp.  iv.  15.  §§  5-7. 


2  f  2      Offices — the  Criminal  Executive 

VI.  8  the  market ;  a  magistrate  should  be  appointed  to  inspect  con- 
tracts and  to  maintain  order.  For  in  every  state  there  must 
inevitably  be  buyers  and  sellers  who  will  supply  one  another's 
wants ;  this  is  the  readiest  way  to  make  a  state  self-sufficing 
and  so  fulfil  the  purpose  for  which  men  come  together  into  one 

4  state  ^  A  second  office  of  a  similar  kind  undertakes  the  super- 
vision and  embellishment  of  public  and  private  buildings,  the 
maintaining  and  repairing  of  houses  and  roads,  the  prevention 
of  disputes  about  boundaries  and  other  concerns  of  a  like  nature. 

5  This  is  commonly  called  the  office  of  City-warden,  and  has 
various  departments,  which,  in  more  populous  towns,  are  shared 
among  different  persons,  one,  for  example,  taking  charge  of  the 

6  walls,  another  of  the  fountains,  a  third  of  harbours.  There 
is  another  equally  necessary  office,  and  of  a  similar  kind,  having 
to  do  with  the  same  matters  without  the  walls  and  in  the 
country : — the  magistrates  who  hold  this  office  are  called 
Wardens  of  the  country,  or  Inspectors  of  the  woods.  Besides 
these  three  there  is  a  fourth  office  of  receivers  of  taxes,  who 
have  under  their  charge  the  revenue  which  they  distribute 
among  the  various  departments ;  these  are  called  Receivers  or 

7  Treasurers.  Another  officer  registers  all  private  contracts,  and 
decisions  of  the  courts,  all  public  indictments,  and  also  all 
preliminary  proceedings.  This  office  again  is  sometimes  sub- 
divided, in  which  case  one  officer  is  appointed  over  all  the  rest. 
These  officers  are  called  Recorders  or  Sacred  Recorders, 
Presidents,  and  the  like. 

8  Next  to  these  comes  an  office  of  which  the  duties  are  the 
most  necessary  and  also  the  most  difficult,  viz.  that  to  which 
is  committed  the  execution  of  punishments,  or  the  exaction  of 

*  Cp.  i.  2.  §  8  ;  Nic.  Eth.  v. 6.  §  4;  PI.  Rep.  ii.  369. 


offices  Military  and  Civil  2^5 

fines  from  those  who  are  }X)sted  up  according  to  the  registers ;  VI.  8 
and  also  the  custody  of  prisoners.  The  difficulty  of  this  office  ■^^'■^'•^  ^ 
arises  out  of  the  odium  which  is  attached  to  it ;  no  one  will 
undertake  it  unless  great  profits  are  to  be  made,  and  any  one  who 
does  is  loth  to  execute  the  law.  Still  the  office  is  necessary  ; 
for  judicial  decisions  are  useless  if  they  take  no  effect ;  and  if 
society  cannot  exist  without  them,  neither  can  it  exist  with- 
out the  execution  of  them.  It  is  an  office  which,  being  so  lo 
unpopular,  should  not  be  entrusted  to  one  person,  but  divided 
among  several  taken  from  different  courts.  In  like  manner 
an  effort  should  be  made  to  distribute  among  different  persons 
the  writing  up  of  those  who  are  registered  as  public  debtors. 
Some  sentences  should  be  executed  by  officers  who  have  other 
functions ;  penalties  for  new  offences  should  be  exacted  by  new 
offices ;  and  as  regards  those  which  are  not  new,  when  one 
court  has  given  judgment,  another  should  exact  the  penalty  ;  for 
example,  the  wardens  of  the  city  should  exact  the  fines  imposed 
by  the  wardens  of  the  agora,  and  others  again  should  exact  the 
fines  imposed  by  them.  For  penalties  are  more  likely  to  be  1 1 
exacted  when  less  odium  attaches  to  the  exaction  of  them ; 
but  a  double  odium  is  incurred  when  the  judges  who  have 
passed  also  execute  the  sentence,  and  if  they  are  always  the 
executioners,  they  will  be  the  enemies  of  all. 

In  many  places  one  magistracy  has  the  custody  of  the 
prisoners,  while  another  executes  the  sentence,  as,  for  example, 
'  the  Eleven  '  at  Athens.  It  is  well  to  separate  off  the  jailor-  1 2 
ship,  and  try  by  some  device  to  render  the  office  less  unpopular. 
For  it  is  quite  as  necessary  as  that  of  the  executioner ;  but 
good  men  do  all  they  can  to  avoid  it,  and  worthless  persons 
cannot  safely  be  trusted  with  it ;  for  they  themselves  require  a 
guard,  and  are  not  fit  to  guard  others.     There  ought  not  there-  1 3 


2f4  offices  Military  and  Civil 

VI.  8  fore  to  be  a  single  or  permanent  officer  set  apart  for  this  duty  ; 
but  it  should  be  entrusted  to  the  young,  wherever  they  are 
organized  into  a  band  or  guard,  and  different  magistrates  acting 
in  turn  should  take  charge  of  it. 

These  are  the  indispensable  officers,  and  should  be  ranked 
first : — next  in  order  follow  others,  equally  necessary,  but  of 

14  higher  rank,  and  requiring  great  experience  and  fidelity.  Such 
are  the  offices  to  which  are  committed  the  guard  of  the  city, 
and  other  military  functions.  Not  only  in  time  of  war  but  of 
peace  their  duty  will  be  to  defend  the  walls  and  gates,  and  to 
muster  and  marshal  the  citizens.  In  some  states  there  are 
many  such  offices  ;  in  others  there  are  a  few  only,  while  small 

1 5  states  are  content  with  one ;  these  officers  are  called  generals 
1322  b  or  commanders.     Again,  if  a  state  has  cavalry  or  light-armed 

troops  or  archers  or  a  naval  force,  it  will  sometimes  happen 
that  each  of  these  departments  has  separate  officers,  who  are 
called  admirals,  or  generals  of  cavalry  or  of  infantry.  And 
there  are  subordinate  officers  called  naval  and  military  captains, 
and  captains  of  horse  ;  having  others  under  them  : — all  these 

16  are  included  in  the  department  of  war.  Thus  much  of  military 
command. 

But  since  many,  not  to  say  all,  of  these  offices  handle  the 
public  money,  there  must  of  necessity  be  another  office  which 
examines  and  audits  them,  and  has  no  other  functions.  Such 
officers  are  called  by  various  names — Scrutineers,  Auditors, 

17  Accountants,  Controllers.  Besides  all  these  offices  there  is 
another  which  is  supreme  over  them,  and  to  this,  which  in  a 
democracy  presides  over  the  assembly,  is  often  entrusted  both 
the  introduction  and  the  ratification  of  measures.  For  that 
power  which  convenes  the  people  must  of  necessity  be  the 
head  of  the  state.     In  some  places  they  are  called  '  probuli,* 


offices  of  ]{eli^ion — Summary       zyy 

because  they  hold  previous  deliberations,  but  in  a  democracy  VI.  8 
more  commonly  'councillors*.'     These  are  the  chief  political  i8 
offices. 

Another  set  of  officers  is  concerned  with  the  maintenance 
of  religion  ;  priests  and  guardians  see  to  the  preservation  and 
repair  of  the  temples  of  the  gods  and  to  other  matters  of  religion. 
One  office  of  this  sort  may  be  enough  in  small  places,  but  in  19 
larger  ones  there  are  a  great  many  besides  the  priesthood ;  for 
example,  superintendents  of  sacrifices,  guardians  of  shrines, 
treasurers  of  the  sacred  revenues.  Nearly  connected  with  these  20 
there  are  also  the  officers  appointed  for  the  performance  of  the 
public  sacrifices,  except  any  which  the  law  assigns  to  the 
priests ;  such  officers  derive  their  dignity  from  the  public  hearth 
of  the  city.  They  are  sometimes  called  archons,  sometimes 
kings  ^,  and  sometimes  prytanes. 

These,  then,  are  the  necessary  offices,  which  may  be  summed  2 1 
up  as  follows  :  offices  concerned  with  matters  of  religion,  with 
war,  with  the  revenue  and  expenditure,  with  the  market,  with 
the  city,  with  the  harbours,  with  the  country ;  also  with  the 
courts  of  law,  with  the  records  of  contracts,  with  execution  of 
sentences,  with  custody  of  prisoners,  with  audits  and  scrutinies 
and  accounts  of  magistrates  ;  lastly,  there  are  those  which  pre- 
side over  the  public  deliberations  of  the  state.    There  are  like-  22 
wise  magistracies  characteristic  of  states  which  are  peaceful 
and  prosperous,  and  at  the  same  time  have  a  regard  to  good 
order :  such  as  the  offices  of  guardians  of  women,  guardians  of 
the  laws,  guardians  of  children,  and  directors  of  gymnastics  ; 
also  superintendents  of  gymnastic  and  Dionysiac  contests,  and  1323  a 
of  other  similar  spectacles.     Some  of  these  are  clearly  not  23 
democratic  offices ;  for  example,  the  guardianships  of  women 
*  Cp.  iv.  15.  §  II.  *  Cp.  iii.  14.  §  14. 


2^6  Summary 

VI.  8  and  children  ^ — the  poor,  not  having  any  slaves,  must  employ 
both  their  women  and  children  as  servants. 
24  Once  more :  there  are  three  forms  of  the  highest  elective 
offices  in  states — guardians  of  the  law,  probuli,  councillors, — 
of  these,  the  guardians  of  the  law  are  an  aristocratical,  the 
probuli  an  oligarchical,  the  council  a  democratical  institution. 
Enough  of  the  different  kinds  of  offices. 

'  Cp.  iv.  15.  §13. 


BOOK  VII 

He  who  would  duly  enquire  about  the  best  form  of  a  state  VII.  1 
ought  first  to  determine  which  is  the  most  eligible  life ;  while 
this  remains  uncertain  the  best  form  of  the  state  must  also  be 
uncertain  ;  for,  in  the  natural  order  of  things,  those  may  be 
expected  to  lead  the  best  life  who  are  governed  in  the  best 
manner  of  which  their  circumstances  admit.  We  ought  there-  2 
fore  to  ascertain,  first  of  all,  which  is  the  most  generally  eligible 
life,  and  then  whether  the  same  life  is  or  is  not  best  for  the  state 
and  for  individuals. 

Assuming  that  enough  has  been  already  said  in  exoteric 
discourses  concerning  the  best  life,  we  will  now  only  repeat 
the  statements  contained  in  them.  Certainly  no  one  will  dispute  3 
the  propriety  of  that  partition  of  goods  which  separates  them 
into  three  classes  \  viz.  external  goods,  goods  of  the  body, 
and  goods  of  the  soul,  or  deny  that  the  happy  man  must  have 
all  three.     For  no  one  would  maintain  that  he  is  happy  who  4 
has  not  in  him  a  particle  of  courage  or  temperance  or  justice 
or  prudence,  who  is  afraid  of  every  insect  which  flutters  past 
him,  and  will  commit  any  crime,  however  great,  in  order  to 
gratify  his  lust  of  meat  or  drink,  who  will  sacrifice  his  dearest 
friend  for  the  sake  of  half  a  farthing,  and  is  as  feeble  and  false 
in  mind  as  a  child  or  a  madman.     These  propositions  are  5 
universally  acknowledged  as  soon  as  they  are  uttered  ^,  but  men 

»  Cp.  N.  Eth.  i.  8.  §  2. 

'  Omitting  wantp,    which    is    bracketed    by    Bekker  in    his  second 
edition. 


25*8    Goods  of  Fortune,  and  Goods  of  the  Soul 

VII.  1  differ  about  the  quantity  which  is  desirable  or  the  relative 
superiority  of  this  or  that  good.  Some  think  that  a  very 
moderate  amount  of  virtue  is  enough,  but  set  no  limit  to  their 
desires  of  wealth,  property,  power,  reputation,  and  the  like. 

6  To  whom  we  reply  by  an  appeal  to  facts,  which  easily  prove 
that  mankind  do  not  acquire  or  preserve  virtue  by  the  help  of 

1323  b  external  goods,  but  external  goods  by  the  help  of  virtue,  and 
that  happiness,  whether  consisting  in  pleasure  or  virtue,  or 
both,  is  more  often  found  with  those  who  are  most  highly 
cultivated  in  their  mind  and  in  their  character,  and  have  only 
a  moderate  share  of  external  goods,  than  among  those  who 
possess  external  goods  to  a  useless  extent  but  are  deficient  in 
higher  qualities ;  and  this  is  not  only  matter  of  experience,  but, 
if  reflected  upon,  will  easily  appear  to  be  in  accordance  with 

7  reason.  For,  whereas  external  goods  have  a  limit,  like  any 
other  instrument ',  and  all  things  useful  are  of  such  a  nature 
that  where  there  is  too  much  of  them  they  must  either  do  harm, 
or  at  any  rate  be  of  no  use,  to  their  possessors,  every  good  of 
the  soul,  the  greater  it  is,  is  also  of  greater  use,  if  the  epithet 

8  '  useful '  as  well  as  '  noble '  is  appropriate  to  such  subjects.  No 
proof  is  required  to  show  that  the  best  state  of  one  thing 
in  relation  to  another  is  proportioned  to  the  degree  of  excel- 
lence by  which  the  natures  corresponding  to  those  states  are 
separated  from  each  other :  so  that,  if  the  soul  is  more  noble 
than  our  possessions  or  our  bodies,  both  absolutely  and  in 
relation  to  us,  it  must  be  admitted  that  the  best  state  of  either 

9  has  a  similar  ratio  to  the  other.  Again,  it  is  for  the  sake  of 
the  soul  that  goods  external  and  goods  of  the  body  are  eligible 
at  all,  and  all  wise  men  ought  to  choose  them  for  the  sake  of 
the  soul,  and  not  the  soul  for  the  sake  of  them. 

>  Cp.  i.  8.  §  15. 


Virtue  the  Source  of  Happiness     2^9 

Let  us  acknowledge  then  that  each  one  has  just  so  much  of  VII.  1 
happiness  as  he  lias  of  virtue  and  wisdom,  and  of  virtuous  and  '° 
wise  action.     God  is  a  witness  to  us  of  this  truth  ^ ;  for  he 
is  happy  and  blessed,  not  by  reason  of  any  external  good,  but 
in  himself  and  by  reason  of  his  own  nature.      And  herein  of 
necessity  lies  the  difference  between  good  fortune  and  happiness; 
for  external  goods  come  of  themselves,  and  chance  is  the  author 
of  them,  but  no  one  is  just  or  temperate  by  or  through  chance  '^. 
In  like  manner,  and  by  a  similar  train  of  argument,  the  happy  ii 
state  may  be  shown  to  be  that  which  is  [morally]  best  and 
which  acts  rightly ;  and  rightly  it  cannot  act  without  doing 
right  actions,  and  neither  individual  nor  state  can  do  right  actions 
without  virtue  and  wisdom.     Thus  the  courage,  justice,  and  12 
wisdom  of  a   state   have  the  same  form  and  nature  as  the 
qualities   which   give  the  individual  who  possesses  them  the 
name  of  just,   wise,  or  temperate. 

Thus  much  may  suffice  by  way  of  preface :  for  I  could  not  13 
avoid  touching  upon  these  questions,  neither  could  I  go  through 
all  the  arguments  affecting  them  ;  these  must  be  reserved  for 
another  discussion. 

Let  us  assume  then  that  t;Jie  best  life,  both  for  individuals  and 
states,  is  the  life  of  virtue,  having  external  goods  enough  for 
the  performance  of  good  actions.     If  there  are  any  who  con-  ^^^*  ^ 
troveit  our  assertion,  we  will  in  this  treatise  pass  them  over, 
and  consider  their  objections  hereafter. 

There  remains  to  be  discussed  the  question,  Whether  the  2 
happiness  of  the  individual  is  the  same  as  that  of  the  state,  or 
different  ?     Here  again  there  can  be  no  doubt — no  one  denies 
tiiat  they  are  the  same.    For  those  who  hold  that  the  well-being  2 

1  Cp.  c.  3.  §  10;  N.  Eth.  X.  8.  §  7 ;  Met.  xii.  7. 

2  Kthics  i.  9.  §  6. 

S  2 


26 o     Is  Contemplation  best^  or  Action^ 

VII.  2  of  the  individual  consists  in  his  wealth,  also  think  that  riches 
make  the  happiness  of  the  whole  state,  and  those  who  value 
most  highly  the  life  of  a  tyrant  deem  that  city  the  happiest 
which  rules  over  the  greatest  number ;  while  they  who  approve 
an  individual  for  his  virtue  say  that  the  more  virtuous  a  city 

3  is,  the  happier  it  is.  Two  points  here  present  themselves 
for  consideration  :  first  (i),  which  is  the  more  eligible  life, 
that  of  a  citizen  who  is  a  member  of  a  state,  or  that  of  an 
alien  who  has  no  political  ties;  and  again  (2),  which  is  the 
best  form  of  constitution  or  the  best  condition  of  a  state,  either 
on  the  supposition  that  political  privileges  are  given  to  all,  or 

4  that  they  are  given  to  a  majority  only  ?  Since  the  good  of  the 
state  and  not  of  the  individual  is  the  proper  subject  of  political 
thought  and  speculation,  and  we  are  engaged  in  a  political  dis- 
cussion, while  the  first  of  these  two  points  has  a  secondary 
interest  for  us,  the  latter  will  be  the  main  subject  of  our 
enquiry. 

5  Now  it  is  evident  that  the  form  of  government  is  best  in 
which  every  man,  whoever  he  is,  can  act  for  the  best  and  live 
happily.  But  even  those  who  agree  in  thinking  that  the  life 
of  virtue  is  the  most  eligible  raise  a  question,  whether  the  life 
of  business  and  politics  is  or  is  not  more  eligible  than  one 
which  is  wholly  independent  of  external  goods,  I  mean  than 
a  contemplative  life,  which  by  some  is  maintained  to  be  the 

6  only  one  worthy  of  a  philosopher.  For  these  two  lives — the 
life  of  the  philosopher  and  the  life  of  the  statesman — appear 
to  have  been  preferred  by  those  who  have  been  most  keen  in 
the  pursuit  of  virtue,  both  in  our  own  and  in  other  ages. 
Which  is  the  better  is  a  question  of  no  small  moment ;  for 
the  wise  man,  like  the  wise  state,  will  necessarily  regulate  his 

7  life  according  to  the  best  end.     There  are  some  who  think 


The  Policy  of  War  and  Oppression      261 

that  while  a  despotic  rule  over  others  is  the  greatest  injustice,  VII.  2 
to  exercise  a  constitutional  rule  over  them,  even  though  not 
unjust,  is  a  great  impediment  to  a  man's  individual  well-being. 
Others  take  an  opposite  view  ;  they  maintain  that  the  true  life 
of  man  is  the  practical  and  political,  and  that  every  virtue  admits 
of  being  practised,  quite  as  much  by  statesmen  and  rulers  as 
by  private  individuals.  Others,  again,  are  of  opinion  that  g 
arbitrary  and  tyrannical  rule  alone  consists  with  happiness  ; 
indeed,  ^  in  some  states  the  entire  aim  of  the  laws  ^  is  to  give 
men  despotic  power  over  their  neighbours.  And,  therefore,  9 
although  in  most  cities  the  laws  may  be  said  generally  to  be  in 
a  chaotic  state,  still,  if  they  aim  at  anything,  they  aim  at  the 
maintenance  of  power :  thus  in  Lacedaemon  and  Crete  the 
system  of  education  and  the  greater  part  of  the  laws  are  framed 
with  a  view  to  war'*.  And  in  all  nations  which  are  able  to  10 
gratify  their  ambition  military  power  is  held  in  esteem,  for  ex- 
ample among  the  Scythians  and  Persians  and  Thracians  and 
Celts.  In  some  nations  there  are  even  laws  tending  to  stimulate 
the  warlike  virtues,  as  at  Carthage,  where  we  are  told  that  men 
obtain  the  honour  of  wearing  as  many  armlets  as  they  have  served 
campaigns.  There  was  once  a  law  in  Macedonia  that  he  who  11 
had  not  killed  an  enemy  should  wear  a  halter,  and  among  the 
Scythians  no  one  who  had  not  slain  his  man  was  allowed  to 
drink  out  of  the  cup  which  was  handed  round  at  a  certain  feast. 
Among  the  Iberians,  a  warlike  nation,  the  number  of  enemies 
whom  a  man  has  slain  is  indicated  by  the  number  of  spits  which 
are  fixed  in  the  earth  round  his  tomb ;  and  there  are  numerous  la 

'  Or,  inserting  kcu  before  rSiMV  (apparently  the  reading  of  the  old 
translator),  'in  some  cases  the  entire  aim  both  of  the  constitution  and  the 

laws.' 

'  Cp.  Plato,  Laws,  i.  633  ff. 


262  War  not  the  Supreme  End 

VII.  2  practices  among  other  nations  of  a  like  kind,  some  of  them 
established  by  law  and  others  by  custom.  Yet  to  a  reflecting 
mind  it  must  appear  very  strange  that  the  statesman  should  be 
always  considering  how  he  can  dominate  and  tyrannize  over 

13  others,  whether  they  will  or  not.  How  can  that  which 
is  not  even  lawful  be  the  business  of  the  statesman  or  the 
legislator  ?  Unlawful  it  certainly  is  to  rule  without  regard  to 
justice,  for  there  may  be  might  where  there  is  no  right. 
The  other  arts  and  sciences  offer  no  parallel ;  a  physician 
is  not  expected  to  persuade  or  coerce  his  patients,  nor  a  pilot 

14  the  passengers  in  his  ship.  Yet  many  appear  to  think  that 
a  despotic  government  is  a  true  political  form,  and  what  men 
affirm  to  be  unjust  and  inexpedient  in  their  own  case  they  are 
not  ashamed  of  practising  towards  others ;  they  demand 
justice  for  themselves,  but  where  other  men  are  concerned 

1 5  they  care  nothing  about  it.  Such  behaviour  is  irrational ; 
unless  the  one  party  is  born  to  command,  and  the  other  born 
to  serve,  in  which  case  men  have  a  right  to  command,  not 
indeed  all  their  fellows,  but  only  those  who  are  intended 
to  be  subjects ;  just  as  we  ought  not  to  hunt  mankind, 
whether  for  food  or  sacrifice,  but  only  the  animals  which  are 
intended    for  food    or   sacrifice,    that    is    to  say,  such   wild 

16  animals   as   are  eatable.     And   surely  there  may  be  a   city 
1325  a  happy  in  isolation,  which  we  will  assume  to  be  well-governed 

(for  it  is  quite  possible  that  a  city  thus  isolated  might  be  well- 
administered  and  have  good  laws) ;  but  such  a  city  would 
not  be  constituted  with  any  view  to  war  or  the  conquest  of 

17  enemies — all  that  sort  of  thing  must  be  excluded.  Hence 
we  see  very  plainly  that  warlike  pursuits,  although  generally 
to  be  deemed  honourable,  are  not  the  supienie  end  of  all 
things,   but   only   means.      And  the  good   lawgiver  should 


The  False  and  True  Idea  of  a  J{uler    263 

enquire  how  states  and  races  of  men  and  communities  VII.  2 
may  participate  in  a  good  life,  and  in  the  happiness  which  is 
attainable  by  them.  His  enactments  will  not  be  always  the  i8 
same  ;  and  where  there  are  neighbours  ^  he  will  have  to  deal 
with  them  according  to  their  characters,  and  to  see  what 
duties  are  to  be  performed  towards  each.  The  end  at  which 
the  best  form  of  government  should  aim  may  be  properly 
made  a  matter  of  future  consideration  '^. 

Let  us  now  address  those  who,  while  they  agree  that  the  3 
life  of  virtue  is  the  most  eligible,  differ  about  the  manner 
of  practising  it.  For  some  renounce  political  power,  and 
think  that  the  life  of  the  freeman  is  different  from  the  life  of 
the  statesman  and  the  best  of  all ;  but  others  think  the  life 
of  the  statesman  best.  The  argument  of  the  latter  is  that 
he  who  does  nothing  cannot  do  well,  and  that  virtuous 
activity  is  identical  with  happiness.  To  both  we  say :  '  you 
are  partly  right  and  partly  wrong.'  The  first  class  are  right 
in  affirming  that  the  life  of  the  freeman  is  better  than  the 
life  of  the  despot;  for  there  is  nothing  grand  or  noble  a 
in  having  the  use  of  a  slave,  in  so  far  as  he  is  a  slave ; 
or  in  issuing  commands  about  necessary  things.  But  it  is 
an  error  to  suppose  that  every  sort  of  rule  is  despotic  like 
that  of  a  master  over  slaves,  for  there  is  as  great  a  difference 
between  the  rule  over  freemen  and  the  rule  over  slaves  as 
there  is  between  slavery  by  nature  and  freedom  by  nature, 
about  which  I  have  said  enough  at  the  commencement  of 
this  treatise "'.  And  it  is  equally  a  mistake  to  place  inac-  3 
tivity  above  action,  for  happiness  is  activity,  and  the  actions  of 
the  just  and  wise  are  the  realization  of  much  that  is  noble, 

'  Cp.  ii.  6.  §  7;  7.  §  14.  ''  Cp.  c.  14. 

»  Cp.  i.e.  5,6,7. 


2^4     T^f^^  False  and  True  Idea  of  a  J{uler 

VII.  3  But  perhaps  some  one,  accepting  these  premisses,  may  still 
maintain  that  supreme  power  is  the  best  of  all  things,  because 
the  possessors  of  it  are  able  to  perform  the  greatest  number 

4  of  noble  actions.  If  so,  the  man  who  is  able  to  rule, 
instead  of  giving  up  anything  to  his  neighbour,  ought  rather  to 
take  away  his  power ;  and  the  father  should  make  no  account 
of  his  son,  nor  the  son  of  his  father,  nor  friend  of  friend ; 
they  should  not  bestow  a  thought  on  one  another  in  com- 
parison with  this  higher  object,  for  the  best  is  the  most 
eligible  and  '  doing  well '  is  the  best.     There  might  be  some 

1325  b  truth  in  such  a  view  if  we  assume  that  robbers  and  plunderers 

5  attain  the  chief  good.  But  this  can  never  be  ;  and  hence  we 
infer  the  view  to  be  false.  For  the  actions  of  a  ruler  cannot 
really  be  honourable,  unless  he  is  as  much  superior  to  other 
men  as  a  husband  is  to  a  wife,  or  a  father  to  his  children, 
or  a  master  to  his  slaves.  And  therefore  he  who  violates 
the  law  can  never  recover  by  any  success,  however  great, 
what  he  has  already  lost  in  departing  from  virtue.  For 
equals  share  alike  in  the  honourable  and  the  just,  as  is  just 

6  and  equal.  But  that  the  unequal  should  be  given  to  equals, 
and  the  unlike  to  those  who  are  like,  is  contrary  to  nature, 
and  nothing  which  is  contrary  to  nature  is  good.  If,  there- 
fore, there  is  any  one  *  superior  in  virtue  and  in  the  power  of 
performing  the  best  actions,   him  we  ought  to  follow  and 

7  obey,  but  he  must  have  the  capacity  for  action  as  well  as 
virtue. 

If  we  are  right  in  out  view,  and  happiness  is  assumed  to 
be  virtuous  activity,  the  active  life  will  be  the  best,  both  for 

8  the  city  collectively,  and  for  individuals.  Not  that  a  life 
of  action  must  necessarily  have  relations  to  others,  as  some 

»  Cp.iii.  13.  525,  and  1 7.  §7. 


The  Conditions  of  the  Perfect  State    26 y 

persons  think,  nor  are  those  ideas  only  to  be  regarded  VII.  3 
as  practical  which  are  pursued  for  the  sake  of  practical  results, 
but  much  more  the  thoughts  and  contemplations  which  are 
independent  and  complete  in  themselves ;  since  virtuous 
activity,  and  therefore  action,  is  an  end,  and  even  in  the  case 
of  external  actions  the  directing  mind  is  most  truly  said 
to  act.  Neither,  again,  is  it  necessary  that  states  which  are  9 
cut  off  from  others  and  choose  to  live  alone  should  be  inactive  ; 
for  there  may  be  activity  also  in  the  parts ;  there  are  many 
ways  in  which  the  members  of  a  state  act  upon  one  another. 
The  same  thing  is  equally  true  of  every  individual.  If  this  10 
were  otherwise,  God  and  the  universe,  who  have  no  external 
actions  over  and  above  their  own  energies  \  would  be  far  enough 
from  perfection.  Hence  it  is  evident  that  the  same  life  is 
best  for  each  individual,  and  for  states,  and  for  mankind 
collectively. 

Thus  far  by  way  of  introduction.      In  what  has  preceded  4 
I    have    discussed    other    forms    of  government ;     in    what 
remains,  the  first  point  to  be  considered  is  what  should  be  the 
conditions  of  the  ideal  or  perfect  state  ;    for  the  perfect  state  2 
cannot  exist  without  a  due  supply  of  the  means  of  life.      And 
therefore  we  must  presuppose  many  purely  imaginary  condi- 
tions ^,    but    nothing  impossible.     There   will    be    a   certain 
number  of  citizens,  a  country  in  which  to  place  them,  and  the 
like.     As  the  weaver  or  shipbuilder    or    any   other    artisan  3 
must  have  the  material  proper  for  his  work  (and  in  proportion  1326  a 
as  this  is  better  prepared,   so  will  the  result  of  his  art  be 
nobler),  so  the  statesman  or  legislator  must  also  have  the 
materials  suited  to  him. 

First  among  the  materials  required   by  the   statesman  is  4 
'  Cp.  c.  1.  §  10.  2  cp.  ii.  6.  §  7. 


266        The  Number  of  the  Citizens 

VII.  4  population  :  he  will  consider  what  should  be  the  number  and 
character  of  the  citizens,  and  then  what  should  be  the  size 
and  character  of  the  country.  Most  persons  think  that  a 
state  in  order  to  be  happy  ought  to  be  large ;  but  even  if  they 
are  right,  they  have  no  idea  what  is  a  large  and  what  a  small 

5  state.  For  they  judge  of  the  size  of  the  city  by  the  number 
of  the  inhabitants ;  whereas  they  ought  to  regard,  not  their 
number,  but  their  power.  A  city  too,  like  an  individual,  has 
a  work  to  do ;  and  that  city  which  is  best  adapted  to  the 
fulfilment  of  its  work  is  to  be  deemed  greatest,  in  the 
same  sense  of  the  word  great  in  which  Hippocrates  might  be 
called  greater,  not  as  a  man,  but  as  a  physician,  than  some  one 

6  else  who  was  taller.  And  even  if  we  reckon  greatness  by 
numbers,  we  ought  not  to  include  everybody,  for  there  must 
always  be  in  cities  a  multitude  of  slaves  and  sojourners  and 
foreigners  ;  but  we  should  include  those  only  who  are  members 
of  the  state,  and  who  form  an  essential  part  of  it.  The  number 
of  the  latter  is  a  proof  of  the  greatness  of  a  city ;  but  a  city 
which  produces  numerous  artisans  and  comparatively  few 
soldiers  cannot  be  great,  for  a  great  city  is  not  to  be  confounded 

7  with  a  populous  one.  Moreover,  experience  shows  that  a  very 
populous  city  can  rarely,  if  ever,  be  well  governed  ;  since  all 
cities  which  have  a  reputation  for  good  government  have  a 
limit  of  population.     We  may  argue  on  grounds  of  reason,  and 

8  the  same  result  will  follow.  For  law  is  order,  and  good  law 
is  good  order ;  but  a  very  great  multitude  cannot  be  orderly  : 
to  introduce  order  into  the  unlimited  is  the  work  of  a  divine 
power — of  such  a  power  as  holds  together  the  universe.    Beauty 

9  is  realized  in  number  and  magnitude  *,  and  the  state  which  com- 
bines magnitude  with  good  order  must  necessarily  be  the  most 

1  Cp.  Poet.  7.  §  4. 


T^he  Number  of  the  Citi^s^ens        267 

beautiful.     To  the  size  of  states  there  is  a  limit,  as  there  is  to  VII.  4 
other  things,  plants,  animals,  implements ;   for  none  of  these  lo 
retain  their  natural  power  when  they  are  too  large  or  too  small, 
but  they  either  wholly  lose  their  nature,  or  are  spoiled.     For 
example  *,  a  ship  which  is  only  a  span  long  will  not  be  a  ship 
at  all,  nor  a  ship  a  quarter  of  a  mile  long  ;  yet  there  may  be 
a  ship  of  a  certain  size,  either  too  large  or  too  small,  which 
will  still  be  a  ship,  but  bad  for  sailing.     In  like  manner  a  state  '^^'■^^  ^ 
when  composed  of  too  few  is  not  as  a  state  ought  to  be,  self- 
sufficing  ;  when  of  too  many,  though  self-sufficing  in  all  mere 
necessaries,  it  is  a  nation  and  not  a  state,  being  almost  incap- 
able of  constitutional  government.      For  who  can  be  the  general 
of  such  a  vast  multitude,  or  who  the  herald,  unless  he  have  the 
voice  of  a  Stentor  ? 

A  state  then  only  begins  to  exist  when  it  has  attained 
a  population  sufficient  for  a  good  life  in  the  political  com- 
munity :  it  may  indeed  somewhat  exceed  this  number.  But,  1 2 
as  I  was  saying,  there  must  be  a  limit.  What  should  be 
the  limit  will  be  easily  ascertained  by  experience.  For  both 
governors  and  governed  have  duties  to  perform  ;  the  special 
functions  of  a  governor  are  to  command  and  to  judge.  But  13 
if  the  citizens  of  a  state  are  to  judge  and  to  distribute  offices 
according  to  merit,  then  they  must  know  each  other's 
characters ;  where  they  do  not  possess  this  knowledge, 
both  the  election  to  offices  and  the  decision  of  lawsuits 
will  go  wrong.  When  the  population  is  veiy  large  they 
are  manifestly  settled  at  haphazard,  which  clearly  ought 
not  to  be.  Besides,  in  an  overpopulous  state  foreigners  and  14 
metics  will  readily  acquire  the  rights  of  citizens,  for  who  will 
find  them  out  ?  Clearly,  then,  the  best  limit  of  the  population 
'  Cp.  V.  9.  §  7. 


2<^8  The  Situation  of  the  City 

VII.  4  of  a  state  is  the  largest  number  which  suffices  for  the  pur- 
poses of  life,  and  can  be  taken  in  at  a  single  vif  w.  Enough 
concerning  the  size  of  a  city. 

5  Much  the  same  principle  will  apply  to  the  territory  of  the 
state :  every  one  would  agree  in  praising  the  state  which 
is  most  entirely  self-sufficing ;  and  that  must  be  the  state 
which  is  all-producing,  for  to  have  all  things  and  to  want 
nothing  is  sufficiency.  In  size  and  extent  it  should  be  such 
as  may  enable  the  inhabitants  to  live  temperately  and  liberally 

2  in  the  enjoyment  of  leisure  ^.  Whether  we  are  right  or 
wrong  in  laying  down  this  limit  we  will  enquire  more  precisely 
hereafter  "^^  when  we  have  occasion  to  consider  what  is  the 
right  use  of  property  and  wealth  :  a  matter  which  is  much 
disputed,  because  men  are  inclined  to  rush  into  one  of  two 
extremes,  some  into  meanness,  others  into  luxury. 

3  It  is  not  difficult  to  determine  the  general  character  of 
the  territory  which  is  required ;  there  are,  however,  some 
points  on  which  military  authorities  should  be  heard;  they 
tell  us  that  it  should  be  difficult  of  access  to  the  enemy,  and 

^  1327  a  easy  of  egress  to  the  inhabitants.  Further,  we  require  that 
the  land  as  well  as  the  inhabitants  of  whom  we  were  just  now 
speaking  should  be  taken  in  at  a  single  view,  for  a  country 
which  is  easily  seen  can  be  easily  protected.  As  to  the 
position  of  the  city,  if  we  could  have  what  we  wish,  it  should 

4  be  well  situated  in  regard  both  to  sea  or  land.  This  then 
is  one  principle,  that  it  should  be  a  convenient  centre  for  the 
protection  of  the  whole  country  :  the  other  is,  that  it  should 
be  suitable  for  receiving  the  fruits  of  the  soil,  and  also  for  the 
bringing  in  of  timber  and  any  other  products. 

6  Whether  a   communication   with  the   sea  is  beneficial   to 

'  Cp.  ii.  6.  §  9.  »  Cp.  c.  8-10  infra  (?). 


Proximity  of  the  Sea,  Good  or  Evil  ^    2<^9 

a  well-ordered  state  or  not  is  a  question  which  has  often  been  VII.  6 
asked.  '  It  is  argued  that  the  introduction  of  strangers  brought 
up  under  other  laws,  and  the  increase  of  population,  will  be 
adverse  to  good  order  (for  a  maritime  people  will  always  have 
a  crowd  of  merchants  coming  and  going),  and  that  intercourse 
by  sea  is  inimical  to  good  government^.     Apart  from  these  2 
considerations,  it  would  be    undoubtedly  better,    both    with 
a  view  to  safety  and  to  the  provision  of  necessaries,  that  the 
city  and  territory  should  be   connected  with  the   sea ;    the  3 
defenders   of   a  country,  if  they  are  to  maintain  themselves 
against  an  enemy,  should  be  easily  relieved  both  by  land  and 
by  sea ;   and  even  if  they  are  not  able  to  attack,  by  sea  and 
land  at  once,  they  will  have  less  difficulty  in  doing  mischief 
to  their  assailants  on  one  element,  if  they  themselves  can  use 
both.     Moreover,  it  is  necessary  that  they  should  import  from  4 
abroad  what  is  not  found  in  their  own  country,  and  that  they 
should  export  what  they  have  in  excess ;   for  a  city  ought  to 
be  a  market,  not  indeed  for  others,  but  for  herself. 

Those  who  make  themselves  a  market  for  the  woj'ld  only 
do  so  for  the  sake  of  revenue,  and  if  a  state  ought  not  to  v 
desire  profit  of  this  kind  it  ought  not  to  have  such  an 
emporium.  Nowadays  we  often  see  in  countries  and  cities  5 
dockyards  and  harbours  very  conveniently  placed  outside  the 
city,  but  not  too  far  off;  and  they  are  kept  in  dependence  by 
walls  and  similar  fortifications.  Cities  thus  situated  mani- 
festly reap  the  benefit  of  intercourse  with  their  ports  ;  and 
any  harm  which  is  likely  to  accrue  may  be  easily  guarded 
against  by  the  laws,  which  will  pronounce  and  determine  who 
may  hold  communication  with  one  another,  and  who  may  not. 

There  can  be  no  doubt  that  the  possession  of  a  moderate  6 
'  Cp.  Plato,  Laws,  iv.  704  ff. 


■17  o       The  Character  of  the  CitiTi^ns 

VII.  e  naval  force  is  advantageous  to  a  city  ;    the   citizens  require 

] 327  b  such    a   force  for  their   own    needs,   and  they  should   also 

be    formidable    to    their   neighbours    in    certain    cases*,    or, 

if  necessaiy,  able  to  assist  them  by  sea  as  well  as  by  land. 

7  The  proper  number  or  magnitude  of  this  naval  force  is 
relative  to  the  character  of  the  state ;  for  if  her  function 
is  to  take  a  leading  part  in  politics  "^.^  her  naval  power  should 
be  commensurate  with  the  scale  of  her  enterprises.  The 
population  of  the  state  need  not  be  much  increased,   since 

8  there  is  no  necessity  that  the  sailors  should  be  citizens :  the 
marines  who  have  the  control  and  command  will  be  freemen, 
and  belong  also  to  the  infantry ;  and  wherever  there  is 
a  dense  population  of  Perioeci  and  husbandmen,  there  will 
always  be  sailors  more  than  enough.  Of  this  we  see 
instances  at  the  present  day.  The  city  of  Heraclea,  for 
example,  although  small  in  comparison  with  many  others,  can 

9  man  a  considerable  fleet.  Such  are  our  conclusions  respect- 
ing the  territory  of  the  state,  its  harbour,  its  towns,  its 
relations  to  the  sea,  and  its  maritime  power. 

7  Having  spoken  of  the  number  of  the  citizens,  we  will 
proceed  to  speak  of  what  should  be  their  character.  This  is 
a  subject  which  can  be  easily  understood  by  any  one  who 
casts  his  eye  on  the  more  celebrated  states  of  Hellas, 
and  generally  on  the  distribution  of  races  in  the  habitable 

2  world.  Those  who  live  in  a  cold  climate  and  in  [northern] 
Europe  are  full  of  spirit,  but  wanting  in  intelligence  and 
skill ;  and  therefore  they  keep  their  freedom,  but  have 
no  political  organization,  and  are  incapable  of  ruling  over 
others.     Whereas  the   natives  of   Asia   are  intelligent    and 

'  Cp.  ii.  6.  §  7. 

^  Reading  voKniK^v  with  the  MSS.  and  Bekker's  first  edition. 


The  Character  of  the  Citizens      271 

inventive,  but  they  are  wanting  in  spirit,  and  therefore  they  are  VII.  7 
always  in  a  state  of  subjection  and  slavery.     But  the  Hellenic  3 
race,  which  is  situated  between  them,  is  likewise  intermediate 
in  character,  being  high-spirited  and  also  intelligent^.     Hence 
it  continues  free,  and  is  the  best  governed  of  any  nation,  and, 
if  it  could  be  formed  into  one  state,  would  be  able  to  rule  the 
world.     There  are  also  similar  differences  in  the  different  tribes  4 
of  Hellas ;  for  some  of  them  are  of  a  one-sided  nature,  and 
are  intelligent  or  courageous  only,  while  in  others  there  is  a 
happy  combination  of  both  qualities.      And  clearly  those  whom 
the  legislator  will  most  easily  lead  to  virtue  may  be  expected 
to  be  both  intelligent  and  courageous.     Some  [like  Plato '^J  5 
say   that   the   guardians    should  be  friendly    towards    those 
whom  they  know,  fierce  towards  those  whom  they  do  not 
know.     Now,  passion  is  the  quality  of  the  soul  which  begets  1328  a 
friendship  and  inspires  affection  ;  notably  the  spirit  within  us 
is  more  stirred  against  our  friends  and  acquaintances   than 
against  those  who  are  unknown  to  us,  when  we  think  that  we 
are  despised  by  them  ;  for  which  reason  Archilochus,  com-  6 
plaining  of  his  friends,  very  naturally  addresses  his  soul  in  these 
words, 

'For  wert  thou  not  plagued  on  account  of  friends'?' 
The  power  of  command  and  the  love  of  freedom  are  in  all 
men  based  upon  this  quality,  for  passion  is  commanding  and 
invincible.     Nor  is  it  right  to  say  that  the  guardians  should  be  7 
fierce  towards  those  whom  they  do  not  know,  for  we  ought 
not  to  be  out  of  temper  with  any  one  ;  and  a  lofty  spirit  is  not 

1  Cp.  Plato,  Rep.  iv.  435  e,  436  a.  »  Rep.  ii.  375. 

'  Or  :  '  For  s  urely  thou  art  not  plagued  on  account  of  thy  friends  ?  ' 
The  line  is  probably  corrupt.  Better  to  read  with  Bergk,  av  ytip  Srj  iraph, 
(piXcDV  dirayx*°>  '  for  thou  indeed  wert  plagued  by  friends.' 


2  72  The  Passionate  Nature 

VII.  7  fierce  by  nature,  but  only  when  excited  against  evil-doers. 
And  this,  as  I  was  saying  before,  is  a  feeling  which  men 
show  most  strongly  towards  their  friends  if  they  think  they 

8  have  received  a  wrong  at  their  hands :  as  indeed  is  reason- 
able ;  for,  besides  the  actual  injury,  they  seem  to  be  de- 
prived of  a  benefit  by  those  who  owe  them  one.  Hence  the 
saying, 

'  Cruel  is  the  strife  of  brethren  ^ ; ' 
and  again, 

'  They  who  love  in  excess  also  hate  in  excess  ^.' 

9  Thus  we  have  nearly  determined  the  number  and  character 
of  the  citizens  of  our  state,  and  also  the  size  and  nature  of 
their  territory.  I  say  '  nearly,'  for  we  ought  not  to  require 
the  same  minuteness  in  theory  as  in  fact'*. 

8  As  in  other  natural  compounds  the  conditions  of  a  compo- 
site whole  are  not  necessarily  organic  parts  of  it,  so  in  a  state 
or  in  any  other  combination  forming  a  unity  not  everything 

2  is  a  part,  which  is  a  necessary  condition  *.  The  members  of 
an  association  have  necessarily  some  one  thing  the  same 
and  common  to  all,  in  which  they  share  equally  or  unequally ; 

3  for  example,  food  or  land  or  any  other  thing.  But  where 
there  are  two  things  of  which  one  is  a  means  and  the  other 
an  end,  they  have  nothing  in  common  except  that  the  one 
receives  what  the  other  produces.  Such,  for  example,  is  the 
relation  in  which  workmen  and  tools  stand  to  their  work; 
the    house   and    the   builder  have  nothing  in   common,  but 

4  the  art  of  the  builder  is  for  the  sake  of  the  house.  And 
so  states  require  property,  but  property,  even  though  living 
beings  are  included  in  it  *,  is  no  part  of  a  state ;  for  a  state  is 

*  Eurip.  Frag.  51  Diudorf.  *  Cp.  la.  §9,  infra. 

^  Cp.  iii.  5.  §  a.  *  Cp.  i.  4.  §  2. 


T^he  Necessary  Conditions  of  a  State     273 

not   a    community  of  living    beings  only,  but  a    community  VII.  8 
of  equals,   aiming  at  the  best  life  possible.      Now,  whereas  5 
happiness  is  the  highest  good,  being  a  realization  and  perfect 
practice  of  virtue,  which  some  attain,  while  others  have  little 
or   none   of  it,   the  various  qualities   of  men  are  clearly  the 
reason  why  there  are  various  kinds  of  states  and  many  forms 
of  government ;    for  different  men  seek   after  happiness  in 
different    ways    and  by    different   means,   and    so  make    for  132S  b 
themselves  different  modes  of  life  and  forms  of  government. 
We  must  see  also  how  many  things   are    indispensable   to  6 
the  existence  of  a  state,  for  what  we  call  the  parts  of  a  state 
will   be    found  among   them.     Let  us   then    enumerate    the 
functions  of  a  state,  and  we  shall  easily  elicit  what  we  want : 

First,  there  must  be  food  ;  secondly,  arts,  for  life  requires  7 
many  instruments ;  thirdly,  there  must  be  arms,  for  the 
members  of  a  community  have  need  of  them  in  order  to 
maintain  authority  both  against  disobedient  subjects  and 
against  external  assailants  ;  fourthly,  there  must  be  a  certain 
amount  of  revenue,  both  for  internal  needs  and  for  the 
pui-poses  of  war ;  fifthly,  or  rather  first,  there  must  be  a  care 
of  religion,  which  is  commonly  called  worship ;  sixthly,  and 
most  necessary  of  all,  there  must  be  a  power  of  deciding  what 
is  for  the  public  interest,  and  what  is  just  in  men's  dealings 
with  one  another. 

These  are  the  things  which  every  state  may  be   said  to  8 
need.     For  a  state  is  not  a  mere  aggregate  of  persons,  but 
a  union  of  them   sufficing   for  the  purposes  of  life ' ;    and 
if  any  of  these  things  be  wanting,  it  is  simply  impossible 
that   the    community    can    be    self-sufficing.     A    state    then  9 

'  Cp.  supra,  c.  5.  §  I. 

DAVIS  T 


2  74    T^^^  Necessary  Conditions  of  a  State 

VII.  8  should  be  framed  with  a  view  to  the  fulfilment  of  these 
functions.  There  must  be  husbandmen  to  procure  food,  and 
artisans,  and  a  warlike  and  a  wealthy  class,  and  priests,  and 
judges  to  decide  what  is  just  ^  and  expedient. 
0  Having  determined  these  points,  we  have  in  the  next  place 
to  consider  whether  all  ought  to  share  in  every  sort  of  occupa- 
tion. Shall  every  man  be  at  once  husbandman,  artisan,  coun- 
cillor, judge,  or  shall  we  suppose  the  several  occupations  just 
mentioned  assigned  to  different  persons  ?  or,  thirdly,  shall  some 
employments  be  assigned  to  individuals  and  others  common  to 
all  ?     The  question,  however,  does  not  occur  in  every  state  ; 

2  as  we  were  saying,  all  may  be  shared  by  all,  or  not  all  by  all, 
but  only  some  by  some  ^ ;  and  hence  arise  the  differences  of 
states,  for  in  democracies  all  share  in  all,  in  oligarchies  the 

3  opposite  ])ractice  prevails.  Now,  since  we  are  here  speaking 
of  the  best  form  of  government,  and  that  under  which  the  state 
will  be  most  happy  (and  happiness,  as  has  been  already  said, 
cannot  exist  without  virtue  ^),  it  clearly  follows  that  in  the 
state  which  is  best  governed  the  citizens  who  are  absolutely 
and  not  merely  relatively  just  men  must  not  lead  the  life  of 
mechanics  or  tradesmen,  for  such  a  life  is  ignoble  and  inimical 

4  to  virtue  *.     Neither  must  they  be  husbandmen,  since  leisure  is 
1329  a  necessary  both  for  the  development  of  virtue  and  the  perform- 
ance of  political  duties. 

Again,  there  is  in  a  state  a  class  of  warriors,  and  another 
of  councillors,  who  advise  about  the  expedient  and  determine 
matters  of  law,  and  these  seem  in  an  especial  manner  parts  of 
a  state.     Now,  should  these  two  classes  be  distinguished,  or 

5  are  both  functions  to  be  assigned  to  the  same  persons  ?     Here 

'  Reading  hiKaiuv  with  Bekker  in  his  second  edition. 
-  Cp.  iv.  4  and  14.  ^  Cp.  c.  8.  §  5.  *  Cp.  Plato,  Laws,  xi.  919. 


The  Governing  Classes  27 f 

again  there  is  no  difiicdty  in  seeing  that  both  functions  will  in  VII.  9 
one  way  belong  to  the  same,  in  another,  to  difFerent  persons. 
To  difFerent  persons  in  so  far  as  their  employments  are  suited 
to  different  ages  of  life,  for  the  one  requires  wisdom,  and  the 
other  strength.  But  on  the  other  hand,  since  it  is  an  im- 
possible thing  that  those  who  are  able  to^use  or  to  resist  force 
should  be  willing  to  remain  always  in  subjection,  from  this 
point  of  view  the  persons  are  the  same  ;  for  those  who  carry 
arms  can  always  determine  the  fate  of  the  constitution.  It  6 
remains  therefore  that  both  functions  of  government  should  be 
entrusted  to  the  same  persons,  not,  however,  at  the  same  time,  ^ 

but  in  the  order  prescribed  by  nature,  who  has  given  to  young 
men  strength  and  to  older  men  wisdom.  Such  a  distribution 
of  duties  will  be  expedient  and  also  just,  for  it  is  in  accordance 
with  desert.  Besides,  the  ruling  class  should  be  the  owners  of  7 
property,  for  they  are  citizens,  and  the  citizens  of  a  state  should 
be  in  good  circumstances  ;  whereas  mechanics  or  any  other 
class  whose  art  excludes  the  art  of  virtue  have  no  share  in  the 
state.  This  follows  from  our  first  principle,  for  happiness  can- 
not exist  without  virtue,  and  a  city  is  not  to  be  termed  happy 
in  regard  to  a  portion  of  the  citizens,  but  in  regard  to  them  all  *. 
And  clearly  property  should  be  in  their  hands,  since  the  has-  g 
bandmen  will  of  necessity  be  slaves  or  barbarians  or  Perioeci  ^. 
Of  the  classes  enumerated  there  remain  only  the  priests,  and 
the  manner  in  which  their  office  is  to  be  regulated  is  obvious. 
No  husbandman  or  mechanic  should  be  appointed  to  it ;  for  9 
the  Gods  should  receive  honour  from  the  citizens  only.  Now 
since  the  body  of  the  citizens  is  divided  into  two  classes,  the 
warriors  and  the  councillors ;  and  it  is  beseeming  that  the 
worship  of  the  Gods  should  be  duly  performed,  and  also  a 

'  Cp.  ii.  5.  §§  27,  28.  2  Cp.  infra,  c.  10.  §§  13,  14. 

T  2 


2  7<^       Warriors — Councillors — 'Priests 

VII.  9  rest  provided  in  their  service  for  those  who  from  age  have 

given  up  active  Hfe — to  the  old  men  of  these  two  classes  should 

be  assigned  the  duties  of  the  priesthood. 

lo      We  have  shown  what  are  the  necessary  conditions,  and 

what  the  parts  of  a  state  :  husbandmen,  craftsmen,  and  labourers 

of  all  kinds  are  necessary  to  the  existence  of  states,  but  the 

parts  of  the  state  are  the  warriors  and  councillors.     And  these 

are  distinguished  severally  from  one  another,  the  distinction 

being  in  some  cases  permanent,  in  others  not. 

10       It  is  no  new  or  recent  discovery  of  political  philosophers 

1329  b  that  the  state  ought  to  be  divided  into  classes,  and  that  the 

warriors  should  be   separated  from   the  husbandmen.     The 

system  has  continued  in  Egypt  and  in  Crete  to  this  day,  and 

was  established,  as  tradition  says,  by  a  law  of  Sesostris  in 

3  Egypt  and  of  Minos  in  Crete.     The  institution  of  common 

tables  also  appears  to  be  of  ancient  date,  being  in  Crete  as 

3  old  as  the  reign  of  Minos,  and  in  Italy  far  older.  The  Italian 
historians  say  that  there  was  a  certain  Italus  king  of  Oenotria, 
from  whom  the  Oenotrians  were  called  Italians,  and  who  gave 
the  name  of  Italy  to  the  promontory  of  Europe  lying  between 
the  Scylletic  and  Lametic  Gulfs,  which  are  distant  from  one 

4  another  only  half  a  day's  journey.  They  say  that  this  Italus 
converted  the  Oenotrians  from  shepherds  into  husbandmen,  and 
besides  other  laws  which  he  gave  them,  was  the  founder  of 
their  common  meals ;  even  in  our  day  some  who  are  derived 
from  him  retain  this  institution  and  certain  other  laws  of  his. 

5  On  the  side  of  Italy  towards  Tyrrhenia  dwelt  the  Opici,  who 
are  now,  as  of  old,  called  Ausones ;  and  on  the  side  towards 
lapygia  and  the  Ionian  Gulf,  in  the  district  called  Syrtis ',  the 

'  Retaining  the  reading  of  the  MSS.,  which  Bekker  in  his  second 
edition  has  altered  into  ^ipiTis,  a  conjecture  of  Goettling's. 


Ancient  Egypt ^  Crete ^  Italy         277 

Chones,  who  are  likewise  of  Oenotrian  race.  From  this  part  VII.  10 
of  the  world  originally  came  the  institution  of  common  tables ; 
the  separation  into  castes  [which  was  much  older]  from  Egypt, 
for  the  reign  of  Sesostris  is  of  far  greater  antiquity  than  that 
of  Minos.  It  is  true  indeed  that  these  and  many  other  things  7 
have  been  invented  several  times  over  ^  in  the  course  of  ages, 
or  rather  times  without  number ;  for  necessity  may  be  supposed 
to  have  taught  men  the  inventions  which  were  absolutely  re- 
quired, and  when  these  were  provided,  it  was  natural  that  other 
things  which  would  adorn  and  enrich  life  should  grow  up  by 
degrees.  And  we  may  infer  that  in  political  institutions  the 
same  rule  holds.  Egypt '^  witnesses  to  the  antiquity  of  all  8 
things,  for  the  Egyptians  appear  to  be  of  all  people  the  most 
ancient ;  and  they  have  laws  and  a  regular  constitution  [existing 
from  time  immemorial].  We  should  therefore  make  the  best 
use  of  what  has  been  already  discovered '',  and  try  to  supply 
defects. 

I  have  already  remarked  that  the  land  ought  to  belong  to  9 
those  who  possess  arms  and  have  a  share  in  the  government  *, 
and  that  the  husbandmen  ought  to  be  a  class  distinct  from  them  ; 
and  I  have  determined  what  should  be  the  extent  and  nature 
of  the  territory.  Let  me  proceed  to  discuss  the  distribution 
of  the  land,  and  the  character  of  the  agricultural  class  ;  for 
I  do  not  think  that  property  ought  to  be  common,  as  some 

'  Cp.  Plato,  Laws,  iii.  676  ;  Aristotle,  Metaph.  xi.  8.  1074  b.  10;  and 
Pol.  ii.  5.  §  16  (note). 

''■  Cp.  Metaph.  i.  i.  §  16;  Meteor,  i.  14.  352  b.  19;  Plato,  Timaeus, 
22  B ;  Laws,  ii.  656,  657. 

^  Reading,  with  Bekker  in  his  second  edition,  (vprjufvoii :  which  may 
have  been  altered  into  flprj/jifyoii  from  a  confusion  of  fiprjTai  npoTtpov 
in  §  9  infra. 

*  Cp.  supra,  c.  9,  §§  5-7. 


278    Private  Layidholders — Common  Meals 

VII.  10  maintain  ^,  but  only  that  by  friendly  consent  there  should  be 
1330  a  a  common  use  of  it ;  and  that  no  citizen  should  be  in  want  of 
subsistence.  -. 

As  to  common  meals,  there  is  a  general  agreement  that  a  well- 

10  ordered  city  should  have  them  ;  and  we  will  hereafter  explain 
what  are  our  own  reasons  for  taking  this  view.  They  ought, 
however,  to  be  open  to  all  the  citizens  ^.  And  yet  it  is  not 
easy  for  the  poor  to  contribute  the  requisite  sum  out  of  their 
private  means,  and  to  provide  also  for  their  household.  The 
expense  of  religious  worship  should  likewise  be  a  public  charge. 

1 1  The  land  must  therefore  be  divided  into  two  parts,  one  public 
and  the  other  private,  and  each  part  should  be  subdivided, 
half  of  the  public  land  being  appropriated  to  the  service  of 
the  Gods,  and  the  other  half  used  to  defray  the  cost  of  the 
common  meals ;  while  of  the  private  land,  half  should  be 
near  the  border,  and  the  other  near  the  city,  so  that  each 
citizen  having  two  lots  they  may  all  of  them  have  land  in  both 
places  ;  there  is  justice  and  fairness  in  such  a  division '',  and  it 
tends  to  inspire  unanimity  among  the   people  in  their  border 

1 2  wars.  Where  there  is  not  this  arrangement,  some  of  them  are 
too  ready  to  come  to  blows  with  their  neighbours,  while  others 
are  so  cautious  that  they  quite  lose  the  sense  of  honour. 
Wherefore  there  is  a  law  in  some  places  which  forbids  those 
who  dwell  near  the  border  to  take  part  in  public  deliberations 
about  wars  with  neighbours,  on  the  ground  that  their  interests 

13  will  pervert  their  judgment.  For  the  reasons  already  mentioned, 
then,  the  land  should  be  divided  in  the  manner  described. 

'  Cp.  ii.  5.  »  Cp.  ii.  9.  §  31. 

'  Cp.  Plato,  Laws,  v.  745,  where  the  same  proposal  is  found.  Aristotle, 
in  Book  ii.  6.  §  15,  condemns  the  division  of  lots  which  he  here 
adopts. 


"The  Land  and  its  Cultivators       279 

The  very  best  thing  of  all  would  be  that  the  husbandmen  should  VII.  10 
be  slaves,  not  all  of  the  same  race^  and  not  spirited,  for  if 
they  have  no  spirit  they  will  be  better  suited  for  their  work, 
and  there  will  be  no  danger  of  their  making  a  revolution.  The 
next  best  thing  would  be  that  they  should  be  Perioeci  of  foreign 
race  *,  and  of  a  like  inferior  nature ;  some  of  them  should  be  14 
the  slaves  of  individuals,  and  employed  on  the  private  estates 
of  men  of  property,  the  remainder  should  be  the  property  of 
the  state  and  employed  on  the  common  land  ^.  I  will  hereafter 
explain  what  is  the  proper  treatment  of  slaves,  and  why  it  is 
expedient  that  liberty  should  be  always  held  out  to  them  as 
the  reward  of  their  services. 

We  have  already  said  that  the  city  should  be  open  to  the  II 
land   and    to  the  sea  *,   and    to    the   whole    country  as    far 
as  possible.     In  respect  of  the  place  itself  our  wish  would 
be  to  find  a  situation  for  it,  fortunate  in  four  things.     The 
first,  health — this  is  a  necessity :  cities  which  lie  towards  the  2 
east,    and  are  blown  upon  by  winds  coming  from  the  east, 
are  the  healthiest ;  next  in  healthfulness  are  those  which  are 
sheltered  from  the  north  wind,  for  they  have  a  milder  winter. 
The    site    of  the    city  should  likewise  be   convenient    both  1330  b 
for  political  administration  and  for  war.     With  a  view  to  the  ,', 
latter   it    should    afford    easy    egress    to    the   citizens,    and 
at  the  same  time  be    inaccessible  and  difficult  of  capture  to 
enemies'.     There  should  be  a  natural  abundance  of  springs 
and  fountains  in  the  town  or,  if  there  is  a  deficiency  of  them, 
great   reservoirs    may  be    established    for    the    collection    of 
rain-water,  such  as  will  not  fail  when  the  inhabitants  are  cut 

1  Cp.  Plato,  Laws,  vi,  777.  '  Cp.  c.  9.  §  8. 

'  Cp.  ii.  7.  §  23.  ♦  Cp.  c.  5.  §  3. 

*  Repetition  of  c.  5.  §  3. 


280      The  City:  Sanitary  Conditions 

VII.  11  off  from  the  country  by  war.  Special  care  should  be  taken 
■♦  of  the  health  of  the  inhabitants,  which  will  depend  chiefly  on 
the  healthiness  of  the  locality  and  of  the  quarter  to  which  they 
are  exposed,  and  secondly,  on  the  use  of  pure  water;  this 
latter  point  is  by  no  means  a  secondary  consideration.  For 
the  elements  which  we  use  most  and  oftenest  for  the  support 
of  the  body  contribute   most  to  health,   and  among  these 

5  are  water  and  air.  Wherefore,  in  all  wise  states,  if  there  is 
a  want  of  pure  water,  and  the  supply  is  not  all  equally  good, 
the  drinking  water  ought  to  be  separated  from  that  which  is 
used  for  other  purposes. 

As  to  strongholds,  what  is  suitable  to  different  forms  of 
government  varies :  thus  an  acropolis  is  suited  to  an  oligarchy 
or  a  monarchy,  but  a  plain  to  a  democracy ;  neither  to  an 

6  aristocracy,  but  rather  a  number  of  strong  places.  The 
arrangement  of  private  houses  is  considered  to  be  more 
agreeable  and  generally  more  convenient  if  the  streets  are 
regularly  laid  out  after  the  modern  fashion  which  Hippo- 
damus  ^  introduced ;  but  for  security  in  war  the  antiquated 
mode  of  building,  which  made  it  difficult  for  strangers  to  get 
out   of  a  town  and  for  assailants  to  find   their   way  in,   is 

y  preferable.  A  city  should  therefore  adopt  both  plans  of 
building :  it  is  possible  to  arrange  the  houses  irregularly, 
as  husbandmen  plant  their  vines  in  what  are  called  '  clumps.' 
The  whole  town  should  not  be  laid  out  in  straight  lines,  but 
only  certain  quarters  and  regions ;  thus  security  and  beauty 
will  be  combined. 

8  As  to  walls,  those  who  say*  that  cities  making  any 
pretension  to  military  virtue  should  not  have  them,  are  quite 
out  of  date  in  their  notions ;  and  they  may  see  the  cities 
1  Cp.  ii.  8.  §  I.  Cp.  Plato,  Laws,  vi.  778,  779. 


I 
Military  J{equirements  281 

which  prided  themselves  on  this    fancy   confuted  by   facts.  VII.  11 
True,   there   is  little   courage   shown   in  seeking    for    safety  9 
behind    a    rampart   when  an    enemy   is    similar  in   character 
and  not  much  superior  in  number ;    but  the  superiority  of  the 
besiegers  may  be  and  often  is  beyond  the  power  of  men  to 
resist,  and  too  much  for  the  valour  of  a  few ;    and  if  they 
are  to  be  saved  and  to  escape  defeat  and  outrage,  the  strongest  1331  a 
wall  will  be  the  best  defence  of  the  warrior,  more  especially 
now  that    catapults   and    siege    engines    have    been    brought 
to  such  perfection.     To  have  no  walls  would  be  as  foolish  10 
as  to  choose  a  site  for  a  town  in  an  exposed  country,  and  to 
level  the  heights ;  or  as  if  an  individual  were  to  leave  his 
house   unwalled,   lest  the  inmates   should   become  cowards. 
Nor  must  we  forget  that  those  who  have  their  cities  surrounded  11 
by  walls  may  either  take  advantage  of  them  or  not,  but  cities 
which  are  unwalled  have  no  choice. 

If  our  conclusions  are  just,  not  only  should  cities  have 
walls,  but  care  should  be  taken  to  make  them  ornamental, 
as  well  as  useful  for  warlike  purposes,  and  adapted  to  resist 
modern  inventions.  For  as  the  assailants  of  a  city  do  12 
all  they  can  to  gain  an  advantage,  so  the  defenders  should 
make  use  of  any  means  of  defence  which  have  been  already 
discovered,  and  should  devise  and  invent  others,  for  when 
men  are  well  prepared  no  enemy  even  thinks  of  attacking 
them. 

As  the  walls  are  to  be  divided  by  guardhouses  and  towers  12 
built  at    suitable  intervals,   and  the   body   of  citizens    must 
be    distributed   at    common   tables,   the    idea   will    naturally 
occur  that  we  should  establish  some  of  the  common  tables 
in  the  guardhouses.     The  arrangement  might  be  as  follows :  2 
the  principal  common  tables  of  the  magistrates  will  occupy 


282  Public  Buildings 

VII.  12  a  suitable  place,  and  there  also  will  be  the  buildings  appro- 
priated to  religious  worship  except  in  the  case  of  those  rites 
which    the    law    or  the    Pythian   oracle  has  restricted  to  a 

3  special  locality  ^.  The  site  should  be  a  spot  seen  far  and 
wide,  which  gives  due  elevation  to  virtue  and  towers  over  the 
neighbourhood.  Near  this  spot  should  be  established  an 
agora,  such  as  that  which  the  Thessalians  call  the  '  freemen's 

4  agora ' ;  from  this  all  trade  should  be  excluded,  and  no 
mechanic,  husbandman,  or  any  such  person  allowed  to  enter, 
unless  he  be  summoned  by  the  magistrates.  It  would  be 
a  charming  use  of  the  place,  if  the  gymnastic  exercises  of 

5  the  elder  men  were  performed  there.  For  *  in  this  noble 
practice  different  ages  should  be  separated  *,  and  some  of 
the  magistrates  should  stay  with  the  boys,  while  the  grown- 
up men  remain  with  the  magistrates  [i.e.  in  the  freeman's 
agora] ;  for  the  presence  of  the  magistrates  is  the  best  mode 

,  of  inspiring  true  modesty  and  ingenuous  feiar.  There  should 
also  be  a  traders'  agora,  distinct  and  apart  from  the  other,  in 
a  situation  which  is  convenient  for  the  reception  of  goods 
both  by  sea  and  land. 

But  in  speaking  of  the  magistrates  we  must  not  forget 
another  section  of  the-  citizens,  viz.  the  priests,  for  whom 
public    tables    should    likewise  be  provided  in   their   proper 

7  place  near  the  temples.  The  magistrates  who  deal  with 
contracts,  indictments,  summonses,  and  the  like,  and  those 
who  have  the  care  of  the  agora  and  of  the  city  respectively, 
ought  to  be  established  near  the  agora  and  in  some  public 
place  of  meeting ;  the  neighbourhood  of  the  traders'  agora 
will    be    a    suitable    spot ;    the   upper   agora  we    devote   to 

'  Cp.  Plato,  Laws,  v.  738  ;  vi.  759,  778  ;  viii.  848. 

'  Or  '  this  institution  should  be  divided  according  to  ages.' 


The  End  of  the  State  and  the  Means     283 

the  life  of  leisure,  the  other  is  intended  for  the  necessities  of  VII.  12 
trade. 

The  same  order  should  prevail  ^  in  the  country,  for  there  s 
too  the  magistrates,  called  by  some  '  Inspectors  of  Forests,' 
and  by  others  '  Wardens  of  the  Country,*  must  have  guard- 
houses and  common  tables  while  they  are  on  duty  ;  temples 
should  also  be  scattered  throughout  the  countiy,  dedicated, 
some  to  Gods,  and  some  to  heroes. 

But  it  would  be  a  waste  of  time  for  us  to  linger  over  9 
details  like  these.     The  difficulty  is  not  in  imagining  but  in 
carrying  them  out.     We  may  talk  about  them  as  much  as  we 
like,   but  the   execution  of  them  will  depend  upon  fortune. 
Wherefore  let  us  say  no  more  about  these  matters  for  the  present. 

Returning  to  the  constitution  itself,  let  us  seek  to  13 
determine  out  of  what,  and  what  sort  of,  elements  the  state 
which  is  to  be  happy  and  well-governed  should  be  composed. 
There  are  two  things  in  which  all  well-being  consists  ;  one  of  2 
them  is  the  choice  of  a  right  end  and  aim  of  action,  and 
the  other  the  discovery  of  the  actions  which  are  means 
towards  it ;  for  the  means  and  the  end  may  agree  or  disagree. 
Sometimes  the  right  end  is  set  before  men,  but  in  practice  they 
fail  to  attain  it ;  in  other  cases  they  are  successful  in  all  the 
means,  but  they  propose  to  themselves  a  bad  end,  and  some- 
times they  fail  in  both.  Take,  for  example,  the  art  of  medicine  ; 
physicians  do  not  always  understand  the  nature  of  health,  and 
also  the  means  which  they  use  may  not  effect  the  desired  end. 
In  all  arts  and  sciences  both  the  end  and  the  means  should  be 
equally  within  our  control. 

The  happiness  and    well-being   which  all   men  manifestly  3 
desire,  some  have  the  power  of  attaining,  but  to  others,  from 
*■  Reading  vtvtft^aOat  with  Bekker's  first  edition. 


284  T^he  Good  Life  Requires  External  Goods 

VII.  13  some  accident  or  defect  of  nature,  the  attainment  of  them  is 

1332a  not  granted;  for  a  good  life  requires  a  supply  of  external 

goods,    in  a   less  degree  when   men  are  in  a  good  state,  in 

4  a  greater  degree  when  they  are  in  a  lower  state.  Others 
again,  who  possess  the  condition  of  happiness,  go  utterly 
wrong  from  the  first  in  the  pursuit  of  it.  But  since  our 
object  is  to  discover  the  best  form  of  government,  that, 
namely,  under  which  a  city  will  be  best  governed,  and  since 

"  the  city  is  best  governed  which  has  the  greatest  opportunity 
of  obtaining  happiness,  it  is  evident  that  we  must  clearly 
ascertain  the  nature  of  happiness. 

5  We  have  said  in  the  Ethics  \  if  the  arguments  there  adduced 
are  of  any  value,  that  happiness  is  the  realization  and  perfect 
exercise  of  virtue,   and  this  not  conditional,    but  absolute. 

6  And  I  used  the  term  '  conditional '  to  express  that  which  is 
indispensable,  and  '  absolute '  to  express  that  which  is  good 
in  itself.  Take  the  case  of  just  actions  ;  just  punishments 
and  chastisements  do  indeed  spring  from  a  good  principle,  but 
they  are  good  only  because  we  cannot  do  without  them — 
it  would  be  better  that  neither  individuals  nor  states  should 
need  anything  of  the  sort — but  actions  which  aim  at  honour 

7  and  advantage  are  absolutely  the  best.  The  conditional 
action  is  only  the  choice  ^  of  a  lesser  evil ;  whereas  these  are 
the  foundation  and  creation  of  good.  A  good  man  may 
make  the  best  even  of  poverty  and  disease,  and  the  other  ills 
of  life ;  but  he  can  only  attain  happiness  under  the  opposite 
conditions  ^     As    we    have    already    said    in    the    Ethics  *, 

'  Cp.  N.  Eth.  «.  7.  §  15  ;  X.  6.  §  2  ;  and  cp.  c.  8.  §  5,  supra. 

*  Retaining  the  MSS.  reading  aXptais  with  Bekker's  first  edition. 
^  N.  Eth.  i.  10.  §  12-14. 

*  N.  Eih.  iii.  4.  §§  4,  5  ;  E.  E.  vii.  15.  §  4  ;  M.  M.  ii.  9,  §  3. 


The  Good  Life  'Requires  External  Goods  285" 

the  good  man  is  he  to  whom,  because  he  is  virtuous,  the  VII.  13 
absolute  good  is  his  good.  It  is  also  plain  that  his  use  8 
of  other  goods  must  be  virtuous  and  in  the  absolute  sense 
good.  This  makes  men  fancy  that  external  goods  are  the 
cause  of  happiness,  yet  we  might  as  well  say  that  a  brilliant 
performance  on  the  lyre  was  to  be  attributed  to  the  instru- 
ment and  not  to  the  skill  of  the  performer. 

It  follows  then  from  what  has  been  said  that  some  things 
the  legislator  must  find  ready  to  his  hand  in  a  state,  others 
he  must  provide.  And  therefore  we  can  only  say :  May  9 
our  state  be  constituted  in  such  a  manner  as  to  be  blessed 
\vith  the  goods  of  which  fortune  disposes  (for  we  acknow- 
ledge her  power) :  whereas  virtue  and  goodness  in  the 
state  are  not  a  matter  of  chance  but  the  result  of  knowledge 
and  purpose.  A  city  can  be  virtuous  only  when  the  citizens 
who  have  a  share  in  the  government  are  virtuous,  and  in 
our  state  all  the  citizens  share  in  the  government ;  let  us  then 
enquire  how  a  man  becomes  virtuous.  For  even  if  we  could  lo 
suppose  all  the  citizens  to  be  virtuous,  and  not  each  of  them, 
yet  the  latter  would  be  better,  for  in  the  virtue  of  each  the 
virtue  of  all  is  involved. 

There  are  three  things  which  make  men  good  and  virtuous: 
these  are  nature,  habit,  reason  ^.     In  the  first  place,  every  one  ii 
must  be  born  a  man  and   not   some   other  animal ;    in  the 
second   place,   he    must   have    a  certain   character,    both    of     » 
body  and  soul.     But  some  qualities  there  is  no  use  in  having         , 
at  birth,  for  they  are  altered  by  habit,  and  there  are  some  1332  b 
gifts  of  nature  which  may  be   turned   by  habit  to  good  or 
bad.     Most  animals  lead  a  life  of  nature,  although  in  lesser  la 
particulars    some   are   influenced    by   habit    as    well.      Man 
'  Cp.  N.  Eth.  X.  9.  §  6. 


2^6  How  Men  become  Good 

VII.  13  has  reason,  in  addition,  and  man  only  '.      Wherefore  nature, 

habit,  reason  must  be  in  harmony  with  one  another  [for  they 

do  not  always  agree]  ;  men  do  many  things  against  habit  and 

13  nature,  if  reason  persuades  them  that  they  ought.     We  have 

already  determined  what  natures  are  likely  to  be  most  easily 

moulded  by  the  hands  of  the  legislator  -.    All  else  is  the  work 

of  education  ;    we  learn  some  things  by  habit  and  some  by 

instruction. 

14      Since  every  political   society  is   composed   of  rulers   and 

subjects,    let  us  consider   whether   the    relations    of  one  to 

the  other  should  interchange  or  be  permanent  ^.     For  the 

education  of  the  citizens  will  necessarily  vary  with  the  answer 

3  given  to  this  question.     Now,  if  some  men  excelled  others 

,     in  the  same  degree  in  which  gods  and  heroes  are  supposed  to 

excel  mankind  in  general,  having  in  the  first  place  a  great 

advantage  even  in  their  bodies,  and  secondly  in  their  minds, 

so  that  the  superiority  of  the  governors  *  over  their  subjects 

was  patent  and  undisputed*,  it  would  clearly  be  better  that 

once  for  all  the  one  class  should  rule  and  the  others  serve '. 

3  But  since  this  is  unattainable,  and  kings  have  no  marked 
suj)eriority  over  their  subjects,  such  as  Scylax  affirms  to  be 
found  among  the  Indians,  it  is  obviously  necessary  on  many 
grounds  that  all  the  citizens  alike  should  take  their  turn  of 
governing  and  being  governed.  Equality  consists  in  the  same 
treatment  of  similar  persons,  and  no  government   can   stand 

4  which  is  not  founded  upon  justice.  For  [if  the  government 
be  unjust]  every  one  in  the  country  unites  with  the  governed 

*  Cp.  i.  3.  §  10.  '  Cp.  supra,  c.  ?•  5  4.  '  Cp.  iii.  6.  §  9. 

*  Or,  taking  to»  apxofiiyon  with  <p<u>tp6,v, '  was  undisputed  and  patent 
to  their  subjects.' 

»  Cp.  i.  5.  §  8;  iii.  13.  §  13. 


Same  Person j  Idlers  and  Subjects     287 

in  the  desire  to  have  a  revolution,  and  it  is  an  impossibiHty  that  VII.  14 
the  members  of  the  government  can  be  so  numerous  as  to  be 
stronger  than  all  their  enemies  put  together.  Yet  that  governors 
should  excel  their  subjects  is  undeniable.  How  all  this  is  to 
be  effected,  and  in  what  way  they  will  respectively  share  in 
the  government,  the  legislator  has  to  consider.  The  subject 
has  been  already  mentioned '.  Nature  herself  has  given  the  5 
principle  of  choice  when  she  made  a  difference  between  old 
and  young  (though  they  are  really  the  same  in  kind),  of  whom 
she  fitted  the  one  to  govern  and  the  others  to  be  governed. 
No  one  takes  offence  at  being  governed  when  he  is  young, 
nor  does  he  think  himself  better  than  his  governors,  espe- 
cially if  he  will  enjoy  the  same  privilege  when  he  reaches  the 
required  age. 

We    conclude    that   from    one    jx)int    of   view    governors  6 
and  governed  are  identical,  and  from  another  different.     And 
therefore  their  education  must  be  the  same  and  also  different.  1333  a 
For  he  who  would  learn  to  command  well  must,  as  men  say, 
first   of  all    learn   to  obey '.     As    I    observed    in    the  first 
part  of  this  treatise,  there  is  one  rule  which  is  for  the  sake 
of  the  rulers  and  another  mle  which  is  for  the  sake  of  the 
ruled  •'' ;  the  former  is  a  despotic,  the  latter  a  free  government.  7 
Some  commands  differ  not    in  the   thing  commanded,    but 
in  the  intention  with  which  they  are  imposed.      Wherefore, 
many   apparently  menial  offices  are  an   honour    to    the    free 
youth  by  whom  they  are  performed  ;  for  actions  do  not  differ 
as  honourable  or  dishonourable  in  themselves  so  much  as  in  the 
end  and  intention  of  them.      But  since  we  say  *  that  the  virtue  8 
of  the  citizen  and  ruler  is  the  same  as  that  of  the  good  man, 

*  Cp.  c.  9.  §  5.  ^  Cp.  iii.  4.  §  14. 

'  Cp.  iii.  6.  §  6.  '  Cp.  iii.  4  and  5.  §  10. 


28  8     Who  must  Learn  l^de  by  Obedience 

VII.  14  and  that  the  same  person  must  first  be  a  subject  and  then 
a  ruler,  the  legislator  has  to  see  that  they  become  good  men, 
and  by  what  means  this  may  be  accomplished,  and  what  is 
the  end  of  the  perfect  life. 
9  Now  the  soul  of  man  is  divided  into  two  parts,  one  of 
which  has  reason  in  itself,  and  the  other,  not  having  reason 
in  itself,  is  able  to  obey  reason  ^  And  we  call  a  map 
good  because  he  has  the  virtues  of  these  two  parts.  In 
which   of  them  the  end   is  more  likely  to  be   found   is  no 

10  matter  of  doubt  to  those  who  adopt  our  division ;  for  in 
the  world  both  of  nature  and  of  art  the  inferior  always  exists 
for  the  sake  of  the  better  or  superior,  and  the  better  or 
suj^erior  is  that  which  has  reason.  The  reason  too,  in 
our  ordinary  way  of  speaking,  is  divided  into  two  parts,  for 

1 1  there  is  a  practical  and  a  speculative  reason  ^,  and  there  must 
be  a  corresponding  division  of  actions;  the  actions  of  the 
naturally  better  principle  are  to  be  preferred  by  those  who 
have  it  in  their  power  to  attain  to  both  or  to  all,  for  that 
is  always  to  every  one  the  most  eligible  which  is  the  highest 

12  attainable  by  him.  The  whole  of  life  is  further  divided 
into  two  parts,  business  and  leisure '',  war  and  peace,  and  all 
actions  into  those  which  are  necessary  and  useful,  and  those 

13  which  are  honourable.  And  the  preference  given  to  one 
or  the  other  class  of  actions  must  necessarily  be  like  the 
preference  given  to  one  or  other  part  of  the  soul  and  its 
actions  over  the  other ;  there  must  be  war  for  the  sake 
of  peace,  business  for  the  sake  of  leisure,  things  useful 
and  necessary  for  the  sake  of  things  honourable.     All  these 

»  Cp.  N.  Eth.  i.  13.  §§  18,19. 
»  Cp.  N.  Eth.  vi.  1.  §  5:  n.  §  4. 
3  N.  Eth.  X.  7.  §  6. 


The  Spartan  Ideal  Critict'^ci       289 

jx)ints  the  statesman  should  keep  in  view  when  he  frames  his  VII.  14 
laws ;  he  should   consider  the  parts  of  the  soul   and  their 
functions,  and  above  all  the  better  and  the  end ;    he  should  14 
also  remember  the  diversities    of  human  lives   and   actions. 
For  men  must  engage  in  business  and  go  to  war,  but  leisure  1333  b 
and  peace  are  better;   they  must  do  what  is  necessary  and 
useful,  but  what  is  honourable  is  better.      In  such  principles 
children  and  persons  of  every  age  which  requires  education 
should    be    trained.      Whereas    even    the    Hellenes   of  the  15 
present  day,  who  are  reputed  to  be  best  governed,  and  the 
legislators  who  gave  them  their  constitutions,  do  not  appear 
to  have  framed  their  governments  with  a  regard  to  the  best 
end,  or  to  have  given  them  laws  and  education  with  a  view  to 
all  the  virtues,  but  in  a  vulgar  spirit  have  fallen  back  on  those 
which  promised  to  be  more   useful    and   profitable.     Many  16 
modern  writers  have  taken  a  similar  view  :  they  commend  the 
Lacedaemonian    constitution,    and   praise    the    legislator    for 
making  conquest  and  war  his  sole  aim  ^,  a  doctrine   which 
may  be  refuted  by  argument  and  has  long  ago  been  refuted  by 
facts.     For  most  men  desire  empire  in  the  hope  of  accumu-  17 
lating  the  goods  of  fortune  ;  and  on  this  ground  Thibron  and 
all  those  who  have  written  about  the  Lacedaemonian  consti- 
tution   have   praised   their  legislator,  because    the    Lacedae- 
monians,   by   a  training    in    hardships,   gained  great   power. 
But  surely  they  are  not  a  happy  people  now  that  their  empire  18 
has    passed   away,    nor   was    their  legislator   right.      How 
ridiculous  is  the  result,  if,  while  they  are  continuing  in  the 
observances  of  his  laws  and  no   one  interferes    with    them 
they  have  lost  the  better  part  of  life.      These  writers  further  19 

'  Plato,  Laws,  i.  628,  638. 

DAVIS  U 


290         spartan  or  Military  Ideal 

VII.  14  err  about  the  sort  of  government  which  the  legislator  should 
approve,  for  the  government  of  freemen  is  noble,  and  implies 
more  virtue  than  despotic  government '.  Neither  is  a  city  to 
be  deemed  happy  or  a  legislator  to  be  praised  because  he 
trains  his  citizens  to  conquer  and  obtain  dominion  over  their 

■io  neighbours,  for  there  is  great  evil  in  this.  On  a  similar 
principle  any  citizen  who  could,  would  obviously  try  to  obtain 
the  power  in  his  own  state — the  crime  which  the  Lacedae- 
monians accused  king  Pausanias  of  attempting  "^^  although 
he  had  so  great  honour  already.  No  such  principle  and 
no  law  having  this  object  is  either  statesmanlike  or  useful  or 

21  right.  For  the  same  things  are  best  both  for  individuals  and 
for  states,  and  these  are  the  things  which  the  legislator  ought 
to  implant  in  the  minds  of  his  citizens.  Neither  should  men 
study  war  with  a  view  to  the  enslavement  of  those  who 
do  not  deserve  to  be  enslaved ;  but  first  of  all  they  should 
provide  against  their  own  enslavement,  and  in  the  second 
1334  a  place  obtain  empire  for  the  good  of  the  governed,  and  not  for 
the  sake  of  exercising  a  general  despotism,  and  in  the  third 
place    they    should    seek    to   be    masters    only    over    those 

2i  who  deserve  to  be  slaves.  Facts,  as  well  as  arguments,  prove 
that  the  legislator  should  direct  all  his  military  and  other 
measures  to  the  provision  of  leisure  and  the  establishment  of 
peace.  For  most  of  these  military  states  are  safe  only  while 
they  are  at  war  ^,  but  fall  when  they  have  acquired  their 
empire  ;  like  unused  iron  they  lose  their  edge  in  time  of  peace. 
And  for  this  the  legislator  is  to  blame,  he  never  having 
taught  them  how  to  lead  the  life  of  peace. 

15       Since  the  end  of  individuals  and  of  states  is  the  same,  the 

»  Cp.  i.  5.  §  2.  =•  Cp.  V.  I.  §  10 ;  7.  §  4. 

5  Cp.  ii.  9.  §  34, 


spartan  or  Military  Ideal          291 

end  of  the  best  man  and  of  the  best  state  must  also  be  VTI,  15 
the  same  ;  it  is  therefore  evident  that  there  ought  to  exist  in 
both  of  them  the  virtues  of  leisure ;  for  peace,  as  has  been 
often  repeated,  is  the  end  of  war,  and  leisure  of  toil.  But  2 
leisure  and  cultivation  may  be  promoted,  not  only  by  those 
virtues  which  are  practised  in  leisure,  but  also  by  some 
of  those  which  are  useful  to  business  ^.  For  many,  neces- 
saries of  life  have  to  be  supplied  before  we  can  have  leisuie. 
Therefore  a  city  must  be  temperate  and  brave,  and  able 
to  endure :  for  truly,  as  the  proverb  says,  '  There  is  no 
leisure  for  slaves,'  and  those  who  cannot  face  danger  like  men 
are  the  slaves  of  any  invader.  Courage  and  endurance  3 
are  required  for  business  and  intellectual  virtue  for  leisure, 
temperance  and  justice  for  both,  more  especially  in  times 
of  peace  and  leisure,  for  war  compels  men  to  be  just  and 
temperate,  whereas  the  enjoyment  of  good  fortune  and 
the  leisure  which  comes  with  peace  tends  to  make  them 
insolent.  Those,  then,  who  seem  to  be  the  best  off  and  to  be  4 
in  the  possession  of  every  good,  have  special  need  of  justice 
and  temperance — for  example,  those  (if  such  there  be,  as  the 
poets  say)  who  dwell  in  the  Islands  of  the  Blest ;  they  above 
all  will  need  philosophy  and  temperance  and  justice,  and  all 
the  more  the  more  leisure  they  have,  living  in  the  midst 
of  abundance.  There  is  no  difficulty  in  seeing  why  the  state  5 
tliat  would  be  happy  and  good  ought  to  have  these  virtues. 
If  it  be  disgraceful  in  men  not  to  be  able  to  use  the  goods  of 
life,  it  is  peculiarly  disgraceful  not  to  be  able  to  use  them  in 
time  of  peace — to  show  excellent  qualities  in  action  and  war, 
and  when  they  have  peace  and  leisure  to  be  no  better  than  slaves. 

*  i.  e.  '  not  only  by  some  of  the  speculative  but  also  by  some  of  the 
practical  virtues.' 

U  2 


2  92     Need  of  a   Higher  Ideal  of  Life 

VII.  15  Wherefore  we  should  not  practise  virtue  after  the  manner  of 
the  Lacedaemonians  \  For  they,  while  agreeing  with  other 
1334  b  men  in  their  conception  of  the  highest  goods,  differ  from  the 
rest  of  mankind  in  thinking  that  they  are  to  be  obtained  by  the 
practice  of  a  single  virtue.  And  since  these  goods  and.  the 
enjoyment  of  them  are  clearly  greater  than  the  enjoyment 
derived  from  the  virtues  of  which  they  are  the  end,  we  must 
now  consider  how  and  by  what  means  they  are  to  be 
attained. 

7  We  have  already  determined  that  nature  and  habit  and  reason 
are  required  -,  and  what  should  be  the  character  of  the  citizens 
has  also  been  defined  by  us.  But  we  have  still  to  consider 
whether  the  training  of  early  life  is  to  be  that  of  reason  or 
habit,  for  these  two  must  accord,  and  when  in  accord  they 
will  then  form  the  best  of  harmonies.  Reason  may  make 
mistakes  and  fail  in  attaining  the  highest  ideal  of  life,  ^  and 

8  there  may  be  a  like  evil  influence  of  habit '.  Thus  much  is 
clear  in  the  first  place,  that,  as  in  all  other  things,  generation 
starts  from  a  beginning,  and  that  the  ends  of  some  beginnings 
are  related  to  another  end.  Now,  in  men  reason  and  mind  are 
the  end  towards  which  nature  strives,  so  that  the  generation 
and  moral  discipline  of  the  citizens  ought  to  be  ordered  with 

g  a  view  to  them.  In  the  second  place,  as  the  soul  and  body 
are  two,  we  see  also  that  there  are  two  parts  of  the  soul,  the 
rational  and  the  irrational  * ,  and  two  corresponding  states — 
reason  and  appetite.  And  as  the  body  is  prior  in  order  of 
generation  to  the  soul,  so  the  irrational  is  prior  to  the  rational. 

'  Cp.  ii.  9.  §  34.  »  Cp.  13.  §  12. 

^  Or,  '  and  yet  a  man  may  be  trained  by  habit  as  if  the  leason  had  ixot 
so  erred.' 

*  Cp.  N.  Eth.  i.  13.  §  9  if. 


Nature  and  Habit  Prior  to  J^easoti     293 

The  proof  is  that  anger  and  will  and  desire  are  implanted  in  VII.  15 
children  from  their  very  birth,  but  reason  and  understanding  ^° 
are  developed  as  they  grow  older.  Wherefore,  the  care  of  the 
body  ought  to  precede  that  of  the  soul,  and  the  training  of  the 
appetitive  part  should  follow :  none  the  less  our  care  of  it  must 
be  for  the  sake  of  the  reason,  and  our  care  of  the  body  for  the 
sake  of  the  soul '. 

Since  the  legislator  should  begin  by  considering  how  the  16 
frames  of  the  children  whom  he  is  rearing  may  be  as  good  as  » 

possible,   his  first  care  will  be  about  marriage — at  what  age 
should  his  citizens  marry,  and  who  are  fit  to  many  ?      In  2 
legislating  on  this  subject  he  ought  to  consider  the  persons  and 
their  relative  ages,  that  there  may  be  no  disproportion  in  them, 
and  that  they  may  not  differ  in  their  bodily  powers,  as  will  be 
the  case  if  the  man  is  still  able  to  beget  children  while  the 
woman  is  unable  to  bear  them,  or  the  woman  able  to  bear  while 
the  man  is  unable  to  beget,  for  fiom  these  causes  arise  quarrels 
and  differences  between  married  persons.     Secondly,  he  must 
consider  the  time  at  which  the  children  will  succeed  to  their 
parents ;  there  ought  not  to  be  too  great  an  interval  of  age,  for  3 
then  the  parents  will  be  too  old  to  derive  any  pleasure  from 
their  affection,  or  to  be  of  any  use  to  them.     Nor  ought  they  1335  a 
to  be  too  nearly  of  an  age  ;  to  youthful  marriages  there  are  many 
objections — the  children  will  be  wanting  in  respect  to  their 
parents,  who  will  seem  to  be  their  contemporaries,  and  disputes 
will  arise  in  the  management  of  the  household.     Thirdly,  and  4 
this  is  the  point  from  which  we  digressed,  the  legislator  must 
mould  to  his  will  the  frames  of  newly-born  children.    Almost 
jfll  these  objects  may  be  secured  by  attention  to  one  point. 
Since  the  time  of  generation  is  commonly  limited  within  the  5 
*  Cp.  Plato,  Rep.  iii.  410. 


2  94  T^f^^  Physical  Foundation 

VII.  16  age  of  seventy  years  in  the  case  of  a  man,  and  of  fifty  in  the 
case  of  a  woman,  the  commencement  of  the  union  should  con- 

6  form  to  these  periods.  The  union  of  male  and  female  when 
too  young  is  bad  for  the  procreation  of  children ;  in  all  other 
animals  the  offspring  of  the  young  are  small  and  ill-developed, 
and  generally  of  the  female  sex,  and  therefore  also  in  man,  as 
is  proved  by  the  fact  that  in  those  cities  in  which  men  and 
women  are  accustomed  to  marry  young,  the  people  are  small 

7  and  weak  ;  in  childbirth  also  younger  women  suffer  more, 
and  more  of  them  die  ;  some  persons  say  that  this  was  the 
meaning  of  the  response  once  given  to  the  Troezenians — 
['  Shear  not  the  young  field '] — the  oracle  really  meant  that 
many  died  because  they  married  too  young  ;  it  had  nothing  to 

8  do  with  the  ingathering  of  the  harvest.  It  also  conduces  to 
temperance  not  to  marry  too  soon ;  for  women  who  marry 
early  are  apt  to  be  wanton ;  and  in  men  too  the  bodily  frame 
is  stunted  if  they  marry  while  they  are  growing  (for  there  is 

9  a  time  when  the  growth  of  the  body  ceases).  Women  should 
marry  when  they  are  about  eighteen  years  of  age,  and  men  at 
seven-and-thirty ' ;  then  they  are  in  the  prime  of  life,  and  the 

10  decline  in  the  powers  of  both  will  coincide.  Further,  the 
children,  if  their  birth  takes  place  at  the  time  that  may 
reasonably  be  expected,  will  succeed  in  their  prime,  when  the 
fathers  are  already  in  the  decline  of  life,  and  have  nearly 
reached  their  term  of  three-score  years  and  ten. 

Thus  much  of  the  age  proper  for  marriage :  the  season  of 
the  year  should  also  be  considered  ;  according  to  our  present 
custom,  people  generally  limit  marriage  to  the  season  of  winter, 

1 1  and  they  are  right.  The  precepts  of  physicians  and  natural 
philosophers  about  generation  should  also  be  studied  by  the 

*  Omitting  i^  fUKpov. 


'Regulations  Concerning  Marriage     295* 

parents  themselves ;    the  physicians  give  good  advice  about  VII.  16 

the  right  age  of  the  body,  and  the  natural  philosophers  about 

the  winds  ;  of  which  they  prefer  the  north  to  the  south.  1335 1 

What  constitution  in  the  parent  is  most  advantageous  to  12 
the  offspring  is  a  subject  which  we  will  hereafter  consider 
when  we  speak  of  the  education  of  children,  and  we  will  only 
make  a  few  general  remarks  at  present.     The  temperarnent  of 
an  athlete  is  not  suited  to  the  life  of  a  citizen,  or  to  health,  or 
to  the  procreation  of  children,  any  more  than  the  valetudinarian 
or  exhausted  constitution,  but  one  which  is  in  a  mean  between 
them.     A  man's  constitution  should  be  inured  to  labour,  but  13 
not  to  labour  which  is  excessive  or  of  one  sort  only,  such  as 
is  practised  by  athletes  ;  he  should  be  capable  of  all  the  actions 
of  a  freeman.     These  remarks  apply  equally  to  both  parents- 
Women  who  are  with  child  should  be  careful  of  themselves  ;  14 
they  should  take  exercise  and  have  a  nourishing  diet.     The 
first  of  these  prescriptions  the  legislator  will  easily  carry  into 
effect  by  requiring  that  they  shall  take  a  walk  daily  to  some 
temple,  where  they  can  worship  the  gods  who  preside  over 
birth  ^.     Their   minds,   however,    unlike  their   bodies,    they 
ought  to  keep  unexercised,  for  the  offspring  derive  their  natures 
from  their  mothers  as  plants  do  from  the. earth. 

As  to  the  exposure  and  rearing  of  children,  let  there  be  a  15 
law  that  no  deformed  child  shall  live,  but  where  there  are  too 
many  (for  in  our  state  population  has  a  limit),  when  couples 
have  children  in  excess,  and  the  state  of  feeling  is  averse  to  the 
exposure  of  offspring,  let  abortion  be  procured  before  sense 
and  life  have  begun ;  what  may  or  may  not  be  lawfully  done  in 
these  cases  depends  on  the  question  of  life  and  sensation. 

And  now,  having  determined  at  what  ages  men  and  women  16 
*  Cp.  Plato,  Laws,  vii.  789. 


29<J     Regulations  Concerning  Mairiage 

VII.  16  are  to  begin  their  union,  let  us  also  determine  how  long  they 
shall  continue  to  beget  and  bear  offspring  for  the  state  ^ ;  men 
who  are  too  old,  like  men  who  are  too  young,  produce  children 
who  are  defective  in  body  and  mind ;  the  children  of  very  old 

ly  men  are  weakly.  The  limit^  then,  should  be  the  age  which  is  the 
prime  of  their  intelligence,  and  this  in  most  persons,  according  to 
the  notion  of  some  poets  who  measure  life  by  periods  of  seven 
years,  is  about  fifty  ^ ;  at  four  or  five  years  later,  they  should 
cease  fiom  having  families ;  and  from  that  time  forward  only 
cohabit  with  one  another  for  the  sake  of  health,  or  for  some 
similar  reason. 

18      As  to  adultery,  let  it  be   held  disgraceful  for  any   man 

or  woman  to  be  unfaithful  when  they  are  married,  and  called 

1336  a  husband  and  wife.     If  during  the  time  of  bearing  children 

anything  of  the  sort  occur,  let  the  guilty  person  be  punished 

with  a  loss  of  privileges  in  proportion  to  the  offence  ^. 

17  After  the  children  have  been  born,  the  manner  of  rearing 
them  may  be  supposed  to  have  a  great  effect  on  their  bodily 
strength.  It  would  appear  from  the  example  of  animals,  and 
of  those  nations  who  desire  to  create  the  military  habit,  that 
the  food  which  has  most  milk  in  it  is  best  suited  to  human  be- 
ings ;  but  the  less  wine  the  better,  if  they  would  escape  disease. 

2  Also  all  the  motions  to  which  children  can  be  subjected  at  their 
early  age  are  very  useful.  But  in  order  to  preserve  their  tender 
limbs  from  distortion,  some  nations  have  had  recourse  to 
mechanical  appliances  which  straighten  their  bodies.  To 
accustom  children  to  the  cold  from  their  earliest  years  is  also 
an  excellent  practice,  which  greatly  conduces  to  health,  and 

3  hardens  them  for  military  service.     Hence  many  barbarians 

'  KdTovpfiTv.  ^  Cp.  Solon,  Fragm.  25  Bergk. 

'  Cp.  Laws,  viii.  841. 


Education  of  Infants  297 

have  a  custom  of  plunging  their  children  at  birth  into  a  cold  VII.  17 

stream ;  others,  like  the  Celts,  clothe  them  in  a  light  wrapper 

only.     For  human  nature  should  be  early  habituated  to  endure 

all  which  by  habit  it  can  be  made  to  endure ;  but  the  process 

must  be  gradual.     And  children,  from  their  natural  warmth, 

may  be  easily  trained  to  bear  cold.     Such  care  should  attend 

them  in  the  first  stage  of  life. 

The  next  period  lasts  to  the  age  of  five ;  during  this  no  4 
demand  should  be  made  upon  the  child  for  study  or  labour,  lest 
its  growth  be  impeded ;  and  there  should  be  sufficient  motion  to 
prevent  the  limbs  from  being  inactive.     This  can  be  secured, 
among  other  ways,  by  amusement,  but  the  amusement  should  not 
be  vulgar  or  tiring  or  riotous.    The  Directors  of  Education,  as  5 
they  are  termed,  should  be  careful  what  tales  or  stories  the 
children  hear  \  for  the  sports  of  children  are  designed  to  prepare 
the  way  for  the  business  of  later  life,  and  should  be  for  the  most 
part  imitations  of  the  occupations  which  they  will  hereafter  pur- 
sue in  earnest  ^.    Those  are  wrong  who  [like  Plato]  in  the  Laws  6 
attempt  to  check  the  loud  crying  and  screaming  of  children, 
for  these  contribute  towards  their  growth,  and,  in  a  manner, 
exercise  their   bodies  ^     Straining    the    voice  has  an  effect 
similar  to  that  produced  by  the  retention  of  the  breath  in 
violent  exertions.     Besides  other   duties,   the    Directors    of  7 
Education  should  have  an  eye  to  their  bringing  up,  and  should 
take  care  that  they  are  left  as  little  as  possible  with  slaves. 
For  until  they  are  seven  years  old  they  must  live  at  home  ;  133(5  b 
and  therefore,  even  at  this  early  age,  all  that  is  mean  and  low 
should  be  banished  from  their  sight  and  hearing.      Indeed,  8 
there  is  nothing  which  the  legislator  should  be  more  careful  to 

'  Plato,  Rtp.  ii.  377  fF.  ^  Plato,  Laws,  i.  643  ;  vii,  799. 

^  Plato,  Laws,  vii.  792. 


298    Maxima  Debetur  Pueris  'Reverentia 

VII.  17  drive  away  than  indecency  of  speech  ;  for  the  light  utterance 
of  shameful  words  is  akin  to  shameful  actions.  The  young 
especially  should  never  be  allowed  to  repeat  or  hear  anything  of 
9  the  sort.  A  freeman  who  is  found  saying  or  doing  what  is 
forbidden,  if  he  be  too  young  as  yet  to  have  the  privilege  of 
a  place  at  the  public  table,  should  be  disgraced  and  beaten,  and 
an  elder  person  degraded  as  his  slavish  conduct  deserves.  And 
since  we  do  not  allow  improper  language,  clearly  we  should 

10  also  banish  pictures  or  tales  which  are  indecent.  Let  the 
rulers  take  care  that  there  be  no  image  or  picture  representing 
unseemly  actions,  except  in  the  temples  of  those  Gods  at 
whose  festivals  the  law  permits  even  ribaldry,  and  whom  the 
law  also  permits  to  be  worshipped  by  persons  of  mature  age 
on  behalf  of  themselves,  their  children,  and  their  wives.     But 

11  the  legislator  should  not  allow  youth  to  be  hearers  of  satirical 
Iambic  verses  or  spectators  of  comedy  until  they  are  of  an  age 
to  sit  at  the  public  tables  and  to  drink  strong  wine  ;  by  that 
time  education  will  have  armed  them  against  the  evil  influences 
of  such  representations. 

12  We  have  made  these  remarks  in  a  cursory  manner — they 
are  enough  for  the  present  occasion ;  but  hereafter '  we  will 
return  to  the  subject  and  after  a  fuller  discussion  determine 
whether  such  liberty  should  or  should  not  be  granted,  and  in 

13  what  way  granted,  if  at  all.  Theodorus,  the  tragic  actor,  was 
quite  right  in  saying  that  he  would  not  allow  any  other  actor, 
not  even  if  he  were  quite  second-rate,  to  enter  before  himself, 
because  the  spectators  grew  fond  of  the  voices  which  they  first 
heard.  And  the  same  principle  of  association  applies  universally 
to  things  as  well  as  persons,  for  we  always  like  best  whatever 

14  comes  first.     And  therefore  youth  should  be  kept  strangers  to 

*  Unfulfilled  promise  (?),  but  cp.  viii.  5.  §  21. 


The  Impressions  of  Early   Tears     299 

all  that  is  bad,  and  especially  to  things  which  suggest  vice  or  VII.  17 
hate.     When  the  five  years  have  passed  away,  during  the  two 
following  years  they  must  look  on  at  the  pursuits  which  they 
are  hereafter  to  learn.     There  are  two  periods  of  life  into  15 
which  education  has  to  be  divided — from  seven  to  the  age  of 
puberty,  and  onwards  to  the  age  of  one-and-twenty.     [The  1337  a 
poets]  who  divide  ages  by  sevens  ^  are  not  always  right  ^ :  we 
should  rather  adhere  to  the  divisions  actually  made  by  nature ; 
for  the  deficiencies  of  nature  are  what  art  and  education  seek 
to  fill  up. 

Let  us  then  first  enquire  if  any  regulations  are  to  be  laid  16 
down  about  children,  and  secondly,  whether  the  care  of  them 
should  be  the  concern  of  the  state  or  of  private  individuals — 
which  latter  is  in  our  own  day  the  common  custom — and  in  the 
third  place,  what  these  regulations  should  be. 

'  Cp.  supra,  c.  16.  §  17. 

^  Reading  ov  KaXSis,  with  the  MSS.  and  Bekker's  first  edition : 
or,  reading  ov  KaKws,  a  conjecture  of  Muretus,  which  Bekker  has  adopted 
in  his  second  edition,  '  are  in  the  main  right ;  but  we  should  also  observe, 
etc' 


BOOK    VIII 

VIII.  1       No  one  will    doubt  that  the  legislator  should  direct  his 
attention  above  all  to  the  education  of  youth,   or  that  the 

2  neglect  of  education  does  harm  to  states.  The  citizen  should 
be  moulded  to  suit  the  form  of  government  under  which 
he  lives  ^.  For  each  government  has  a  peculiar  character 
which  originally  formed  and  which  continues  to  preserve 
it.  The  character  of  democracy  creates  democracy,  and  the 
character  of  oligarchy  creates  oligarchy ;  and  always  the 
better  the  character,  the  better  the  government. 

Now   for  the   exercise  of  any   faculty  or  art  a  previous 
training    and    habituation    are    required ;    clearly    therefore 

3  for  the  practice  of  virtue.  And  since  the  whole  city  has 
one  end,  it  is  manifest  that  education  should  be  one  and  the 
same  for  all,  and  that  it  should  be  public,  and  not  piivate — 
not  as  at  present,  when  every  one  looks  after  his  own 
children  separately,  and  gives  them  separate  instruction  of  the 
sort  which  he  thinks  best ;  the  training  in  things  which  are  of 

4  common  interest  should  be  the  same  for  all.  Neither  must 
we  suppose  that  any  one  of  the  citizens  belongs  to  himself,  for 
they  all  belong  to  the  state,  and  are  each  of  them  a  part 
of  the  state,  and  the  care  of  each  part  is  inseparable  from  the 
care  of  the  whole.  In  this  particular  the  Lacedaemonians 
are  to  be  praised,  for  they  take  the  greatest  pains  about  their 
children,  and  make  education  the  business  of  the  state  ^. 

2      That  education   should  be  regulated   by  law  and   should 
be  an  affair  of  state  is  not  to  be  denied,   but  what  should 
'  Cp.  V.  9.  §§  11-16.  "  Cp.  N.  Eth.  X.  9.  §  J3. 


What  is  a  Liberal  Education  f      301 

be   the  character  of  this  public  education,   and  how  young  VIII.  2 
persons  should  be  educated,  are  questions  which  remain  to  be 
considered.     For  mankind  are  by  no  means  agreed  about  the 
things  to  be  taught,  whether  we  look  to  virtue  or  the  best  life. 
Neither  is    it   clear  whether   education    is    morfe    concerned 
with  intellectual  or  with  moral  virtue.     The  existing  prac-  2 
tice    is    perplexing ;    no    one  knows  on   what  principle   we 
should  proceed — should  the  useful  in  life,  or  should  virtue, 
or  should  the  higher  knowledge,  be  the  aim  of  our  training  ; 
all  three  opinions  have  been  entertained.     Again,  about  the  1337  b 
means  there  is  no  agreement ;     for  different  persons,  start- 
ing with  different  ideas  about  the  nature  of  virtue,  naturally 
disagree  about  the  practice  of  it.     There  can  be  no  doubt  3 
that   children   should  be  taught    those  useful  things  which 
are  really   necessary,    but    not   all    things ;    for   occupations 
are  divided  into  liberal  and  illiberal ;  and  to  young  children 
should  be  imparted  only  such   kinds  of  knowledge   as   will 
be  useful    to  them    without   vulgarizing    them.      And  any  ^ 
occupation,  art,  or  science,  which  makes  the  body  or  soul  or 
mind  of  the  freeman   less  fit  for   the  practice  or   exercise 
of  virtue,    is  vulgar ;    wherefore  we    call  those   arts    vulgar  5 
which  tend  to  deform  the  body,  and  likewise  all  paid  employ- 
ments, for  they  absorb  and  degrade  the  mind.       There  are 
also  some  liberal  arts  quite  proper  for  a  freeman  to  acquire, 
but   only  in    a  certain  degree,    and  if  he   attend   to  them 
too  closely,  in  order  to  attain  perfection  in  them,  the  same 
evil    effects    will    follow.     The    object    also    which    a    man  6 
sets   before    him   makes   a  great  difference ;    if  he  does  or 
learns   anything    for  his  own   sake  '  or  for  the  sake  of  his 
friends,   or  with  a  view    to  excellence,  the   action   will  not 
»  Cp.iii.  4.  §  13. 


3  02      what  is  a  Liberal  Education^ 

VIII.  2  appear  illiberal ;  but  if  done  for  the  sake  of  others,  the  very 
same  action  will  be  thought  menial  and  servile.  The 
received  subjects  of  instruction,  as  I  have  already  remarked  \ 
are  partly  of  a  liberal  and  partly  of  an  illiberal  character. 
3  The  customary  branches  of  education  are  in  number  four ; 
they  are — (i)  reading  and  writing,  (2)  gymnastic  exercises, 
(3)  music,  to  which  is  sometimes  added  (4)  drawing.  Of 
these,  reading  and  writing  and  drawing  are  regarded  as  useful 
for  the  purposes  of  life  in  a  variety  of  ways,  and  gymnastic 
exercises  are  thought  to  infuse  courage.      Concerning  music 

2  a  doubt  may  be  raised — in  our  own  day  most  men  cultivate  it 
for  the  sake  of  pleasure,  but  originally  it  was  included  in 
education,  because  nature  herself,  as  has  been  often  said, 
requires  that  we  should  be  able  not  only  to  work  well,  but  to 
use  leisure  well ;    for,  as  I  must  repeat  once  and  again  "^,  the 

3  first  principle  of  all  action  is  leisure.  Both  are  required,  but 
leisure  is  better  than  occupation  ;  and  therefore  the  question 
must  be  asked  in  good  earnest,  what  ought  we  to  do  when  at 
leisure  ?  Clearly  we  ought  not  to  be  amusing  ourselves, 
for  then  amusement  wt>uld  be  the  end  of  life.     But  if  this  is 

4  inconceivable,  and  yet  amid  serious  occupations  amusement 
is  needed  more  than  at  other  times  (for  he  who  is  hard 
at  work  has  need  of  relaxation,  and  amusement  gives 
relaxation,  whereas  occupation  is  always  accompanied  with 
exertion  and  effort),  at  suitable  times  we  should  introduce 
amusements,  and  they  should  be  our  medicines,  for  the 
emotion  which  they  create  in  the  soul  is  a  relaxation,  and 

1338  a  from  the  pleasure  we  obtain  rest.     Leisure  of  itself  gives 
pleasure  and    happiness    and  enjoyment    of  life,    which  are 

5  experienced,   not  by  the  busy  man,   but  by  those  who  have 

'   §  3  supra.  '■■  As  in  vii.  15.  §§  I,  2,  and  N.  Eth.  x.  6. 


The  %)se  of  Music  303 

leisure.  For  he  who  is  occupied  has  in  view  some  end  which  VIII.  3 
he  has  not  attained  ;  but  happiness  is  an  end  which  all  men 
deem  to  be  accompanied  with  pleasure  and  not  with  pain. 
This  pleasure,  however,  is  regarded  differently  by  different 
persons,  and  varies  according  to  the  habit  of  individuals ;  the 
pleasure  of  the  best  man  is  the  best,  and  springs  from 
the  noblest  sources.  It  is  clear,  then,  that  there  are  branches  6 
of  learning  and  education  which  we  must  study  with  a  view 
to  the  enjoyment  of  leisure,  and  these  are  to  be  valued 
for  their  own  sake  ;  whereas  those  kinds  of  knowledge  which 
are  useful  in  business  are  to  be  deemed  necessary,  and  exist 
for  the  sake  of  other  things.  And  therefore  our  fathers  7 
admitted  music  into  education,  not  on  the  ground  either  of  its 
necessity  or  utility,  for  it  is  not  necessary,  nor  indeed  useful 
in  the  same  manner  as  reading  and  writing,  which  are  useful 
in  money-making,  in  the  management  of  a  household,  in  the 
acquisition  of  knowledge  and  in  political  life,  nor  like  drawing, 
useful  for  a  more  correct  judgment  of  the  works  of  artists, 
nor  again  like  gymnastic,  which  gives  health  and  strength ; 
for  neither  of  these  is  to  be  gained  from  music.  There  8 
remains,  then,  the  use  of  music  for  intellectual  enjoyment  in 
leisure  ;  which  appears  to  have  been  the  reason  of  its  introduc- 
tion, this  being  one  of  the  ways  in  which  it  is  thought  that 
a  freeman  should  pass  his  leisure ;  as  Homer  says — 

'How  good  is  it  to  invite  men  to  the  pleasant  feast',' 
and  afterwards  he  speaks    of  others  whom  he  describes  as  9 
inviting 

'  The  bard  who  would  delight  them  all '.' 
*  Or,  '  to  invite  Thalia  to  the  feast,'  an  interpretation  of  the  passage 
possibly   intended    by    Aristotle,    though    of  course    not    the    original 
meaning.  -  Od.  xvii.  385. 


304  Educational  Studies 

VIII.  3  And  in  another  place  Odysseus  says  there  is  no  better  way  or 
passing  life  than  when 

'  Men's  hearts  are  merry  and  the  banqueters  in  the  hall, 
sitting  in  order,  hear  the  voice  of  the  minstrel  ^' 

10  It  is  evident,  then,  that  there  is  a  sort  of  education  in 
which  parents  should  train  their  sons,  not  as  being  useful  or 
necessary,  but  because  it  is  liberal  or  noble.  Whether  this  is 
of  one  kind  only,  or  of  more  than  one,  and  if  so,  what  they 
are,   and  how  they  are  to  be   imparted,    must  hereafter  be 

1 1  determined.  Thus  much  we  are  now  in  a  position  to  say  that 
the  ancients  witness  to  us ;  for  their  opinion  may  be  gathered 
from  the  fact  that  music  is  one  of  the  received  and  traditional 
branches  of  education.  Further,  it  is  clear  that  children 
should  be  instructed  in  some  useful  things — for  example,  in 
reading  and  writing — not  only  for  their  usefulness,  but  also 
because  many  other  sorts  of  knowledge  are  acquired  through 

12  them.  With  a  like  view  they  may  be  taught  drawing,  not 
to  prevent  their  making  mistakes  in  their  own  purchases,  or 
in  order  that  they  may  not  be  imposed  upon  in  the  buying 

1388  b  or  selling  of  articles,  but  rather  because  it  makes  them 
judges  of  the  beauty  of  the  human  form.  To  be  always 
seeking  after  the  useful  does  not  become  free   and  exalted 

1 3  souls  ^  Now  it  is  clear  that  in  education  habit  must  go 
before  reason,  and  the  body  before  the  mind ;  and  therefore 
boys  should  be  handed  over  to  the  trainer,  who  creates  in 
them  the  proper  habit  of  body,  and  to  the  wrestling-master, 
who  teaches  them  their  exercises. 

4      Of  those  states  which  in  our  own  day  seem  to  take  the  greatest 
care  of  children,  some  aim  at  producing  in  them  an  athletic 
habit,  but  they  only  injure  their  forms  and  stunt  their  growth. 
*  Od.  ix.  7.  '*  Cp.  Plato,  Rep.  vii.  535  ff. 


Phyncal  Education  3 of 

Although    the    Lacedaemonians   have   not    fallen    into    this  VIII.  4 

mistake,  yet  they  brutalize  their  children  by  laborious  exercises   • 

which  they  think  will  make  them  courageous.       But  in  truth,  2 

as  we  have  often  repeated,  education  should  not  be  exclusively 

directed  to  this  or  to  any  other  single  end.      And  even  if  we 

suppose  the  Lacedaemonians  to  be  right  in  their  end,  they  do 

not  attain  it.      For  among  barbarians    and   among    animals 

courage  is  found  associated,  not  with  the  greatest  ferocity,  but 

with  a  gentle  and  lion-like  temper.     There  are  many  races  3 

who  are  ready  enough  to  kill  and  eat  men,    such    as    the 

Achaeans  and  Heniochi,  who  both  live  about  the  Black  Sea  ^ ; 

and  there  are  other  inland  tribes,  as  bad  or  worse,  who  all  live 

by  plunder,  but  have  no  courage.     It  is  notorious  that  the  4 

Lacedaemonians,    while    they    were    themselves    assiduous 

in  their  laborious  drill,  were  superior  to  others,  but  now  they 

are  beaten  both  in  war  and  gymnastic  exercises.      For  "their 

ancient  superiority  did  not  depend  on  their  mode  of  training 

their  youth,  but  only  on  the  circumstance  that  they  trained 

them    at   a   time  when  others  did   not.       Hence   we   may  5 

infer  that  what  is  noble,  not  what  is  bnital,  should  have  the 

first  place  ;  no  wolf  or  other  wild  animal  will  face  a  really 

noble  danger ;    such  dangers  are  for  the  brave  man  *.      And  6 

parents    who   devote    their    children    to    gymnastics    while 

they  neglect  their  necessary  education,   in   reality  vulgarize 

them  ;    for  they  make  them  useful  to  the  state  in  one  quality 

only,  and  even  in  this  the  argument  proves  them  to  be  inferior 

to  others.      We  should  judge  the  Lacedaemonians  not  from  7 

what  they  have  been,  but  from  what  they  are  4    for  now  they 

have  rivals  who  compete  with  their  education  ;    formerly  they 

had  none. 

'  Cp.  N.  Eth.  vii.  5.  §  2.  ^  Cp.  N.  Eth.  Hi.  0,  §  8. 

DAVIS  X 


3o<^  Gymnastic 

VIII.  4  It  is  an  admitted  principle  that  gymnastic  exercises  should 
be  employed  in  education,  and  that  for  children  they  should 
be  of  a  lighter  kind,  avoiding  severe  regimen  or  painful  toil, 

8  lest  the  growth  of  the  body  be  impaired.  The  evil  of 
excessive    training    in    early    years   is    strikingly   proved   by 

1339  a  the  example  of  the  Olympic  victors ;  for  not  more  than  two 
or  three  of  them  have  gained  a  prize  both  as  boys  and  as  men  ; 
their  early  training  and  severe  gymnastic  exercises  exhausted 

9  their  constitutions.  When  boyhood  is  over,  three  years 
should  be  spent  in  other  studies ;  the  period  of  life  which 
follows  may  then  be  devoted  to  hard  exercise  and  strict 
regimen.  Men  ought  not  to  labour  at  the  same  time  with 
their  minds  and  with  their  bodies  ^ ;  for  the  two  kinds  of 
labour  are  opposed  to  one  another — the  labour  of  the  body 
impedes  the  mind,  and  the  labour  of  the  mind  the  body. 

5  Concerning  music  there  are  some  questions  which  we  have 
already  raised  ;  these  we  may  now  resume  and  carry  further ; 
and  our  remarks  will  serve  as  a  prelude  to  this  or  any  other 

2  discussion  of  the  subject.  It  is  not  easy  to  determine  the 
nature  of  music,  or  why  any  one  should  have  a  knowledge  of 
it.  Shall  we  say,  for  the  sake  of  amusement  and  relaxation, 
like  sleep  or  drinking,  which  are  not  good  in  themselves,  but 
are  pleasant,  and  at  the    same  time   '  make  care  to  cease,' 

3  as  Euripides  '^  says  ?  And  therefore  men  rank  them  with 
music,  and  make  use  of  all  three — sleep  ^,  drinking,  music — 
to  which  some  add  dancing.  Or  shall  we  argue  that  music 
conduces  to  virtue,  on  the  ground  that  it  can  form  our  minds 
and  habituate  us  to  true  pleasures  as  our  bodies  are  made  by 

'  Cp.  Plato,  Rep.  vii.  537  b.  '  Bacchae,  380. 

*  Reading  (with  Bekker's  and  ed.)  virv(u,  a  correction  which  seems 
necessary,  and  is  suggested  by  vitvov  koi  nfOr/s  above. 


Music  307 

gymnastic  to  be  of  a  certain  character  ?     Or  shall  we  say  that  VIII.  5 
it  contributes  to  the  enjoyment  of  leisure  and  mental  cultiva-  ^ 
tion,  which  is  a  third  alternative  ?     Now  obviously  youth  are 
not  to  be  instructed  with  a  view  to  their  amusement,  for  learn- 
ing is  no  pleasure,  but  is  accompanied  with  pain.     Neither  is 
intellectual  enjoyment  suitable  to  boys  of  that  age,  for  it  is 
the  end,  and  that  which  is  imperfect  cannot  attain  the  perfect 
or  end.     But  perhaps  it  may  be  said  that  boys  learn  music  for  5 
the  sake  of  the  amusement  which  they  will  have  when  they 
are  grown  up.     If  so,  why  should  they  learn  themselves,  and 
not,  like  the  Persian  and  Median  kings,  enjoy  the  pleasure 
and  instruction  which  is  derived  from  hearing  others  ?     (for  6 
surely  skilled    persons    who  have  made  music   the  business 
and  profession  of  their  lives  will  be  better  performers  than 
those  who  practise  only  to  learn).     If  they  must  learn  music, 
on  the  same   principle    they   should    learn    cookery,    which 
is  absurd.     And  even  granting  that    music  may  form    the  7 
character,   the  objection  still  holds :    why   should  we  leam 
ourselves  ?     Why  cannot  we  attain  true  pleasure  and  form  1339  b 
a  correct  judgment  from  hearing  others,  like  the  Lacedae- 
monians ? — for  they,  without  learning  music,  nevertheless  can 
correctly  judge,  as  they  say,  of  good  and  bad  melodies.     Or  8 
again,   if  music    should    be    used   to    promote    cheerfulness 
and  refined  intellectual  enjoyment,  the  objection  still  remains — 
why   should    we    leam  ourselves    instead    of    enjoying   the 
performances  of  others  ?      We  may  illustrate  what  we  are 
saying  by  our  conception  of  the  Gods  ;  for  in  the  poets  Zeus 
does  not  himself  sing   or  play  on  the  lyre.     Nay,  we  call 
professional   performers   vulgar ;     no  freeman  would  play  or 
sing  unless  he  were  intoxicated  or  in  jest.     But  these  matters  9 
may  be  left  for  the  present. 

X  2 


3o8  The  Pleasure  of  Music 

VIII.  5  The  first  question  is  whether  music  is  or  is  not  to  be  a  part 
of  education.  Of  the  three  things  mentioned  in  our  discus- 
sion, which  is  it  ? — Education  or  amusement  or  intellectual 
enjoyment,  for  it  may  be  reckoned  under  all  three,  and  seems 
•  lo  to  share  in  the  nature  of  all  of  them.  Amusement  is  for  the 
sake  of  relaxation,  and  relaxation  is  of  necessity  sweet,  for 
it  is  the  remedy  of  pain  caused  by  toil,  and  intellectual 
enjoyment  is  universally  acknowledged  to  contain  an  element 
not   only   of  the  noble  but  of  the   pleasant,    for   happiness 

11  is  made  up  of  both.  All  men  agree  that  music  is  one  of 
the  pleasantest  things,  whether  with  or  without  song  ;  as 
Musaeus  says, 

'  Song  is  to  mortals  of  all  things  the  sweetest.' 
Hence   and   with  good  reason  it  is  introduced  into  social 
gatherings  and  entertainments,  because  it  makes  the  hearts  of 
men  glad  :    so  that  on  this  ground  alone  we  may  assume  that 

12  the  young  ought  to  be  trained  in  it.  For  innocent  pleasures 
are  not  only  in  harmony  with  the  perfect  end  of  life,  but  they 
also  provide  relaxation.  And  whereas  men  rarely  attain  the 
end,  but  often  rest  by  the  way  and  amuse  themselves,  not  only 
with  a  view  to  some  good,  but  also  for  the  pleasure's  sake,  it 
may  be  well  for  them  at  times  to  find  a  refreshment  in  music. 

13  It  sometimes  happens  that  men  make  amusement  the  end, 
for  the  end  probably  contains  some  element  of  pleasure, 
though  not  any  ordinary  or  lower  pleasure ;  but  they  mistake 
the  lower  for  the  higher,  and  in  seeking  for  the  one  find  the 
other,  since  every  pleasure  has  a  likeness  to  the  end  of 
action'.  For  the  end  is  not  eligible,  nor  do  the  pleasures 
which  we  have  described  exist,  for  the  sake  of  any  future 
good  but  of  the  past,  that  is  to  say,  they  are  the  alleviation  of 

»  Cp.  N.Eth.vii.  13.  §6. 


Music  and  l^torals  309 

past  toils    and   pains.       And   we   may   infer  this  to  be  the  VIII.  5 

reason    why  men    seek   happiness  from    common    pleasures.  14 

But   music   is  pursued,    not   only  as   an   alleviation   of  past 

toil,  but  also  as   providing    recreation.      And  who  can  say  15 

whether,  having  this  use,  it  may  not  also  have  a  nobler  one  ? 

In  addition  to  this  common  pleasure,  felt  and  shared  in  by  all  1310  a 

(for  the  pleasure    given   by  music  is  natural,   and  therefore 

adapted  to  all  ages    and  characters),   may  it  not  have  also 

some  influence  over  the  character  and  the  soul  ?      It  must  i5 

have  such  an  influence  if  characters  are  affected  by  it.      And 

that   they  are   so  affected  is  proved   by    the   power   which 

the  songs  of  Olympus  and  of  many  others  exercise ;    for 

beyond    question    they  inspire  enthusiasm,    and   enthusiasm 

is  an  emotion  of  the  ethical  part  of  the  soul.      Besides,  when  1 7 

men    hear   imitations,    even   unaccompanied   by    melody    or 

rhythm,  their  feelings  move  in  sympathy.      Since,  then,  music 

is  a  pleasure,  and  virtue  consists  in  rejoicing  and  loving  and 

hating  aright,  there  is  clearly  nothing  which  we  are  so  much 

concerned  to  acquire  and  to  cultivate  as  the  power  of  forming 

right  judgments,  and  of  taking  delight  in  good  dispositions 

and  noble  actions  ^       Rhythm  and  melody  supply  imitations  18 

of  anger  and  gentleness,  and  also  of  courage  and  temperance 

and  of  virtues  and  vices  in  general,  which  hardly  fall  short  of 

the  actual  affections,  as  we  know  from  our  own  experience, 

for  in  listening  to  such  strains  our  souls  undergo  a  change. 

The  habit  of  feeling  pleasure  or  pain  at  mere  representations  19 

is  not  far  removed  from  the  same  feeling  about  realities  " ;  for 

example,  if  any  one  delights  in  the   sight  of   a   statue    for 

its    beauty   only,    it   necessarily    follows   that   the    sight   of 

^  Cp.  Plato,  Rep.  iii.  401,  402  ;  Laws,  ii.  658,  659. 
^  Cp.  Plato,  Rep.  iii.  395. 


3  I  o  The  Harmonies 

VIII,  5  the  original  will  be  pleasant  to  him.     No  other  sense,  such 

20  as  taste  or  touch,  has  any  resemblance  to  moral  qualities ; 
in  sight  only  there  is  a  little,  for  figures  are  to  some  extent  of 
a  moral  character,  and  [so  far]  all  participate  in  the  feeling 
about  them.     Again,  figures  and  colours  are  not  imitations, 

21  but  signs  of  moral  habits,  and  these  signs  occur  only  when  the 
body  is  under  the  influence  of  emotions.  The  connexion  of 
them  with  morals  is  slight,  but  in  so  far  as  there  is  any, 
young  men  should  be  taught  to  look,  not  at  the  works 
of  Pauson,  but  at  those  of  Polygnotus  \  or  any  other  painter 
or  statuary  who  expresses  moral  ideas.      On  the  other  hand, 

3  2  even  in  mere  melodies  ^  there  is  an  imitation  of  character,  for 
the  musical  modes  diflTer  essentially  from  one  another, 
and  those  who  hear  them  are  differently  affected  by  each. 
1340  b  Some  of  them  make  men  sad  and  grave,  like  the  so-called 
Mixolydian,  others  enfeeble  the  mjnd,  like  the  relaxed 
harmonies,  others,  again,  produce  a  moderate  and  settled 
temper,  which  appears  to  be  the  peculiar  effect  of  the  DoHan  ; 

23  the  Phrygian  inspires  enthusiasm.  The  whole  subject 
has  been  well  treated  by  philosophical  writers  on  this  branch 
of  education,  and  they  confirm  their  arguments  by  facts. 
The  same  principles  apply  to  rhythms  '^ :  sopie  have  a 
character  of  rest,  others  of  motion,  and  of  these  latter  again, 

24  some  have  a  more  vulgar,  others  a  nobler  movement.  Enough 
has  been  said  to  show  that  music  has  a  power  of  forming  the 
character,  and  should  therefore  be  introduced  into  the  education 

25  of  the  young.  The  study  is  suited  to  the  stage  of  youth,  for 
young  persons  will  not,  if  they  can  help,  endure  anything  which 
is  not  sweetened  by  pleasure,  and  music  has  a  natural  sweet- 

1  Cp.  Poet.  2.  §  2 ;  6.  §  15.  ^  Cp.  Plato,  Rep.  iii.  398,  399. 

^  Rep.  iii.  399  e,  400. 


The  Harmonies  311 

ness.     There  seems  to  be  in  us  a  sort  of  affinity  to  harmonies  VIII.  5 
and  rhythms,  which  makes  some  philosophers  say  that  the  soul 
is  a  harmony,  others,  that  she  possesses  harmony. 

And   now    we  have    to    determine    the    question    which  6 
has    been    already    raised ',     whether    children    should    be 
themselves  taught  to  sing  and  play  or  not.      Clearly  there  is 
a  considerable  difference  made  in  the  character  by  the  actual 
practice  of  the  art.     It   is  difficult,   if  not  impossible,   for 
those  who  do  not  perform  to  be  good  judges  of  the  perform- 
ance of  others  ^      Besides,  children  should  have  something  2 
to  do,  and  the  rattle  of  Archytas,  which  people  give  to  their 
children  in  order  to  amuse  them    and    prevent   them    from 
breaking  anything   in    the    house,    was    a    capital    invention, 
for  a  young  thing  cannot  be  quiet.     The  rattle  is  a  toy  suited 
to  the  infant  mind,  and  [musical]  education  is  a  rattle  or  toy 
for  children  of  a  larger  growth.     We  conclude  then  that  they  3 
should  be  taught  music  in  such  a  way  as  to  become  not  only 
critics  but  performers. 

The  question  what  is  or  is  not  suitable  for  different  ages 
may  be  easily  answered ;  nor  is  there  any  difficulty  in 
meeting  the  objection  of  those  who  say  that  the  study  of 
music  is  vulgar.  We  reply  (l)  in  the  first  place,  that  they  4 
who  are  to  be  judges  must  also  be  performers,  and  that  they 
should  begin  to  practise  early,  although  when  they  are  older 
they  may  be  spared  the  execution  ;  they  must  have  learned 
to  appreciate  what  is  good  and  to  delight  in  it,  thanks  to 
the  knowledge  which  they  acquired  in  their  youth.  As  to  5 
(2)  the  vulgarizing  effect  which  music  is  supposed  to  exercise, 
this  is  a  question  [of  degree],  which  we  shall  have  no 
difficulty  in  determining,  when  we  have  considered  to  what 
*  c.  5.  §§  5-8.  "  Cp.  supra,  c.  5.  §  7. 


3 1  2  The  Gentleman  Musician 

VIII.  6  extent   freemen    who    are   being   trained    to   political    virtue 

should  pursue  the  art,  what  melodies  and  what  rhythms  they 

1341  a  should  be  allowed  to  use,  and  what  instruments  should  be 

employed  in  teaching  them  to  play,  for  even  the  instrument 

6  makes  a  difference.  The  answer  to  the  objection  turns  upon 
these  distinctions  ;  for  it  is  quite  possible  that  certain  methods 
of  teaching  and  learning  music  do  really  have  a  degrading 
effect.  It  is  evident  then  that  the  learning  of  music  ought 
not  to  impede  the  business  of  riper  years,  or  to  degrade  the 
body  or  render  it  unfit  for  civil  or  military  duties,  whether  for 
the  early  practice  or  for  the  later  study  of  them. 

7  The  right  measure  will  be  attained  if  students  of  music  stop 
short  of  the  arts  which  are  practised  in  professional  contests, 
and  do  not  seek  to  acquire  those  fantastic  marvels  of  execution 
which  are  now  the  fashion  in  such  contests,  and  from  these 

8  have  passed  into  education.  Let  the  young  pursue  their 
studies  until  they  are  able  to  feel  delight  in  noble  melodies  and 
rhythms,  and  not  merely  in  that  common  part  of  music  in  which 
every  slave  or  child  and  even  some  animals  find  pleasure. 

From  these  principles  we  may  also  infer  what  instruments 

9  should  be  used.  The  flute,  or  any  other  instrument  which 
requires  great  skill,  as  for  example  the  harp,  ought  not  to  be 
admitted  into  education,  but  only  such  as  will  make  intelligent 
students  of  music  or  of  the  other  parts  of  education. 
Besides,  the  flute  is  not  an  instrument  which  has  a  good  moral 
effect ;  it  is  too  exciting.  The  proper  time  for  using  it  is 
when  the  performance  aims  not  at  instruction,  but  at  the  relief 

lo  of  the    passions^.     And   there  is   a    further  objection;  the 
impediment  which  the  flute  presents  to  the  use  of  the  voice 
detracts  from  its  educational  value.     The  ancients  therefore 
'  Cp.  c.  7.  §  3. 


Musical  Instruments  313 

were  right  in  forbidding   the  flute  to  youths  and   freemen,  VIII.  6 
although  they  had  once  allowed  it.    For  when  their  wealth  gave  ii 
them  greater  leisure,  and  they  had  loftier  notions  of  excellence, 
being  also  elated  with  their  success,  both  before  and  after  the 
Persian  War,  with  more  zeal  than  discernment  they  pursued 
every  kind  of  knowledge,  and  so  they  introduced  the  flute  into 
education.     At  Lacedaemon  there  was  a  Choragus  who  led  12 
the  Chorus  with  a  flute,  and  at  Athens  the  instrument  became 
so   popular   that    most    freemen   could  play   upon    it.     The 
popularity  is  shown  by  the  tablet  which  Thrasippus  dedicated 
when  he  furnished  the  Chorus  to  Ecphantides.    Later  expe- 
rience enabled  men  to  judge  what  was  or  what  was  not  really 
conducive  to  virtue,  and  they  rejected  both  the  flute  and  several  13 
other  old-fashioned  instruments,  such  as  the  Lydian  harp,  the 
many-stringed  lyre,  the  'heptagon,'  'triangle,'  '  sambuca,' and  ISilb 
the   like — which   are  intended  only  to  give  pleasure  to  the 
hearer,  and  require  extraordinary  skill  of  hand  ^     There  is 
a  meaning  also  in  the  myth  of  the  ancients,  which  tells  how 
Athene  invented  the  flute  and  then  threw  it  away.     It  was  14 
not  a    bad    idea   of   theirs,   that  the   Goddess   disliked    the 
instrument  because  it  made  the  face  ugly ;  but  with  still  more 
reason  may  we  say  that  she  rejected  it  because  the  acquirement 
of  flute-playing   contributes    nothing  to    the  mind,   since  to 
Athene  we  ascribe  knowledge  and  art. 

Accordingly  we  reject  the  professional  instruments  and  also  15 
the  professional  mode  of  education  in  music — and  by  pro- 
fessional we  mean  that  which  is  adopted  in  contests,  for  in  this 
the  performer  practises  the  art,  not  for  the  sake  of  his  own 
improvement,  but  in  order  to  give  pleasure,  and  that  of  a  vulgar 
sort,  to  his  hearers.  For  this  reason  the  execution  of  such 
'  Cp.  Plato,  Rep.  iii.  399  d. 


314         T^he   'Professional  Alusician 

VIII.  6  music  is  not  the  part  of  a  freeman  but  of  a  paid  performer,  and 
16  the  result  is  that  the  performers  are  vulgarized,  for  the  end  at 
which  they  aim  is  bad  ^.  The  vulgarity  of  the  sjjectator  tends 
to  lower  the  character  of  the  music  and  therefore  of  the  per- 
formers ;  they  look  to  him — he  makes  them  what  they  are,  and 
fashions  even  their  bodies  by  the  movements  which  he  expects 
them  to  exhibit. 
7  We  have  also  to  consider  rhythms  and  harmonies.  Shall  we 
use  them  all  in  education  or  make  a  distinction  ?  and  shall  the 
distinction  be  that  which  is  made  by  those  who  are  engaged  in 
education,  or  shall  it  be  some  other  ?  For  we  see  that  music 
is  produced  by  melody  and  rhythm,  and  we  ought  to  know 
what  influence  these  have  respectively  on  education,  and 
whether  we  should  prefer  excellence  in  melody  or  excellence  in 

2  rhythm.  But  as  the  subject  has  been  very  well  treated  by 
many  musicians  of  the  present  day,  and  also  by  philosophers 
who  have  had  considerable  experience  of  musical  education,  to 
these  we  would  refer  the  more  exact  student  of  the  subject ;  we 
shall  only  speak  of  it  now  after  the  manner  of  the  legislator, 
having  regard  to  general  principles. 

3  We  accept  the  division  of  melodies  proposed  by  certain 
philosophers  into  ethical  melodies,  melodies  of  action,  and 
passionate  or  inspiring  melodies,  each  having,  as  they  say,  a 
mode  or  harmony  corresponding  to  it.  But  we  maintain 
further  that  music  should  be  studied,  not  for  the  sake  of  one, 
but  of  many  benefits,  that  is  to  say,  with  a  view  to  (l) 
education,  (2)  purgation  (the  word  '  purgation '  we  use  at  present 
without  explanation,  but  when  hereafter  we  speak  of  poetry  ^,  we 
will  treat  the  subject  with  more  precision) ;   music  may  also 

*   Cp.  Plato,  Laws,  iii.  700. 
*  Cp.  Poet.  c.  6,  though  the  promise  is  really  unfulfilled. 


The  Power  of  Music  3  i  s 

serve  (3)  for  intellectual  enjoyment,   for  relaxation  and  for  VIII.  7 
recreation  after  exertion.     It  is  clear,  therefore,  that  all  the  1342  a 
harmonies  must  be  employed  by  us,  but  not  all  of  them  in  the 
same  manner.    In  education  ethical  melodies  are  to  be  preferred, 
but  we  may  listen  to  the  melodies  of  action  and  passion  when 
they  are  performed  by  others.     For  feelings  such  as  pity  and  4 
fear,  or,  again,  enthusiasm,  exist  very  strongly  in  some  souls, 
and  have  more  or  less  influence  over  all.     Some  persons  fall 
into  a  religious  frenzy,  whom  we  see  disenthralled  by  the  use  of 
mystic  melodies,  which  bring  healing  and  purgation  to  the  soul. 
Those  who  are  influenced  by  pity  or  fear  and  every  emotional  5 
nature  have  a  like  experience,  others  in  their  degree  are  stirred 
by  something  which  specially  affects  them,  and  all  are  in  a 
manner  purged  and  their  souls  lightened  and  delighted.     The 
melodies  of  purgation  likewise  give  an  innocent  pleasure  to 
mankind.     Such  are  the  harmonies  and  the  melodies  in  which  6 
those  who  perform  music  at  the  theatre  should  be  invited  to 
compete.     But  since  the  spectators  are  of  two  kinds — the 
one  free  and  educated,  and  the  other  a  vulgar  crowd  composed 
of  mechanics,   labourers   and  the   like — there   ought   to  be  7 
contests  and  exhibitions  instituted  for  the  relaxation  of  the 
second  class  also.     And  the  melodies  will  correspond  to  their 
minds ;  for  as  their  minds  are  perverted  from  the  natural  state, 
so  there  are  exaggerated  and  corrupted  harmonies  which  are 
in  like  manner  a  perversion.     A  man  receives  pleasure  from 
what  is  natural  to  him,  and  therefore  professional  musicians 
may  be  allowed  to  practise  this  lower  sort  of  music  before  an 
audience  of  a  lower  type.      But,  for  the  purpose  of  education,  8 
as  I  have  already  said,  those  modes  and  melodies  should  be 
employed  which  are  ethical,  such  as  the  Dorian ;  though  we 
may  include  any  others  which  are  approved  by  philosophers 


^i6  The  Dorian,  Phrygian, 

VIII.  7  who   have  had  a  musical   education.     The  Socrates  of  the 

9  Republic  ^  is  wrong  in  retaining  only  the  Phrygian  mode  along 

1342  b  with  the  Dorian,  and  the  more  so  because  he  rejects  the  flute ; 

for  the  Phrygian  is  to  the  modes  what  the  flute  is  to  musical 

instruments — both    of  them   are    exciting    and    emotional. 

10  Poetry  proves  this,  for  Bacchic  frenzy  and  all  similar  emotions 
are  most  suitably  expressed  by  the  flute,  and  are  better  set  to 
the  Phrygian  than  to  any  other  harmony.    The  dithyramb,  for 

1 1  example,  is  acknowledged  to  be  Phrygian,  a  fact  of  which  the 
connoisseurs  of  music  offer  many  proofs,  saying,  among  other 
things,  that  Philoxenus,  having  attempted  to  compose  his 
Tales  ^  as  a  dithyramb  in  the  Dorian  mode,  found  it  impossible, 

12  and  fell  back  into  the  more  appropriate  Phrygian.  All  men 
agree  that  the  Dorian  music  is  the  gravest  and  manliest.  And 
whereas  we  say  that  the  extremes  should  be  avoided  and  the 
mean  followed,  and  whereas  the  Dorian  is  a  mean  between  the 
other  harmonies  [the  Phrygian  and  the  Lydian  ^],  it  is  evident 
that  our  youth  should  be  taught  the  Dorian  music. 

13  Two  principles  have  to  be  kept  in  view — what  is  possible, 
what  is  becoming  :  at  these  every  man  ought  to  aim.  But 
even  these  are  relative  to  age ;  the  old,  who  have  lost  their 
powers,  cannot  very  well  sing  the  severe  melodies,  and  nature 
herself  seems  to  suggest  that  their  songs  should  be  of  the 

14  more  relaxed  kind.  Wherefore  the  musicians  likewise  blame 
Socrates,  and  with  justice,  for  rejecting  the  relaxed  harmonies 
in  education  under  the  idea  that  they  are  intoxicating  ;  not  in  the 
ordinary  sense  of  intoxication  (for  wine  rather  tends  to  excite 
men),  but  because  they  have  no  strength  in  them.     And  so 

'  Plato,  Rep.  iii.  399. 

^  Retaining  the  MS.  reading  fivOovs.     Cp.  Poet.  c.  2.  §  7. 

3  Cp.  c.  5.  §  22. 


and  Lydian  Modes  317 

with  a  view  to  a  time  or  life  when  men  begin  to  grow  old,  VIII.  7 
they  ought  to  practise  the  gentler  harmonies  and  melodies  as 
well  as  the  others.  And  if  there  be  any  harmony,  such  as  the  15 
Lydian  above  all  others  appears  to  be,  which  is  suited  to 
children  of  tender  age,  and  possesses  the  elements  both  of  order 
and  of  education,  clearly  [we  ought  to  use  it,  for]  education 
should  be  based  upon  three  principles — the  mean,  the  possible, 
the  becoming,  these  three. 


INDEX 


Abydos,  v.  6,  §§  6,  13. 

Account,  power  of  calling  magis- 
trates to,  in  Sparta  exercised  by 
the  Ephors,  ii.  9,  §  26 ;  given 
by  Solon  to  the  people,  ib.  12, 
§  5;  iii.  II,  §  8 ;  and  justly 
claimed  by  them,  iii.  1 1 ;  when 
exercised  by  all,  a  mark  of 
democracy,  iv,  14,  §§  4-6  ;  vi.  2, 

§  6  ;  4.  §  5- 
Achaea  [in  Peloponnerus],  v.  3, 

§11. 
Achaea  [Pthiotis],  ii.  9,  §  3. 
Achaeans,  the  (in  Colchis),  viii.  4, 

§3. 
Achilles,  iii.  5,  §  9. 
v'^  Acquisition,  the  art  of,  (i)  the 
natural,  i.  9,  §  12  ;  11,  §§  i,  2  ; 
includes  war  [in  certain  cases] 
and  hunting,  i.  7,  §  5  ;  8,  §  12  ; 
vii.  14,  §  21 ;  a  part  of  house- 
hold management,  i.  4,  §  i ; 
8,  §§  13-15;  9'  §§  1-8;  10, 
§  §  I  -4 ;  1 1 ,  §  2  ;  has  a  limit, 
ib.  8,  §  14;  9,  §§13-18:  {i\)that 
which  is  contrary  to  nature,  in- 
cluding {a)  exchange  which 
goes  beyond  the  need   of  life, 

i.  9»  §§2-5;    10,  §4;    II,  §3; 

(/')  usury,  ib.  10,  §  4  ;    1 1,  §  3  ; 

{c)  trade,  ib.  9,  §4;    10,  §4; 

1 1>  §  3  ;  (^)  service  for  hire,  ib. 

II,  §  3 :    (iii)  ihe  intermediate 

kind,  ib.  §  4. 
Adamas,  v.  10,  §  18. 
Admiral,  office  of  (at  Sparta), 

ii-  9,  §  33- 
Aegina,  iv.  4,  §  21  ;  v.  6,  §  9. 
Aenos,  in  Thrace,  v,  10,  §  18. 


Aesymnetes,  the,  or  dictators  of 
ancient  Hellas,  iii.  14,  §§8-io, 
14 ;  iv.  10,  §  2  ;  always  received 
a  guard,  iii.  15,  §  16. 

Agamemnon,  iii.  5,  §9;  14,  §  4; 
16,  §  10. 

Agesilaus,  King  of  Sparta,  v.  7, 
§3- 

Agriculture,  the  employment  fol- 
lowed by  the  greater  part  of 
mankind,  i.  8,  §  7 ;  works  upon, 
ib.  II,  §7;  ancient  legislation 
to  encourage,  vi.  4,  §§  8-10. 

Alcaeus,  iii.  14,  §  10. 

Alcyone,  mother  of  Diodes  the 
Corinthian,  ii.  12,  §  8. 

Aleuadae,  the,  at  Larissa,  v.  6, 

§13- 
Aliens,  resident,  how  distin- 
guished from  citizens,  iii.  i,  §  4; 
obliged  to  have  a  patron,  ib. ; 
enrolled  by  Cleisthenes  in  the 
tribes,  ib.  2,  §3;  admitted  to 
citizenship   at    Syracuse,   v.  3, 

§13- 

Alliance,  an,  how  different  from 
a  state,  ii.  2,  §  3;  iii.  9,  §§  6-8. 

Almsgiving,  demoralizing  effects 
of,  vi.  5,  §  7_. 

Alternation  in  office,  character- 
istic of  constitutional  govern- 
ments, i.  i,  §  2;  12,  §2;  ii.  2, 
§§4-7;  iii.  4,  §§io,  14-17;  6, 
§§9,  10;  16,  §§2,  3;  17,  §4; 
vi.  2,  §§2,5;  vii.  14,  §§1-5. 

Amadocus  (?  king  of  the  Odry- 
sians),  v.  10,  §  24. 

Amasis,  king  of  Egypt,  i.  12,  §  2. 

Ambition,  a  cause  of  crime,  ii.  7, 


320 


Index 


§§  10-14,  18  ;  9.  §  28  ;  encour- 
aged by  the  Spartan  law-giver, 
ib.  9,  §  28 ;  a  motive  of  revolu- 
tions, ii.  7,  §§  10,  18  ;  V.  7,  §  4; 
10,  §5- 

Ambracia,  v.  3,  §  10;  4,  §  9;  10, 
§16. 

Amphipolis,  v.  3,  §  13;  6,  §  8. 

Amyntas  the  Little  (?  father  of 
Philip),  v.  10,  §  16. 

Anaxilaus,  tyranny  of,  at  Rhe- 
gium,  V.  12,  §  13. 

Andria,  ancient  name  of  the 
common  meals  at  Sparta,  ii.  10, 

§5- 
Androdamas,  of  Rhegium,  ii.  12, 

§14- 

Andros,  ii.  9,  §  20. 

Animals,  the,  intention  of  Nature 
in  denying  speech  to,  i.  2,§§  10- 
1 2 ;  under  the  dominion  of  man, 
ib.  5,  §  7 ;  tame  better  than  wild, 
ib. ;  only  differ  from  slaves  in 
not  being  able  to  apprehend 
reason,  ib.  §  9 ;  their  various 
modes  of  life,  ib.  8,  §§  4-6; 
supply  their  offspring  with  food 
in  different  ways,  ib.  §  10;  cre- 
ated for  the  sake  of  man.  ib. 
§§9-12;  produce  offspring  re- 
sembling their  parents,  ii.  3,  §  9; 
cannot  form  a  state,  iii.  9,  §  6 ; 
lead  a  life  of  nature,  not  of 
reason,  vii.  13,  §  12  ;  the  parts 
of  animals  an  illustration  of  the 
parts  of  the  state,  iv.  4,  §§  7-9 ; 
the  offspring  of  young  animals 
often  small  and  ill-developed, 
vii.  16,  §  6. 

Antileon,  tyrant  at  Chalcis,  v.  1 2, 
§12. 

Antimenides,  brother  of  Alcaeus, 
iii.  14,  §9. 

Antissa,  in  Lesbos,  v.  3,  §  12. 

Antisthenes,  iii.  13,  §  14, 

Aphytaeans,  the  (in  Pallene), 
vi.  4,  §  10. 


Apollodorus  of  Lemnos,  i.  11,  §  7. 
Apollonia  (on  the  Adriatic),  iv.  4 , 

§5. 
Apollonia  (on  the  Euxine),  v.  3, 

§  13;  ib.  6,  §9. 
Appeal,  a  court  of,  allowed  by 

Hippodamus,  ii.  8,  §  4. 
Appetitive  principle,  the,  of  the 

soul,  i.  5,  §6;  iii.4,§6;  i6,§5; 

vii.  15,  §§9.  lo- 
Arbitrator,  the  judge  should  not 

be  made  into  an,  ii.  8,  §  13;  the 

middle  class  the  arbitrators  of 

the  state,  iv.  12,  §  5. 
Arcadia,  ii.  2,  §3;  ib.  9,  5§  3.  i^- 
Archelaus,  king  of  Macedonia, 

v.  10,  §§  17-20. 
Archias  of  Thebes,  v.  6,  §  15. 
Archilochus,  quoted,  vii.  7,  §  6. 
Archons,  the  duties  of,  vi.  8,  §  20 ; 

the  single  Archoa  at  Epidam- 

nns,  iii.  16,  §  i ;  v.  i,  §  12. 
Archytas,  of  Tarentum,  viii.  6, 

§2. 

Areopagus,  the,  at  Athens  {sec 
Council  of  Areopagus). 

Argo,  the,  iii.  13,  §  16. 

Argos,  use  of  ostracism  at,  v.  3, 
§  3  ;  the  political  changes  after 
'  Hebdome,'  ib.  3,  §  7  ;  the  oli- 
garchical revolution  after  the 
battle  of  Mantinea,  ib.  4,  §  9  ; 
the  tyranny  of  Pheidon,  ib.  10, 
§  6  ;  enmity  of  the  Argives  to 
the  Lacedaemonians,  ii.  9,  §§  3, 
II. 

Ariobarzanes,  v.  10,  §  25. 

Aristocracy,  characterized  by 
election  for  merit,  ii.  11,  §§9, 
II ;  iv.  8,  §7;  V.  7,  §  I ;  dis- 
tinguished from  the  perfect  state, 
as  being  a  government  of  men 
who  are  only  good  relatively  to 
the  constitution,  iv.  7,  §  2  {but 
cp.  iii.  4,  §  5) ;  so  called  because 
the  best  rule  or  the  best  interests 
of  the  state  are  consulted,  iii.  7, 


Index 


321 


§  3 ;  not  a  perversion,  iv.  8,  §  i ; 
analogous  to  oligarchy  (1)  be- 
cause the  few  rule,  v.  7,  §  i ; 
(2)  because  birth  and  education 
commonly  accompany  wealth, 
iv.  8,  §  3; — to  royalty  as  a 
government  of  the  best,  ib.  10, 
§  2 ;  preferable  to  royalty,  be- 
cause the  good  are  more  than 
one,  iii.  15,  §  10;  how  distin- 
guished from  oligarchy  and 
constitutional  government,  iv.  7 ; 
8;  14,  §10;  V.  7,  §§5-9(cp.ii. 
ii>  §§5-10);  usually  degener- 
ates into  oligarchy,  iii.  7,  §  5 ; 
15,  §11;  iv.  2,  §2;  V.  7,  §7; 
8,  §  7 ; — causes  of  revolutions  in 
aristocracies,  v.  7 ;  tiie  means  of 
their  preservation,  ib.  8,  §§  5-7 ; 
aristocracy  less  stable  than  con- 
stitutional government,  ib.  7, 
§  6 ;  liable  to  danger  because 
the  rich  have  too  much  power, 

■  i^:_l£iX^'  ™ig^t  ^  combined 
with  democracy  if  the  magi- 
strates were  unpaid  and  office 
open  to  all,  ib.  8,  §  17  (cp.  vi.  4, 
§  6) ; — magistracies  peculiar  to 
aristocracy,  iv.  15,  §  10;  vi.  8, 
§§  22,  24;  aristocratical  modes 
of  appointing  magistrates  and 
judges,  iv.  15,  §§20,  21 ;  16,  §8; 
practice  of  trying  all  suits  by  the 
same  magistrates,  aristocratical, 
ii.  II,  §  8;  iii.  i,  §  10; — the 
people  naturally  suited  to  an 
aristocracy,  iii.  17,  §§  3-7. 

Aristogeiton,  conspiracy  of  Har- 
modius  and,  v.  10,  §  15. 

Aristophanes,  ii.  4,  §  6. 

Arrhibaeus,  king  of  the  Lyn- 
cestians,  v.  10,  §  17. 

Art,  works  of,  wherein  different 
from  realities,  iii.  11,  §  4. 

Artapanes,  v.  10,  §  21. 

Artisan,  the  employments  of  the, 
devoid  of  moral  excellence,  i.  13, 


§§13,14;  iii.  5,  §5;  vi.4,  §12; 
vii.  9,  §§3.7;  artisans  some- 
times public  slaves,  ii.  7,  §  22  ; 
only  admitted  to  office  in  de- 
mocracies, iii.  4,  §  12;  often 
acquire  wealth,  ib.  5,  §  6  ;  the 
question  whether  they  are  citi- 
zens, ib.  5 ;  necessary  to  the 
existence  of  the  state,  iv.  4,  §§9, 
21  ;  not  a  part  of  the  state,  vii. 
4,  §  6 ;  should  be  debarred  from 
the  'Freemen's  Agora,'  ib.  12, 

§3- 

Arts,   the,   require    instruments, 
both  living  and   lifeless,   i.  4; 
some  arts  subservient  to  others, 
ib.  8,  §  2  ;   10,  §§  1-4;   the  arts 
have    a   limit    in    their  means 
though  not  in  their  end,  ib.  8, 
§  14 ;  9,  §  13;  both  the  means 
and  the  end  ought  to  be  within 
our  control,  vii.  13,  §  2 ;  amount 
of  knowledge  which  a  freeman 
is  permitted  in  the  arts,  i.  11 
9  i;  viii.  2,  §  5;  degrees  of  ex 
cellence  in  them,  i.  11,  §  6;  viii 
2,  §§5,6;    changes  in,  advan 
tageous,  ii.  8,  §  18  ;   iii.  15,  §  4 
the  analogy  of,  not  to  be  ex 
tended  to  the  laws,  ii-  8,  §  24 
iii.  15,  §4;  exist  for  the  benefit 
of  those  under  them,  iii.  6,  §§  7- 
9 ;  by  whom  should  the  artist 
be  judged  ?  ib.  11,  §§  10-14  (cp. 
viii.  6,  §§  1-4) ;  the  arts  aim  at 
some  good,  iii.  12,  §  i  ;  justice 
of  the  different  claimsto  political 
superiority  illustrated  from  the 
arts,  ib.  12,  §§  4-8;  law  of  pro- 
portion in  the  arts,  ib.  13,  §21; 
the  problems   of  the   arts,   an 
illustration  of  the  problems  of 
politics,  iv.  I,  §§  1-4;    the  arts 
have  to  supply  the  deficiencies 
of  Nature,  vii.  17,  §  15. 

Asia,  ii.  10,  §  3  ;    iv.  3,  §  3  ;    the 
Asiatics  better  fitted  for  slavery 


3  22 


Index 


than  the  Hellenes,  iii.  14,  §  6 ; 
vii.  7,  §  2  ;  cannibal  tribes  in 
Asia,  viii.  4,  §  3. 

Assembly,  the,  payment  of,  evil 
effects  of  the  practice,  ii.  7,  §  19; 
iv.  6,  §  5 ;  vi.  2,  §  6  ;  how  they 
may  be  connteracted,  vi.  5,  §  5; 
— power  monopolized  by,  in  ex- 
treme democracies,  iv.  6,  §  5  ; 
14.  §7;  V.  5,  §10:  6,  §17;  9, 
§  14;  vi.  2,  §5;  4,  §  15  (cp.  ii. 
12,  §4;  V.  II,  §§  II,  12);  meet- 
ings should  be  infrequent,  vi.  5, 
§  5  (cp,  iv.  14,  §§  4,  5);  charac- 
ter of,  in  the  different  kinds  of 
democracies,  iv.  14,  §§  4-7  ;  vi. 
3,  §§  5-7;  in  oligarchies,  iv.  14, 
§§  8-1 1  (cp.  iii.  I,  §  10) ;  pro- 
vision in  case  of  equal  voting  in 
assemblies,  vi.  3,  §  6  : — at  Car- 
thage, ii.  11,  §§  5-6;  in  Crete, 
ib.  10,  §  7  ;  II,  §6;  at  Sparta, 
ib.  II,  §6. 

Astyages,  v.  10,  §  24. 

Atameus  (in  Mysia),  ii.  7,  §  1 7. 

Athene,  viii.  6,  §  13. 

Athens ;  payment  of  the  dicas- 
teries  commenced  by  Pericles, 
ii.  12,  §4  (cp.  iv.  6,  §  5;  vi.  2, 
§  6) ;  evil  effects  of  the  practice, 
ii.  7,  §  19;  plan  introduced  by 
Diophantus  for  the  regulation 
of  the  public  slaves,  ib.  §  23  ; 
maintenance  at  the  public  ex- 
pense of  the  children  of  citizens 
who  had  fallen  in  battle,  ib.  8, 
§  6  ;  the  Solonian  constitution, 
ib.  7,  §6;  12,  §§  1-6;  iii.  11, 
§  8 ;  the  Areopagus  {see  Council 
of  Areopagus) ;  the  Court  of 
Phreatto,  iv.  16,  §3;  effect  of 
the  Persian  war  upon  Athens, 
ii.  12,  §5  ;  V.  4,  §  8;  viii.  6,  §  1 1 ; 
introduction  of  flute-playing  at 
Athensafter  the  Persian  war,  viii. 
6,  §  1 1 ;  the  legislation  of  Draco, 
ii.  12,  §13;  the  expulsion  of  the 


tyrants,  iii.  2,  §  3;  v.  12,  §  5  ; 
the  use  of  ostracism,  v.  3,  §  3 
(cp.  iii.  13,  §  15);  number  of 
sailors  in  the  population,  iv.  4, 
§21;  new  citizens  introduced  by 
Cleisthenes,  iii.  2,  §  3;  the  tribes 
redivided  by  him,  vi.  4,  §17; 
treatment  of  the  subject  cities  by 
Athens,  iii.  13,  §  19 ;  democrati- 
cal  governments  forced  upon  the 
allies  by  the  Athenians,  iv.  11, 
§  18  ;  v.  7,  §  14  ;  great  losses  of 
the  nobility  in  the  Peloponnesian 
War,  V.  3,  §  7 ;  difference  of  sen- 
timent between  the  Athenians 
and  the  citizens  of  the  Piraeus, 
ib.  §15;  origin  of  the  war  be- 
tween Athens  and  Mitylene,  ib. 
4,  §  6  ;  defeat  of  the  Athenian 
expedition  to  Sicily,  ib.  §  9 ; 
government  of  the  Four  Hun- 
dred, ib.  §13;  6,  §6;  of  the 
Thirty,  ib.  6,  §  6  ;  rise  of  Pei- 
sistratns  to  the  tyranny,  ib.  5,  §  9; 
10,  §  6 ;  his  trial  before  the 
Areopagus,  ib.  12,  §  2;  con- 
spiracy of  Harmodius  and  Aris- 
togeiton,  ib.  10,  §  1 5 ;  magistracy 
of  the  Eleven,  vi.  8,  §11. 

Athlete,  the  temperament  of  an, 
not  suited  to  the  life  of  the 
citizen,  vii.  16,  §  12;  viii.  4. 

Athletics :  see  Gymnastic  Kxer- 
cises. 

Attains,  V.  10,  §  16. 

Ausones,  the,  or  Opici,  vii.  10, 

§.- 
Autophradates,  satrap  of  I.ydia, 

ii.  7.  §  17- 
Avarice,  encouraged  at  Sparta, 
ii-  9.  §§  i,^.  28,  37;  at  Carthage, 
ib.  II,  §11;  a  frequent  cause  of 
crime,  ib.  7,  §  19;  9,  §  28;  of 
revolution,  v.  2,  §5;  3,  §1. 

Babylonia,  ii.  6,  §6;  Babylon, iii. 
3,  §  5  ;  Babylonians,  ib.  13,  §  19. 


Index 


323 


Bacchiadae.the,  at  Corinth,  ii.  12, 
§8. 

Ijarbarians,  the,  do  not  distin- 
guish the  female  and  the  slave, 
i-  2,  §4;  generally  under  kingly 
rule,  ib.  §  6  (cp.  iii.  14,  §  6) ; 
regarded  by  the  Hellenes  as 
natural  slaves,  i.  6,  §  6  ;  their 
nobility  not  recognized  by  the 
Hellenes,  ib.  §  7;  prevalence  of 
barter  among  them,  ib.  8,  §  5. 

Barter :  see  Exchange. 

Basilidae,  the,  v.  6,  §  5. 

Bequest,  freedom  of,  at  Sparta, 
ii.  9,  §  14;  should  be  forbidden 
by  law,  V.  8,  §  20. 

Birth,  illegitimate,  not  a  dis- 
qualification for  citizenship  in 
extreme  democracies,  iii.  5,  §  7 ; 
vi.  4,  §16. 

Blest,theIslandsofthe,vii.i5,§4. 

Body,  the,  ruled  according  to 
nature  by  the  soul,  i.  5,  §§  4-7 ; 
the  body  of  the  freeman  not 
always  distinguished  by  nature 
from  that  of  the  slave,  ib,  §  10; 
the  beauty  of  the  body  more 
obvious  than  that  of  the  soul, 
ib.  §  1 1 ;  the  interest  of,  identi- 
cal with  that  of  the  soul,  ib.  6, 
§  10;  the  goods  of,  for  the  sake 
of  the  soul,  vii.  i,  §§  8,  9;  prior 
to  the  soul,  ib.  15,  §  10;  must 
not  be  educated  at  the  same 
time  as  the  mind,  viii.  3,  §  ij; 

4,  §9- 
Body,  habit  of,  to  be  required  in 
the  citizen,  vii.  16,  §  12  ;  viii.  3, 

§13. 
Byzantium,  iv.  4,  §  2 1 ;  v.  3,  §  1 2. 

Camions,  ii.  10,  §  4. 

Carthage,  the  constitution  of, 
analogous  to  those  of  Lacedae- 
mon  and  Crete,  ii.  1 1,  §§  i,  5  ; 
an  aristocracy  with  oligarchical 
and  democratical  features,  ib. 


§§5-10;  iv.  7,  §4;  V.  12,  §14; 
never  had  a  revolution,  ii.  11, 
§§  2,  15  ;  v.  12,  §  14;  never 
under  a  tyranny,  ii.  11,  §  2  'btd 
cp.v.  12,  §  12) ;  the  kings  partly 
chosen  for  ability,  ii,  11,  §§4-9; 
influence  of  wealth,  ib.  §§  9-1 3 ; 
plurality  of  ofifices,  ib.  §  13 ; 
the  magistrates  judges  in  crim- 
inal cases,  ib  §  7  ;  iii.  i,  §§  10, 
11;  honours  paid  to  military 
merit,  vii.  2,  §  10;  the  con- 
spiracy of  Hanno,  v.  7,  §  4 ; 
custom  of  sending  out  the 
poorer  citizens  to  the  colonies, 
ii.  II,  §  15;  vi.  5,  §9;  treaties 
between  the  Carthaginians  and 
the  Tyrrhenians,  iii.  9,  §  6. 

Catana,  ii.  12,  §  6. 

Cavalry,  importance  of,  in  the 
ancient  oligarchies,  iv,  3,  §  3 ; 
13,  §  10;  vi.  7,  §  I  (cp.  the 
government  of  '  the  knights '  in 
Eretria,  v.  6,  §  14). 

Celts,  the,  ii,  9,  §  7;  vii.  2,  §  10; 

17,  §3. 

Chalcidian  cities,  the  (in  Italy 
and  Sicily),  ii.  12,  §6; — (of 
Thrace),  ib.  §  14. 

Chalcis,  in  Euboea,  iv.  3,  §3; 
v,4,  §9;  ib.  12,  §12. 

Chares,  the  Athenian  general, 
v.  6,  §  9. 

—  of  Paros,  a  writer  on  Agri- 
culture, i.  II,  §  7. 

Charicles,  leader  of  a  party 
among  the  Thirty  at  Athens, 
v.  6,  §  6. 

Charilaus,  king  of  Sparta,  ii.  10, 
§  2;  v.  12,  §  12. 

Charondas,  used  the  word  byio- 
aiTTvoi  for  the  members  of  a 
family,  i.  2,  §5;  legislated  for 
Catana  and  the  other  Chalcidian 
cities  in  Italy  and  Sicily,  ii.  12, 
§  6 ;  said  to  have  been  the 
disciple   of  Zaleucus,    ib.  §  7 ; 


Y  2 


3  24 


Index 


the  first  to  make  laws  against 
perjury,  ib.  §  1 1 ;  famous  for  the 
accuracy  of  his  legislation,  ib. ; 
belonged  to  the  middle  class, 
iv.  1 1 ,  §  1 5 ;  compelled  the  rich 
to  attend  the  law-courts,  ib.  13, 
§2. 
Child,  the,  relation  of,  and  the 
parent,  i.  2,  §  2  ;  3,  §  i ;  the 
virtue  of,  ib.  13,  §§  3-12;  ruled 
like  a  king  by  the  elder  or 
parent,  ib.  2 ,  §  6 ;  7,  §  i ;  12, 
§  3 ;  has  the  deliberative  faculty, 
but  immature,  ib.  13,  §  7  (cp.vii. 

15.  §  lo)- 
Children,  ought  to  be  educated 
with  regard  to  the  constitution, 
i-  13,  §15;  V.  9,  §§11-15;  viii. 
I ;  recognized  in  certain  coun- 
tries by  their  resemblance  to 
their  parents,  ii.  3,  §  9 ;  the 
children  of  citizens  who  died  in 
battle  reared  at  the  public  ex- 
pense, ib.  8,  §6;  children,  in 
what  sense  citizens,  iii.  i ,  §  5  ; 
5,  §  2  ;  education  of  the  chil- 
dren of  kings,  ib.  4,  §  8 ;  bad 
education  of  the  children  of  the 
rich,  iv.  11,  §§4-8;  v.  9,  §§  11- 
15 ;  licence  permitted  to  chil- 
dren in  democracies  and  tyran- 
nies, vi.  4,  §  20  ;  exposure  of 
deformed  children,  vii.  16,  §  15; 
way  in  which  children  should  be 
reared,  ib.  17;  they  should  not 
see  or  hear  anjrthing  indecent, 
ib.  §§  7-11 ;  viii.  5,  §§  19-21 ; 
what  their  education  should 
include,  viii.  2  ;  3  ;  why  they 
ought  to  learn  music  and  draw- 
ing, ib.  3,  §  2  foil. ;  degree  to 
which  they  should  carry  musical 
proficiency,  ib.  6,  §§  1-8 ;  must 
not  carry  gymnastic  exercise  too 
far,  ib.  4 ;  must  not  labour  with 
body  and  mind  at  once,  ib.  §  9 ; 
restlessness  of  young  children, 


ib.  6,  §  2  ;  their  toys,  ib. ;  their 
crying  not  to  be  checked,  vii. 

17.  §6. 
Children,  Plato's  community  of, 

see  Women  and  Children. 
Children,  Guardians  of,  iv.  15, 

§§9,  13;  vi.  8,  §22. 
Chios,  iii.  13,  §  19;  iv.  4,  §  21 ; 

v-3>  §12;  6,  §  16. 
Chones,  the,  in  southern  Italy, 

vii.  10,  §  5. 
Chytrnm,  a  part  of  Clazomenae, 

V.3,  §  15- 
Cinadon,  v.  7,  §  3. 
Citizen,  the,  must  both  rule  and 

obey,  i.  I,  §  2;   12,  §  2;  ii.  2, 

§§4-7;  ".  §  m;  "i-4>  §§io- 

16;  5,  §1;  6,  §§9-ii;  13, 
§  12;  16,  §§  2,  3;  17,  54; 
vi.  2,  §  5;  vii.  9,  §§4-8;  14, 
§§  1-8 ;  must  have  leisure,  ii.  9, 
§  2;  II,  §§  10,  12;  vii,  9,  §§4, 
7 ;  1 2,  §  7  ;  belongs  to  the  state, 
viii.  I ,  §  4 ;  — necessity  of  defining 
the  word,  iii.  i,  §  2  foil. ;  children 
and  old  men,  in  what  sense 
citizens,  ib.  §  5  ;  5,  §  2  ;  resi- 
dence and  legal  rights,  inade- 
quate definitions,  ib.  i,  §§  4,  5; 
not  enough  that  the  parents 
were  citizens,  ib.  2,  §§  1-3  ;  the 
citizen  must  share  in  the  ad- 
ministration of  the  state,  ib.  i, 
§§5-12;  2,  §§3-5;  5;  13, §12; 
differs  under  each  form  of  gov- 
ernment, ib.  1,  §  9 ;  5,  §  5 ;  13, 
§12;  iv.  7,  §  2 ;  the  question 
about  citizens  admitted  after  a 
revolution,  iii.  2,  §§  3-5  ;— the 
virtue  of  the  good  citizen  :  is  it 
identical  with  that  of  the  good 
man?  ib.  4;  5,  §  10;  18;  vii. 
14,  §  8,  the  virtue  of  the  citizen 
in  the  perfect  state,  iii.  4,  §  5  ; 
I3>  §  12  ; — not  all  citizens  who 
are  necessary  to  the  state,  ib.  5, 
§2;    vii.  9,  §10;   the   artisans 


Index 


325- 


not  to  be  citizens,  iii.  5 ;  vii.  9, 
§3  ;  nor  the  sailors,  vii.  6,  §§7, 
8 ;  is  the  life  of  the  citizen  the 
best  ?  ib.  2  ;  3 ;  the  character 
necessary  in  the  citizens,  ib.  7  ; 
their  habit  of  body,  ib.  16,  §  12; 
viii.  3,  §13;  4. 
Citizenship,  rights  of,  conferred 
on  strangers  in  early  times  at 
Sparta,  ii.  9,  §  17;  lost  at  Sparta, 
by  failure  to  contribute  to  the 
common  meals,  ib.  §  32  ;  10, 
§  7  i  given  to  persons  of  ille- 
gitimate birth  in  extreme  de- 
mocracies, iii.  5,  §  7;  vi. 4,  §  16; 
exclusion  from,  sometimes  con- 
cealed, iii.  5,  §9;  easily  pre- 
tended in  a  large  state,  vii.  4, 

§14- 
City,  the  :  see  State. 
Clazomenae,  v.  3,  §  15. 
Cleander,  tyrant  of  Gela,  v.  12, 

§  13- 
Cleisthenes,  tyrant  of  Sicyon,  v. 

12,  §§  I,  12. 
— ,  the  Athenian,  iii.  2.  §  3  ;  vi.  4, 

§  18. 
Cleomenes  fking  of  .Sparta),  v.  3, 

§7- 
Cleopatra  (the  widow  of  Perdic- 

cas),  V.  10,  §  17. 
Cleotimus,  leader  of  a  revolution 

at  Amphipolis,  v.  6,  §  8. 
Clubs;   at  Carthage,  ii.  11,  §3; 

at  Abydos,  v.  6,  §§  6,  13;  hated 

by  tyrants,  ii.  11,  §  5. 
Cnidus,  V.  6,  §§  4, 16. 
Codrus,  king  of  Athens,  v.  to,  §  8. 
Colonies,  of  Carthage,  ii.  1 1 ,  §  15 ; 

vi.  .*),  §  9 ;  oligarchies  formed  in 

colonies  by  the  first  settlers,  iv. 

4,  §  5  ;  dissensions  in,  a  cause  of 

revolutions,  v.  3,  §§  11-14. 
Colophon,  of,  iv.  4,  §  5  ;    v.  3, 

§15- 
Commerce,  divisions  of,  i.  1 1 ,  §  3 ; 
its  advantages   and    disadvan- 


tages, vii.  6 ; — commercial  trea- 
ties, iii.  9,  §  6. 
Common  meals,  hostility  of  the 
tyrant  to,  v.  11,  §  5;  first  estab- 
lished in  Italy,  vii.  10,  §§  1-8; 
how  they  should  be  arranged, 
ib.  §§10-12;  the  young  not 
allowed  to  share  in  them,  ib.  17, 
§  II ; — of  the  magistrates,  vi.  2, 
§  7 ;  vii.  12,  §  I ;  of  the  priests, 
vii.  12,  §6; — (at  Carthage),  ii. 

11,  §  3;— (in  Crete),  ib.  5,  §  15; 
the  original  of  the  Spartan,  ib. 
10,  §  5  ;  maintained  at  the  public 
cost,  ib.  §§7-10; — (at  Sparta), 
make  property  to  some  degree 
common,  ib.  5,  §  15 ;  badly  regu- 
lated, ib.  9,  §§  31,  32;  10,  §  7; 
anciently  called  '  andria,'  ib.  10, 

§5- 

Community  of  women  and  chil- 
dren, the,  proposed  by  Plato, 
ii.  1,  §  3;  arguments  against,  ii. 
3;  4; — of  property,  ib.  5;  vii. 
10,  §  9. 

Confederacy,  difference  between 
a,  and  a  state,  ii.  3,  §  3;  iii.  9, 
§§  6-8. 

Constitution,  regard  must  be  had 
to  the,  in  education,  i.  13,  §  15; 
V.9,  §§  11-15;  viii.  i;  the  best 
constitution  supposed  by  some 
to  be  a  combination  of  all  exist- 
ing forms,  ii.  6,  §  17  (cp.  iv.  i, 
§6;  7,  §  4;  9»  §  7);  the  per- 
manence of  a  constitution  only 
secured  by  the  consent  of  all 
classes,  ii.  9,  §22;    iv.  9,  §10; 

12,  §6;  v.  8,  §5;  9,  §§5-10; 
vi.  6,  §  2 ;  7,  §  4 ;  older  constitu- 
tions more  simple  than  later, 
ii.  10,  §1;  contentment  with  a 
constitution  not  always  a  proof 
of  its  excellence,  ib.  10,  §  12 
{but  cp.  c.  II,  §§  2, 15) ;  in  each 
constitution  the  citizen  differ- 
ent, iii.  1,  §9;  5,  §5;  13,  §12; 


^26 


Index 


iv.  7,  §  2 ;  relation  of  the  con- 
stitution and  the  state,  iii.  i, 
§  i;  3»§9;  6,  §i;  7,§  2;  iv.  I, 
§10;  3.  §5;  definition  of  the 
word,  iii.  I,  §1;  6,  §1;  iv.  1, 
§10;  3,  §5;  the  constitution 
the  life  of  the  state,  i v.  11,  §  3; 
the  people  naturally  suited  to 
each  constitution,  iii.  17;  the 
constitution  sometimes  nomin- 
ally unchanged  after  a  revolu- 
tion, iv.  5,  §§3,4(cp.v.  I,  §8); 
the  encroachments  of  the  rich 
often  more  dangerous  to  the 
constitution  than  those  of  the 
poor,  iv.  12,  §  6;  life  according 
to  the  constitution  no  slavery, 

V.  9.  §  15;  vii.  3.  §§i-3- 

Corinth,  iii.  9,  §  9;  tyranny  of 
Timophanes,  v.  6,  §  1 2  ;  tyranny 
of  the  Cypselids,  ib.  10,  §  6 ;  11, 
§9;  its  duration,  ib.  12,  §§  3,4; 
family  of  the  Bacchiadae,  ii.  1 2, 
§8. 

Cos,  v.  5,  §  2. 

Cosmi,  the  (in  Crete),  to  the 
Ephors,  ii.  10,  §§6-14. 

Cotys,  king  of  the  Odrysians  in 
Thrace,  v.  10,  §  18. 

Council  of  Areopagus,  the,  ii.  1 2, 
§§  2,  4;  V.  4,  §  8;  12,  §  2. 

Councillors  and  warriors,  the  two 
highest  classes  in  the  state,  iv.  4, 
§§  10-J7;  vii.4,§§4-7;8,  §7; 
9,  §§  4-10. 

Crataeus,  one  of  the  assassins  of 
Archelaus,  v.  10,  §  17. 

Crete,  favourable  position  of,  ii. 
iO)§§3>i2,i6;  visit  of  Lycurgys 
to,ib.  §  2  ; — the  Cretan  constitu- 
tion the  original  of  the  Lace- 
daemonian, ib.  §§  1-3;  analo- 
gous to  the  Carthaginian,  ib.  1 1, 
§  I  ;  the  attention  of  the  legis- 
lator directed  solely  to  war,  vii. 
2,  §  9  ; — the  common  tables  in- 
troduced into  Crete  by  Minos, 


ib.  10,  §§2,6;  called  by  the 
Cretans,  avh^ia,  ii.  10,  §  5  ;  ob- 
ject of  the  institution,  ii.  5,  §  15 ; 
better  managed  in  Crete  than  at 
Lacedaemon,  ib.  9,  §§  30-33 ; 
10,  §§  7-9; — frequency  of  sedi- 
tion in  Crete,  ib.  10,  §§  I4,  15  ; 
—  slaves  in  Crete  forbidden 
gymnastic  exercises  and  the  use 
of  arms,  ib.  5,  §  19;  thePerioeci 
in  Crete  well  managed,  ib.  9,  §  3; 
10,  §§  15, 16  ;  governed  by  the 
laws  of  Minos,  ib.  10,  §  3  ;  ana- 
logy of  the  Cretan  Perioeci  with 
the  Helots,  ib.  §  5 ; — existence 
of  caste  in  Crete,  vii.  10,  §  1. 

Custom,  power  of,  ii.  8,  §  24 ; 
iv.  5>  §3;  vii.  13,  §§  11-13;  a 
sort  of  justice,  i.  6,  §  5. 

Cyclopes,  the,  i.  2,  §  7. 

Cyme,  in  Aeolis,  v.  5,  §  4. 

Cypselids,  the,  v.  11,  §  9;  ib.  1  2, 

§§3,4- 
Cypselus  of  Corinth,  v.  10,  §  6 ; 

12,  §  3- 
Cyrene,  vi.  4,  §§17,  18. 
Cyrus,   king   of  Persia,    v.    10, 

§§  8,  24. 

Daedalus,  i.  4,  §  3. 

Dancing,  viii.  5,  §  3. 

Daphnaeus,  of  Syracuse,  v.  5, 
§  10. 

Darius,  son  of  Xerxes,  v.  10, 
§  21. 

Decamnichns,  v.  10,  §  20. 

Deliberation,  the  right  to  share 
in,  essential  to  the  citizen,  iii.  i ; 
§§6-12;  2,  §5;  13,  §12  (cp. 
vii.  8,  §  7). 

Delphi,  v.  4,  §  5  ;  the  Delphian 
knife,  i.  2,  §  3. 

Demagogues,  the  authors  and 
flatterers  of  the  extreme  demo- 
cracy, ii.  12,  §§  4-6;  iv.  4, 
§§25-31;  v.9,§io;  ii,§§ii, 
12;  vi.  4,  §§  15-17;  confiscate 


Index 


327 


the  properly  of  the  rich,  v.  5, 
§  5;  V'-  5.  §3;  often  bring 
about  revolutions,  v.  3,  §  4;  5, 
§§1-5;  in  ancient  times  became 
tyrants,  ib.  5,  §§ 6-10;  10,  §§4, 
6 : — in  oligarchies,  ib.  6,  §  5. 

Demiurgi,  magistrates  atLarissa, 
iii.  2,  §  2. 

Democracy,  the  government  of 
the  many  in  their  own  interests, 
iii.  7,  §  5;  8,  §  2;  iv,  II,  §  17; 
akin  to  tyranny,  iv,  4,  §  27;  v. 
10,  §§  11,30.  35;  ",§12;  the 
only  possible  government  in 
large  states,  iii.  15,  §  12;  iv.  6, 
§5;  13.  §  10  (cp.  vi.  5,  §  5); 
the  perversion  of  constitutional 
government,  iii.  7,  §5;  iv.  2, 
§§  I,  2;  Plato  wrong  in  calling 
democracy  the  w.orst  of  good 
constitutions,  but  the  best  of 
bad  ones,  iv.  2,  §  3 ;  insuffici- 
ency of  the  common  definitions 
of  democracy,  iii.  8;  iv.  4,  §§  i- 
6;  more  forms  of  democracy 
than  one,  iv.  i,  §  8  ;  4,  §§  20- 
22;  II,  §20;  12, §3;  13,  §12; 
vi,  I ,  §  2 ;  the  formsenumerated, 
iv.  4,  §§22-31;  6,  §§1-7;  12, 
§3;  14,  §§  1-7;  vi.  4;  growth 
of  the  last  and  worst  form,  ii. 
12, §4;  iii, 4,  §  12;  6, §§9-11; 
iv-  6,  §5;  V.  5,  §§6-ii;  6, 
§§6-8;  9,  §  10;  vi.  2,  §§.5-9; 
4.  §§  i5-2o(cp.  V.  10,  §  12;  II, 
§11) ; — democracy  more  stable 
than  oligarchy,  iv.  11,  §  I4;  v. 
I,  §15;  7,  §6  (cp.v.  3,  §8); 
causes  of  revolution  in  democra- 
cies :  anarchy,  v.  3,  §  5  ;  vi.  4, 
§  17  ;  demagogic  practices,  v. 

I,  §4;  .s;  9,  §\o;  vi.  5,  §5; 

disproportionate  increase,  v.  3, 
§§  6-8  ;  dissatisfaction  of  the 
notables,  ib.  §  I4(cp.ii.7,  §§  10, 
18) ;  long  tenure  or  greatness 
of  oflice,  v,  5,  §  8 ;  8,  §  7  ;  the 


means  of  their  preservation,  iv, 
12,  §4;  13,  §§5-8;  14,  §12  ; 
V.  8 ;  vi.  4,  §  1 7 ;  5 ;  democracy 
(especially  the  extreme  form) 
apt  to  pass  into  tyranny,  iv.  11, 
§  11;   v.  5,   §§6-io;    8,    §7; 

10,  §30;  Plato  censured  for 
supposing  that  the  change  is 
necessarily  to  tyranny,  v.  12, 
§  10 ; — Athens  the  champion  of 
democracy  in  Hellas,  iv.  11, 
§  18  ;  V.  7,  §  14;  the  democratic 
principle  represented  at  Sparta 
by  the  Ephoralty,  ii.  6,  §  17  ; 
9,  §  21;  10,  §10;  iv.  9,  §9;— 
characteristics  of  democracy : 
liberty  and  equality  for  all,  iii. 
S,  §7;  iv.  4.  §§22,  23;  8,  §7; 
V.  I,  §3;  8,  §6;  9,  §§14,  15; 
vi.  2,  §§  1-4,  9;  4,  §  20;  the 
use  of  the  lot,  ii.  11,  §7;    12, 

§ 3 ;  iv.  9.  §4;  15,  §  19 ;  vi. 

2.  §§5,  8 ;  employment  of  a 
large  number  of  magistrates,  ii . 

11,  §  14  ;  short  tenure  of  office, 
V.  8,  §6;  vi.  2,  §§5,  8;  pay- 
ment of  the  citizens,  ii.  7,  §  19; 

12,  §4;  iv.  6,  §6;  9,  §2;  vi. 
2,  §§6,  7;  5, §5;  carelessness 
in  the  admission  of  artisans  and 
persons  of  illegitimate  birth  to 
citizenship,  iii.  4,  §  12  ;  5,  §§  7, 
8;  vi.  4,  §16;  licence  allowed 
to  women  and  children,  v.  11, 
§  1 1 ;  vi.  4,  §  20 ; — ostracism 
originally  a  democratic  institu- 
tion, iii.  13,  §  15;  V,  3,  §  3; 
democratical  tricks  to  keep  the 
power  in  the  hands  of  the 
people,  iv.  1 3,  §  5  ;  suggestions 
for  the  improvement  of  demo- 
cracy, ib.  14,  §  12  ;  vi.  5,  §§5- 
1 1 ;  the  magistrates  peculiar  to 
democracy,  iv.  15,  §  11  ;  vi.  8, 
§§  17,  24;  democratical  modes 
of  appointing  magistrates  and 
judges,  iv.  If;,  §  19;  16,  §8; — 


328 


Index 


character  and  powers  of  the 
assembly,  ib.  14,  §§  1-7  ;— the 
best  material  of  a  democracy, 
ib.  6,  §  2  ;  vi.  4,  §  i  ;  the 
position  suitable  to  a  democracy, 
vii.  II,  §  5  ;  democracy  always 
supported  by  the  sailors  and 
light  armed,  vi.  7,  §§  i,  2. 

Derdas  (?  King  of  Elymaea),  v. 
10,  §  16. 

Devices,  political,  of  oligarchies 
and  democracies,  iv.  13,  §§  i- 
8  ;  their  inutility,  v.  8,  §  4. 

Diagoras,  an  Eretrian,  v.  6,  §  14. 

Dicaea,  'the  Pharsalian  mare,' 

ii-  3,  §  9- 
Dicasteries,  the  Athenian,  ii.  12, 

§4- 
Dictators  :  see  Aesymnetes. 
Diodes,  ii.  12,  §§  8-11. 
Dion,  V.  10,  §§  23,  38,  31,  32. 
Dionysi us  the  Elder,  i.  11,  §§ii, 

12;    iii,  15,   §16;   V.  5,  §§8, 

10;  7,  §  10;  10,  §6;  II,  §  10. 
Dionysius  the  Younger,  v.   10, 

§§23,  28,  31,32. 
Diophantus,  ii.  7,  §  23. 
Directors  of  Education,  vii.  1 7, 

§§  5>  7  >  of  Gymnastics,  vi.  8, 

§  22. 
Dorian      Harmony,      the :     see 

Harmony. 
Dowries,  ii.  7,  §3;  9.  §  ^5- 
Doxander,  v.  4,  §  6. 
Draco,  ii.  12,  §  13, 
Drawing,  a  branch  of  education, 

viii.  3.  §§  I,  12. 
Dynasty,  or  Family  Oligarchy  : 

see  Oligarchy. 

Ecphantides  (the  ancient  comic 
poet),  viii.  6,  §  12. 

Education,  may  be  directed  to 
a  wrong  end,  ii.  7,  §§  8,  9; 
must  have  regard  to  the 
constitution,  i.  13,  §  15 ;  v.  9, 
§11;  viii.  I ;  the  great  means 


of  uniting  the  state,  ii.  5,  §§  18- 
21  ;  special,  for  the  ruler,  iii.  4, 
§  8  (cp.  vii.  14,  §  6) ;  confers  a 
claim  to  pre-eminence  in  the 
state,  iii.  13,  §  i  (cp.  c.  9,  §§  14, 
15;  12.  §§8,  9;  iv-8,  §§2-5); 
excellence  of  the  Spartan 
education,  iv.  9,  §  7  ;  viii.  i, 
§4  {but  cp.  viii.  4,  §§1-7); 
bad  education  of  the  rich,  iv. 
II,  §  6;  V.  9,  §  13  ;  hostility  of 
the  tyrant  to  education,  v.  11, 
§  5  ;  education  necessary  to 
supplement  habit,  vii.  13,  §  13; 
i/j  §  15  ;  the  special  business 
of  the  legislator,  viii.  i,  §  i  ; 
wrong  notions  of  education 
prevalent  in  Hellas,  vii.  14,  §  15 ; 
viii.  I,  §  3  ;  4,  §  6 ;  the  periods 
of  education,  vii.  17;  viii.  4, 
§§7-9;  necessity  of  a  common 
system  of  education,  viii.  i,  §  3 
(cp.  ii.  7,  §  8;  and  iv.  9,  §  7 )  ; 
should  education  have  an  ethical 
or  a  practical  aim  ?  viii.  253; 
5;  should  it  include  music?  ib. 
3  ;  5 ;  6  ;  what  instruments 
and  harmonies  are  to  be  used  ? 
ib.  6,  §§8-i6;  7;  education 
not  to  be  directed  to  a  single 
end,  ib.  4,  §  2 ;  the  proper 
place  of  gymnastics  in  education, 
ib.  3,  §  13  ;  4;  the  education  of 
mind  and  body  not  to  be  carried 
on  together,  ib.  4,  §  9  ;  writers 
upon  musical  education,  ib.  5, 
§  23;  7,  §§  2,  3,  8,  II,  14; 
musical  education  a  kind  of 
rattle  to  older  children,  ib.  6, 
§  2  ;  the  three  principles  of  edu- 
cation, ib.  7,  §  15  : — Directors 
of  Education,  vii.  17,  §§  5,  7. 

Egypt,  iii.  15,  §  4;  v.  11,  §9 ; 
vii.  10,  §§  1-6,  8. 

Eleven, the,  at  Athens,  vi.  8,  §  xi. 

Elis,  V.  6,  §  II. 

Elymaea,  v.  10,  §  17. 


Index 


329 


Empire,  unnecessary  to  the  hap- 
piness of  states,  vii.  2;  3;  14, 
§§ 12-22. 

End,  the,  the  completed  nature 
of  each  thing,  i.  2,  §  8  ;  has  no 
limit  in  the  arts,  ib.  8,  §  14 ;  9, 
§  13  ;  may  agree  or  disagree 
with  the  means,  vii.  13,  §  2  ; 
contains  an  element  of  pleasure, 

^■iii-  5,  §  13- 

Ephialtes,  ii.  12,  §4. 

Ephors,  the,  a  democratic  element 
at  Sparta,  ii.  6,  §  17  ;  9,  §§  20- 
22;  10,  §  10;  iv.  9,  §9;  their 
corruption  and  licence,  ii.  9, 
§§19-24;  10,  §12;  greatness 
of  their  power,  ib.  9,  §  20 ;  v. 
II,  §2;  the  mode  of  their 
election  childish,  ii.  9,  §  23 ; 
have  the  right  of  calling  the 
magistrates  to  account,  ib.  §  26; 
try  suits  respecting  contracts, 
iii.  I,  §10  (cp.  ii.  9,  §23;  II, 
§  7)  ;  established  by  Theopom- 
pus  as  a  check  on  the  royal 
power,  V.  II,  §§  1-3;  corre- 
spond to  the  Cosrai  in  Crete,  ii. 
lOj  §§  6,  10,  12  ;  to  the  magis- 
tracy of  104  at  Carthage,  ib. 

II.  §3- 

Epidamnus,  ii.  7,  §  23 ;  iii.  16, 
§  i;  V.  I,  §§  10,  II  ;  4,  §7. 

Epimenides,  of  Crete,  i.  2,  §5. 

Equality,  how  related  to  justice, 
iii.  9;  12  ;  13,  §§  II,  12;  V.  I, 
§  2  ;  9,  §  14;  vii.  3,  §5;  14, 
§§  1-6 ;  (the  true  kind)  no 
longer  desired  in  Hellenic 
states,  iv.  11,  §§4-10,  19;  v, 
9>  §§5-10;  equality  and  liberty 
the  aim  of  democracy,  iii.  8, 
§  7  ;  iv.  4,  §  22;  8,  §7;  V.  I, 
§3;  8,  §6;  9,  §14;  vi.  2,  §§i- 
4,  9 ;  the  desire  of  equality  a 
cause  of  sedition,  v.  i,  §§  3-8  ; 
2,  §§2,  3;  3,  §2;  when 
attained    creates   contentment, 


ib.  7,  §  6 ;  equality  either 
numerical  or  proportional,  iii. 
8;  iv.  12,  §§  1-4;  v.  I,  §§  13- 
16  ;  vi.  3  ;  states  must  not  be 
based  on  one  kind  alone,  v.  i, 
§  14 ;  denied  to  the  weak  by  the 
strong,  vi.  3,  §  6. 

Equality  of  property,  proposed 
by  Phaleas,  ii.  7  ;  12,  §  12. 

Eretria,  iv.  3,  §  3  ;  v.  6,  §  14. 

Erythrae,  v.  6,  §  5. 

Ethiopia,  iv.  4,  §  4. 

Eubulus  (tyrant  of  Atarneus),  ii. 

7,  §17- 
Euripides,  v.  10,  §  ao ;   quoted, 

i.  2,  §4;  iii.  4,§8;  v.  9,  §  15; 

viL  7,  §  8 ;  viii.  5,  §  2. 
Europe,  vii.  7,  §  2. 
Euryphon,  ii.  8,  §1. 
Eurytion,  v.  6,  §  15. 
Euthycrates,  a  Phocian,  v.  4,  §  7. 
Evagoras,   tyrant  of  Salamis  in 

Cyprus,  v.  10,  §  16. 
Evil,  i.  2,  §  1 2. 
Exchange,     (i)     according     to 

nature  (barter  of  necessaries), 

i-  9.  §§  2-7;    10.  §§3,  4;  (2) 

contrary  to  nature  (retail  trade), 

i.  9,  §§  1-4,9-12  ;  10,  §4;  II, 

§3- 
Executive  element,  the,  in  the 

state,  iv,  14,  §  2  ;  15 ;  vi.  8. 
Experience,  value  of,  ii.  5,  §  16  ; 

vii.  10,  §  8. 
Exposure  of  deformed  children, 

justifiable,  vii.   16,  §  15. 
Extremes,    danger    of,    iv.    11, 

§§16-19;     12,   §§4-6;   vi.  5, 

§§  1-4- 

Faction,  frequency  of,  in  Crete, 
ii.  10,  §§  14-16  ;  evil  effects  of, 
in  Hellas,  iv.  11,  §§  16-18;  a 
cause  of  revolution  in  oligar- 
chies, v.  6,  §  9  ;  less  common 
in  democracies,  iv.  11,  §  14;  v. 
I,  §§'5'  »6;  7,  §6. 


330 


Index 


Family,  the,  the  village  a  colony 
of,  i.  2,  §  6  ;  (cp.  c.  9,  §  5)  ; 
composed  of  three  relations 
which  are  sanctioned  by  nature, 
ib.  2,  §  2  foil.;  3,  §§1-3;  12; 
^3>  §  ^5  >  governed  by  the  elder 
or  parent  who  is  their  king,  ib. 
2)  §6;  7,  §  I ;  12,  §3;  different 
kinds  of  rule  within  the  family, 
ib.  12  ;  the  family  apart  of  the 
state,  ib.  13,  §  15  ;  ii,  9,  §5; 
the  state  more  self-sufficient 
than  the  family,  ii.  2,  §  8. 

Family  oligarchy:  .f^^  Oligarchy. 

Family  quarrels,  a  cause  of 
revolutions,    v.   4,  §§  5-7  ;    6, 

§  m;  io>  §3- 
Father  and  child,  relation  of,  i. 

,2,  §§  1-5;  3.  §§  1-3;  12- 

Female,  the,  by  nature  different 
from  the  slave  except  among 
barbarians,  i.  2,  §§3,4;  subject 
by  nature  to  the  male,  ib.  5, 
§  7 ;  12, §  I ;  13, §  7  ;  tendency 
of  the  female  to  produce  off- 
spring like  the  parents,  ii.  3, 
§  9  : — the  union  of  male  and 
female  formed  in  obedience  to 
a  natural  instinct,  i.  2,  §  2  ;  the 
relation  of  male  and  female 
part  of  the  household,  ib.  3,52; 
12,  §  I.     \See  Woman.] 

Finance,  importance  of,  to  the 
statesman,  i.  ir,  §13;  the 
finances  of  Sparta  badly  man- 
aged, ii.  9,  §  36 ;  suggestions 
for  the  regulation  of  state 
finances,  v.  8,  §§  15-19;  vi.  5. 

Four  Hundred,  government  of 
the,  at  Athens,  v.  4,  §  13 ;  6,  §  6. 

Freedom,  supposed  by  Hellenes 
not  to  exist  among  barbarians, 
i.  2,  §  4 ;  6,  §  6  ;  is  a  reason 
why  men  claim  authority  in  a 
state,  iii.  9,  §  14;  12,  §8;  13, 
§  §  2  -  5 .     \Scc  1 A  berty.  ] 

Freeman,  the,  in  his  relation  to 


the  slave,  i.  2,  §§  2-4  ;  3,  §  4 ; 
5  ;  6  ;  not  always  outwardly 
distinguished  by  nature  from 
him,  ib.  5,  §  10 ;  rule  over 
freemen  more  noble  than  rule 
over  slaves,  ib.  §  2  ;  vii.  3,  §  2 ; 
14,  §19;  will  never  willingly 
submit  to  the  tyrant,  iv.  10, 
§  4  ;  v.  1 1 ,  §  12  ;  has  a  natural 
right  to  rule,  ii.  2,  §  6  ;  iii.  16, 
§§2,  3  ;  must  not  be  ashamed 
to  obey  his  lawful  superiors,  v. 
9,  §§  11-14;  vii.  3,  §2;  14, 
§§  1-5  (cp.  iv.  II,  §6);  may 
have  a  certain  knowledge  of  the 
arts,  viii.  2,  §§5,6;  may  be  al- 
lowed to  share  in  the  pleasures 
of  music,  ib.  5,  §  7. 
Friendship,  weakened  by  com- 
munism, ii.  4,  §§  5-9 ;  the 
motive  of  society,  ib.  §  6  ;   iii. 

9,  §13;  iv.  II,  §7  (cp.  vi.  5, 
§§7  11);  implies  equality,  iii. 
16,  §  13  ;  friendship  among  the 
citizens  hated  by  the  tyrant,  v. 
II,  §  5  ;  friendship  at  Sparta, 
ii-  5)  §  7- 

Gela,  v.  12,  §  13. 

Gelo,  tyrant  of  Syracuse,  v.  3, 
§5  ;  10,  §31;  12,  §§6,6. 

General,  the,  learns  command  by 
obedience,  iii.  4,  §  14  ;  generals 
often  became  demagogues  in  an- 
cient times,  V.  5,  §§  6-10  ;  have 
often  attacked  their  masters,  ib. 

10,  §  24  ;  wise  generals  com- 
bine light-armed  troops  with 
cavalry  and  heavy  infantry,  vi. 
7»  §2. 

Generalship,    a  rare  quality,  v. 

9.  §  Z- 
Gerusia  :  see  Council  of  Eldei-s. 
God,  happy  by  reason  of  his  own 

nature,  vii.   i,  §  10;    3,  §  10 ; 

alone  able  to  hold  together  the 

universe,  ib.  4,  §  8. 


Index 


331 


Gods,  the,  supposed  to  be  under 
a  king  because  mankind  origin- 
ally were,  i.  2,  §  7;  12,  §  3; 
their  statues  more  beautiful  than 
ordinaryhumanforms,  ib.  5,§  10. 

Good,  absolute  and  relative,  vii. 

13,  §§5-8. 

Good,  the,  the  aim  of  the  state, 
i.  I,  §  I  ;  ii.  2,  §  7, 

Good  and  evil,  the  sense  of,  cha- 
racteristic of  man,  i.  2,  §12; 
made  the  test  of  freedom  and 
slavery,  ib.  6,  §  8. 

Goods,  the  three  kinds  of,  vii,  i, 
§§  ^-5  ;  external  goods  not  to 
be   preferred  to   virtue,   ii.    9, 

§.35;  vii-  i>  §§5-9;  15.  §6; 
not  the  cause  of  happiness,  vii. 
I,  §  lo;  13,  §8. 

Gordius,  father  of  Psammetichus, 
tyiant  of  Corinth,  v.  12,  §  3. 

Gorgias  of  Leontini,  i.  13,  §  10  ; 
iii.  2,  §  2. 

Government,  the  Constitutional, 
called  in  ancient  times  demo- 
cracy, iv.  13,  §  1 1  ;  its  rarity,  ib. 
7,  §1  (cp.  c.  II,  §  16)  ;  one  of 
the  true  forms  of  government, 
iii.  7,  §  3  (cp.  iv.  8,  §  i)  ;  how 
distinguished  from  aristocracy, 
oligarchy,  and  democracy,  iv.  7 ; 
8;  14,  §§8-io;  V.  7,  §§5-7; 
vi.  I,  §3  (cp.  ii.  II,  §§6-9); 
composed  of  the  heavy-armed 
soldiers,  ii.  6,  §  16  ;  iii.  7,  §  4; 
17,  §4;  iv.  13,  §10;  the  people 
to  whom  it  is  adapted,  iii.  17, 
§  4 ;  suited  to  a  large  country 
population,  vi.  4,  §14;  cha- 
racterized by  the  alternation  of 
rulers  and  ruled,  i.  i,  §  2  ;  12, 
§  2;  ii.  2,  §§4-7;  II,  §14;  iii. 
4,  §§  10,  14;  6,  §9 ;  16,  §  2  ; 
17,  §4;  vii.  14,  §§  1-5  (cp.  i. 
7,  §  1);  by  the  combination  of 
the  vote  and  the  lot  in  the  election 

.  of  the  magistrates,  iv.  1 5 ,  §  §  1 9- 


22  ;  gives  the  affirmative  power 
to  the  many,  ib.  14,  §  16;  the 
mode  in  which  it  arises,  ib.  9  ; 
causes  of  revolution  to  which  it 
is  subject,  v.  3,  §§6-8;  6, 
§§  16-18;  7,  §§5-9;  means  of 
its  preservation,  ib.  8,  §§  10, 
II ;  more  stable  than  aristocracy, 
ib.  7,  §  6. 
Government,  forms  of,  how  to 
be  criticized,  ii.  9,  §  i ;  iv.  i ; 
the  legislator  must  know  all, 
iv.  1,  §§5-8;  differ  according 
to  the  character  of  the  supreme 
authority,  iii.  6,  §1  ;  13,  §5; 
iv.  8,  §§  2-4;  14,  §  I  ;  are 
based  on  partial  justice  only, 
iii.  9,  §§  1-4,  15  ;    17,  §6;  V. 

1,  §  a  ;  vi.  3,  §§  1-4;  are  all 
perversions  of  the  perfect  state, 
iv.  8,  §1  ;  may  be  divided  into 
true  forms  or  perversions,  iii.  i , 
§§8-10;   6,  §  II  ;  7;   18;  iv. 

2.  §§1-3;  8,  §1;  their  suc- 
cessive changes  in  ancient  times, 
iii.  15,  §§  11-13;  iv.  13,  §§9- 
12  ;  Plato's  theory  of  change 
wrong,  v.  12,  §§5-18  ;  influence 
of  increased  population  upon 
forms  of  government,  iii.  15, 
§§  11-13;  iv.  6,  §5;  vi.5,§5; 
the  worst  forms  the  most  pre- 
carious, vi.  6,  §  4 ;  common 
error  that  forms  of  government 
can  be  reduced  to  two — oli- 
garchy and  democracy,  iv.  3, 
§§6-8  ;  sense  in  which  this  is 
true,  ib.  4,  §  19;  v.  i,  §  14  (cp. 
vi.  I,  §  6) ;  the  people  adapted 
to  each  form  of  government,  iii. 
1 7  ;  the  magistrates  suited  to 
each,  iv.  15,  §§11-13  ;  vi.  8, 
§§17,  24;  the  judicial  arrange- 
ments, ii.  II,  §  7  ;  iii.  i,  §§  10, 
11;  iv.  16,  §8;  the  military 
force,  vi.  7,  §§  1 ,  2. 

Government,  writers  on,  often  an- 


3  32 


Index 


practical,  iv.  i,  §5;  have  ex- 
lolled  the  Lacedaemonian  con- 
stitution, ib.  §6;  vii.  14, §§ 16, 17. 

Guardians,  the,  in  Plato's 
Republic :  see  Plato. 

Gymnastic,  like  other  arts,  has 
undergone  improvement,  ii.  8, 
§  18  ;  includes  various  kinds 
of  training,  iv.  i,  §§  i,  2. 

Gymnastic  exercises,  forbidden 
to  slaves  in  Crete,  ii.  5,§  19; 
discouraged  in  oligarchies 
among  the  poor,  iv.  13,  §  4 ; 
one  of  the  recognized  branches 
of  education,  viii.  3,  §  i ;  carried 
to  excess  at  Lacedaemon,  ib.  4, 
§§  1-7  ;  suggestions  for  their 
arrangement,  vii.  12,  §§  1-6  ; 
should  be  of  a  lighter  kind  for 
children,  viii.  4,  §  7  : — Directors 
of,  vi.  8,  §  22. 

Habit,  the  strength  of  law  derived 
from,  ii.  8,  §  24 ;  one  element 
of  virtue,  vii.  13,  §§11-13  ;  15, 
§  7  ;  must  go  before  reason  in 
education,  viii.  3,  §  13. 

llanno,  v.  7,  §  4. 

Happiness,  independent  of  exter- 
nal goods,  vii.  I,  §  10  ;  13,  §8; 
the  happiness  of  the  whole  de- 
pendent on  the  happiness  of  the 
parts,  i.  6,  §  10  ;  ii.  5,  §  27  ; 
vii.  9,  §  7  ;  happiness  propor- 
tioned to  virtue,  vii.  i,  §  10;  8, 

§5;  9.  §§3,  7;  13,  §5;  the 
perfect  happiness  of  the  divine 
nature,  ib.  I,  §  10;  3,  §10;  the 
happiness  of  men  and  states  the 
same,  ib.  2  ;  3 ;  the  happiness 
of  states  not  dependent  on  em- 
pire over  others,  ib. 2,  §§ 14-18; 
or  on  size,  ib.  4,  §§4-1 1  ;  happi- 
ness implies  virtuous  activity, 
ib.  3,  §§  1-3  ;  is  the  worthy 
employment  of  leisure,  viii.  3, 

§§3-6;  5.  §§9-15- 


Harbours,  should  be  separated 
from  the  city,  vii.  6,  §§  1-6. 
Harmodius,  v.  10,  §  15. 
Harmonies,  the,  iv.  3,  §  7  ;  viii. 

5,  §§  16-25  ;  7- 

Harmony,  the  soul  said  to  be,  or 
to  possess,  viii.  5,  §  25. 

Harmony,  the  Dorian,  lit.  3,  §8  ; 
iv.  3j  §  7  ;  produces  a  moderate 
and  settled  temper,  viii.  5,  §  22  ; 
7)  §§8-13: — the  Lydian;  re- 
jected by  Plato  in  the  Republic, 
ih.  7,  §§9,  14;  suitable  to 
children,  ib.  §  15  : — the  Mixo- 
Lydian ;  has  a  sad  and  grave 
effect,  ib.  5,  §22  : — the  Phry- 
gian, iii.  3,  §  8 ;  iv.  3,  §  7  ; 
inspires  enthusiasm,  viii.  5,  §  22 ; 
7,  §  9  ;  should  not  have  been 
retained  by  Plato,  ib.  7,  §§9-13. 

Hebdome,  v.  3,  §  7. 

Heliaea,  court  of,  at  Epidamnus, 

V.    I,   §  II. 

Hellanocrates  of  Larissa,  v.  10, 
§  18. 

Hellas,  influence  of  the  climate 
of,  on  the  national  character, 
vii.  7,  §§1-4;  natural  superi- 
ority of  Hellenes  to  Barbarians, 
i.  2,  §4;  6,  §  6;  iii.  14,  §  6; 
vii-  7,  §  3  ;  differences  of  the 
various  Hellenic  tribes,  vii.  7, 
§  4  : — barbarous  laws  among 
the  ancient  Hellenes,  ii.  8,  §  20; 
the  Hellenes  formerly  under 
royal  rule,  i.  2,  §  6 ;  iii.  1 5,  §  1 1 . 
iv.  13,  §  10  ;  changes  in  govern- 
ment caused  by  the  increase  of 
population, iii.  15, §§11-13;  iv. 

6,  §5;  13,  §§  10-12;  vi.  5, 
§  5  ;  rise  of  the  heavy-armed 
in  importance,  iv.  13,  §10; 
effects  of  the  Persian  war  upon 
Hellas,  ii.  1 2,  §  5  ;  V.  4,  §  8 ; 
viii.  6,  §  II  ;  growth  of  the 
Athenian  empire  in  Hellas,  iii. 
13)  §  19  '1  division  of  Hellas  be- 


Index 


333 


tvveen  Athens  and  Lacedaemon, 
iv.  II,  §  i8;  V.  7,  §  14:— 
smallness  of  the  middle  class 
in  later  Hellas,  iv.  11,  §§  7,  16- 
19;  lack  of  great  men,  v.  10, 
§  37  ;  effects  of  the  cultivation 
of  rhetoric,  ib.  5,  §  7  ;  wrong 
notions  of  education,  iv.  11,  §6  ; 
vii.  14,  §  15  ;  viii.  i,  §  3;  2, 
§  2  : — rage  for  flute  playing  in 
Hellas  after  the  Persian  War, 
viii.  6,  §  12. 

Helots,  ii.  5,  §  22  ;  9,  §  2  ;  10, 
§§4,  16. 

Heniochi,   the,  in  Pontns,  viii. 

4,  §3- 

Hephaestus,  i.  4,  5  3. 
Heraclea,  in  Pontus,  v.  5,  §  3  ; 

6,  §§2,  3,  7,  15;  vii.  6,  §8. 
Heracleidesof  AenoSjV.  10,  §  18. 
Heracleitus,  v.  11,  §  31. 
Heracleodorus,  v.  3,  §  9. 
Heracles,  iii.  13,  §  16. 
Heraea  (in  Arcadia),  v.  3,  §  9. 
Hesiod,quoted,i.2,§5;  v.io,§3o. 
Hestiaea  (the  later  Oreus)  in  Eu- 

boea,  V.  3,  §  9  ;  4.  §  4- 
Hiero,  tyrant  of  Syracuse,  v.  10, 

§31;  II,  §  7;  12,  §§5,6. 
Hipparinus,  v.  6,  §  8. 
Hippocrates,  vii.  4,  §  5. 
Hippodamus,  of  Miletus,  ii.  8, 

§  I  ;  vii.  II,  §  6. 
Homer,  calls  Zeus  '  the  father  of 

Gods  and  men,'  i.  12,  §2; — 

quoted, 

II.  ii.  204  ;  iv.  4,  §  27  ; 
ib.  372  ;  iii.  16,  §  10; 

V.  391-3;  ib.  14.  §.5; 
ix.  63;  i.  2,  §  9; 
ib.  319;  ii.  7,  §  10; 
ib.  648  ;  iii.  5,  §  9 ; 
X.  224  ;  ib.  16,  §  10  ; 
xviii.  376  ;  i.  4.  §  3  ; 
Odyss.  ix.  7  ;  viii.  3,  §  9  ; 
ib.  14;  i.  2,  §7; 
xvii.  385  ;  viii.  3,  §  9  : 


— a  passage  is  also  cited,  viii. 

3,  §  8,  which  does  not  occur  in 
our  Homer. 

Honour,  inequality  in,  a  cause  of 
revolutions,  ii.  7,  §§  10-13,  18- 
20  ;  V.  2,  §  2  ;  3,  §§  2,  14  ;  4, 
§§  8-10;  12,  §  18;  the  remedy 
for  this,  V.  8,  §  12;  11,  §§  26, 
27  ;  the  citizen  must  share  in 
the  honours  of  the  state,  iii.  5, 
§9  (cp.c.  10,  §§4,  5);  honour 
less  desired  by  men  than  wealth, 
iv.  i3,§8;  V.  8,  §  16;  vi.  4,  §3 
(cp.  vi.  7,  §  7). 

Household  management,  the  art 
of,  distinguished  from  the  rule 
of  a  master,  i.  i,  §  2  ;  3,  §  4  ; 
7,  §  I ;  iii.  6,  §§6,  7;  divided 
into  three  parts,  i.  3,  §§  1-3; 
12,  §  I  ;  how  related  to  money- 
making,  ib.  3,  §3;  8,  §§  I,  2; 
9,  §§  I,  12-18;  10,  §§  1-4; 
includes  the  natural  art  of  ac- 
quisition, ib.  4,  §  I  ;  8,  §§  13- 
i.S;  9.  §§  1-8;  10,  §§1-4;  II, 
§§1-3;  has  a  limit,  ib.  9, 
§§14,  18;  is  more  concemetl 
with  virtue  than  with  wealth, 
ib.  13,  §  I  ;  the  parts  of  men 
and  women  in,  different,  iii.  4, 
§17;  exists  for  the  benefit  of 
those  under  it,  ib.  6,  §§6,  7. 

Husband  and  wife,  relation  of. 
\^See  '  Male '  and  '  Female.'] 

Husbandmen,  are  sometimes 
hunters,  i.  8,  §  8 ;  would  be 
better  suited  for  Plato's  com- 
munism than  the  guardians,  ii. 

4,  §  4;  make  the  best  form  of 
democracy,  iv.  6,  §  2  ;  12,  §  3  ; 
vi.  4,  §§  I,  8-10 ;  furnish  good 
sailors,  vii.  6,  §  8  ;  should  not  be 
citizens,  ib.  9,  §  8  ;  10,  §§13, 
14  ;  nor  admitted  to  office,  ib. 
9,  §  9  ;  should  be  excluded  from 
the  'Freemen's  Agora,'ib. 12, §  3. 

Husbandry,  a  part  of  the  natural 


334 


Index 


art  of  money-making,  i.  8,  §  3  ; 
10,  §.',;   IT,  §  2. 

lapygia,  v.  3,  §  7  ;  vii.  10,  §  5. 

Iberians,  the,  vii.  2,  §  11. 

India,  vii.  14,  §  3. 

Inheritance,  sale  of  an,  forbidden, 
ii.  7.  §  6 ;  (at  Sparta\  ib.  9, 
§  14  (cp.  V.  8,  §  20) ;  the  divi- 
sion of  an,  may  be  a  cause  of 
revolution,  v.  4,  §  4. 

Instruments,  best  when  made  for 
one  use,  i.  2,  §  3;  may  be  either 
living  or  lifeless,  ib.  4,  §  2  ;  are 
used  either  in  production  or  in 
action,  ib.  §§4-6;  are  never 
unlimited  in  the  arts,  ib.  8, 
§§  I4»  ^5  ;  t^^  slave  a  living 
instrument,  ib.  4,  §§2,  6. 

Ionia,  V.  10,  §  6. 

Ionian  Gulf,  the,  vii.  10,  §  5. 

Iphiades,  a  party  leader  at 
Abydos,  v.  6,  §  14. 

Istros,  V.  6,  §  2. 

Italns,  king  of  Oenotria,  vii.  10, 

Italy,  vii.  10,  §§  2-6. 

Jason,  tyrant  of  Pherae,iii.  4,  §9. 

Judges,  not  allowed  to  commu- 
nicate with  each  other,  ii.  8, 
§  13  ;  should  not  hold  office  for 
life,  ib.  9,  §  25 ;  necessary,  even 
in  the  first  beginnings  of  the 
state,  iv.  4,  §§13,  14;  the 
various  modes  of  appointing 
them,  ib.  16,  §§  5-7  ;  provision 
for  an  equal  division  of  opinion 
among  judges,  vi.  3,  §  6  ;  those 
who  inflict  penalties  to  be 
different  from  those  who  see  to 
their  execution,  ib.  8,  §§8-ii. 

Justice,  the  sense  of,  peculiar  to 
man,  i.  2,  §  12  ;  the  bond  of 
men  in  states,  ib.  §  16  ;  iii.  12, 
§9;  ^%h},\  (cp.  iv.  4,  §  13); 
sometimes  defined   as  benevo- 


lence, i.  6,  §  4 ;  different  in  men 
and  women,  ib.  13,  §§3,  9;  in 
the  ruler  and  the  subject,  ib. 
§§2-8;  iii.  4,  §§16-18;  con- 
sists in  equality,  iii.  9,  §  i ;  12, 
§1;  13,  §  12;  vii.  14,  §3; 
cannot  be  the  destruction  of  the 
state,  iii.  10,  §  2  ;  cannot  be 
united  with  thelove  of  conquest, 
vii.  2,  §§  7-18  ;  selfishness  of 
the  ordinary  notions  of  justice, 
vi.  3,  §  6 ;  vii.  2,  §  14 ;  all  claims 
to  rule  based  upon  partial  and 
relative  justice  only,  iii.  9, 
§§  1-6,  1.5;  V.  I,  §§2-6  ;  9, 
§  I ;  vi.  2,  §  2  ;  3,  §§  1-4. 

King,  the,  not  the  same  with  the 
statesman,  i.  i,  §  2  ;  ought  to 
be  chosen  for  merit  (as  at 
Carthage),  ii.  9,  §  29  ;  11,  §  4  ; 
receives  a  special  education,  iii. 
4,  §  8  ;  may  be  justified  in  put- 
ting down  his  rivals,  ib.  13, 
§  22  ;  V.  II,  §  27  ;  is  the 
champion  of  the  better  classes 
against  the  people,  v.  10,  §  3  ; 
often  supreme  in  religious 
matters,  iii.  14,  §13;  vi.  8, 
§  20  ;  should  he  have  a  military 
force?  iii.  15,  §§14-16;  is 
guarded  by  the  citizens,  ib.  14, 
§  7  ;  V.  10,  §  10. 

King,  the  true,  or  natural  supe- 
rior of  the  citizens,  iii.  13, 
§§  13,  24,  25;  17,  §§5-8;  vii. 
3,  §  6  ;  unknown  in  later  Hellas, 
V.  10,  §  37.     [.S"^^  Royalty.] 

King,  a,  the  Gods  why  supposed 
to  be  under,  i.  2,  §  7  ;  12,  §  3. 

Kings,  the,  of  Crete  (in  ancient 
times),  ii.  10,  §  6  ;  of  Carthage, 
ib.  II,  §§  3-6,  9,  10  ;  of  Mace- 
donia, V.  10,  §8;  oftheMolos- 
sians,  ib.  ;  11,  §  2  ;  of  Persia, 
y  viii.  5,  §  5  ;  of  Sparta  [j^^  Lace- 
daemon]  ; — Kings,  the  ancient, 


Index 


33f 


sometimes    became  tyrants,  v. 
10,  §  5. 
Knights,  the,  at  Athens,  ii.  12, 
§  6 ;  at  Eretria,  v.  6,  §  14. 

Lacedaemon ;  frequent  wars  of 
the  Lacedaemonians  with  theii 
neighbours,  ii.  9,  §§  3, 11 ;  their 
difficulties  with  the  Helots, 
ib.  §§  2-4  (cp.  ib.  5,  §  22) ;  the 
Messenian  Wars,  ib.  §  1 1  ;  v. 
7>  §§3.  4  ;  the  conspiracy  of 
the  Partheniae,  v.  7,  §  2  ; — of 
Pausanias,  ib.  i,  §  lo;  7,  §4; 
vii.  14,  §  20; — ofCinadon,v.  7, 
§  3  ;— of  Lysander,  ib.  i,  §10; 
7,  §  2  ;  the  putting  down  of  the 
tyrants,  ib.  10,  §  30;  the  subject 
cities  governed  in  the  oligar- 
chical interest  by  the  Lacedae- 
monians, iv.  II,  §  18;  V.  7, 
§  14  ;— friendship  among  the 
Lacedaemonians,  ii.  5,  §7; 
agriculture  forbidden  lO  them, 
ib.  §17;  simplicity  of  life  among 
them,  ib.  6,  §  17  ;  iv.  9,  §§  6-9; 
excellence  of  the  Lacedae- 
X  monian  education,  iv.  9,  §  7  ; 
viii.  I,  §  4  but  cp.  vii.  2,  §  9  ; 
viii.  4,  §1);  music  not  com- 
prised in  it,  viii.  5,  §  7  ;  Lace- 
daemonian training  only  ad- 
vantageous while  other  nations 
did  not  train,  ib.  4,  §§  4-7  ; 
rage  for  flute-playing  at  Lace- 
daemon after  the  Persian  War, 
ib.  6,  §  12  ;  error  of  the  Lace- 
daemonians in  thinking  the  ob- 
jects of  their  desire  preferable  to 
the  virtue  which  gained  them,  ii. 
9.  §35(cp- vii.  i,§5);  spirit  of 
distrust  in  the  Lacedaemonian 
government,  ii.  9,  §  30  ;  bad 
management  of  the  revenue,  ib. 
§  36  ;  frequency  of  corruption, 
ib.  §§19,  26;  10,  §12;  accu- 
mulation   of  property,    ib.   9, 


§§13,  14;  V.  7,§S3,  io(cp.  v. 
12,  §  15)  ;  number  of  heiresses, 
ii.  9,  §  15  ;  decrease  in  popu- 
lation, ib.  §§  14-19;  encourage- 
ment of  large  families,  ib.  §  14; 
expulsion  of  strangers,  ib.  10, 
§15;  strangers  admitted  to 
citizenship  in  ancient  times,  ib. 
9,  §  17;  licence  of  the  Lacedae- 
monian women,  ib.  §§  5-13  : — 
the  Lacedaemonian  constitution 
a  combination  of  various  forms 
of  government,  ib.  6,  §§  16,  17; 
9,  §  22  ; — an  aristocracy  with  an 
element  of  democracy,  iv.  7,  §4 
(cp.  ii.  9,  §  20  ;  10,  §  10) ; — re- 
garded by  some  as  a  democracy, 
by  others  as  an  oligarchy,  iv.  9, 
§§6-io; — often  considered  the 
next  best  to  the  ideal  state,  ii. 
6,  §  16  ;  iv.  I,  §  6  ; — its  resem- 
blance to  the  Cretan,  ii.  10, 
§§4-7; — to  the  Carthaginian, 
ib.  ii,§§3-,S  ;  the  arrangement 
of  the  law-courts  atLacedaemcn, 
an  aristocratical  feature,  ib,  §  7  ; 
iii.  I,  §§  10,  11;  the  attention 
of  the  legislator  directed  solely 
to  war,  ii.  9,  §§  34,  35  ;  vii. 
2,  §9;  14,  §§16-22;  viii.  4, 
§§1-7  : — imperfections  of  the 
Lacedaemonian  monarcliy,  ii.  9, 
§§  29,  30;  1 1,  §§3,  4;  limited 
powers  of  the  kings,  iii.  14,  §3; 
v.  II,  §  2;  their  office  an  heredi- 
tary generalship,  ii.  9,  §  33  ;  iii. 
14.  §9  4.5.  H;  15.  §§  i>2;  16, 
§  I  :  origin  of  their  power, 
v.  10,  §  8 ;  reason  of  its  long 
continuance,  ib.  11,  §2: — the 
Gerusia  criticized,  ii.  9,  §§  25- 
29;  II,  §§4,  II  ;  V.  6,  §  Ill- 
faults  and  merits  of  the  Epho- 
ralty,  ii.  6,  §  17;  9,  §§  19-24, 
26;  10,  §§  10,  12  ;  II,  §3; 
established  by  Theopompus  as 
a  check  on  the  royal  power,  v. 


33<^ 


Index 


n,  §§2,  3; — the  office  of  ad- 
miral, ii.  9,  §  33  : — the  com- 
mon tables,  why  instituted,  ib. 
5.  §15;  6,  §  17;  9,  §§31,32; 
iv.  9,  §  8 ;  not  so  well  managed 
as  in  Crete,  ii.  9,  §32;  10, 
§§  7,  8. 

Lametic  Gulf,  the,  vii.  10,  §  3. 

Land,  the,  should  be  divided  into 
two  portions,  vii.  10,  §  11  (3m/ 
cp.  ii.  6,  §  15) :  Hippodamus's 
division  of,  ii.  8,  §§3,  12; — 
should  it  be  cultivated  by  the 
owners?  ib.  5,  §§3,  18,  19;  8, 
§§  8-13  ;  vii.  9,  §§1-4;  10, 
§§  13, 14 ;  at  Sparta,  had  fallen 
into  the  hands  of  a  few,  ii.  9, 

§§14.  ^5- 

Landowners,  small,  to  be  encour- 
aged, vi.  4,  §§  8-10. 

Larissa,  iii.  2,  §  2  ;  v.  6,  §§  6,  13. 

Law,  the,  of  Oxylus,  vi.  4,  §  9: — 
Laws,  the,  of  Androdamas,  ii. 
12,  §14;  of  Charondas,  ib. 
§§  6-8,  II  ;  iv.  13,  §2  ;  of 
Draco,  ii.  12,  §  13;  ofLycurgus 
{see  Sparta)  ;  of  Minos,  ii.  10, 
§  3  ;  vii.  10,  §  1 ;  of  Phaleas,  ii. 
7  ;  12,  §  12  ;  of  Philolaus,  ib. 
12,  §§8-io;  of  Pittacus,  ib. 
§13;  of  Plato  {see  Plato)  ;  of 
Solon, ii.  7,  §  6;  12,  §§  1-6;  iii. 
II,  §8;  of  Zaleucus,  ii.  12,  §6. 

Law,  the,  derives  its  force  from 
habit,  ii.  8,  §  24 ;  'a  surety  of 
justice'  (Lycophron),  iii.  9,  §  8  ; 
may  have  a  party  character,  ib. 
10,  §5;  II,  §20;  only  exists 
for  equals,  ib.  13,  §§13,  14; 
16,  §§2,  3;  must  be  supported 
by  force  in  the  ruler,  ib.  15, 
§§14,  15  ;  is  a  mean,  ib.  16, 
§  8 ;  is  order,  vii.  4,  §  8 ;  is 
without  passion,  iii.  15,  §  5  ; 
the  rule  of,  the  rule  of  God,  ib. 
16,  §5  (cp.  i.  2,  §§15,  16);  — 
should  the  law  or  the  monarch 


rule?  iii.  15,  §§i-io;  16; — 
should  the  law  ever  be  changed  ? 
ii.  8,  §§16-25  cp.  iii.  15,  §§6, 
7  ;  16,  §  5)  : — Laws, the,  cannot 
provide  for  circumstances,  ii.  8. 
§  22;  iii.  II,  §  19;  15,  §§4-8  ; 
16,  §§4-13;  should  be  supreme, 
and  the  magistrates  only  their 
interpreters,  iii.  11,  §19;  16, 
§§5,  10-12  ;  iv.  4,  §31  ;  are 
relative  to  the  constitution,  but 
distinct  from  it,  iii.  11,  §20; 
iv.  I,  §§9,  10 ;  must  be  obeyed 
and  must  be  good,  iv.  4,  §  30  ; 
8,  §§5.6. 

Law,  the,  or  convention,  by  which 
prisoners  of  war  become  slaves, 
i-  6,  §§  I,  5. 

Law,  unwritten,  importance  of, 
iii.  16,  §  9. 

Laws,  the,  of  Hellenic  citiesgene- 
rally  in  a  chaotic  state,  vii.  2,§  9. 

Laws,  the,  of  Plato  {see  Plato). 

Law  Courts,  the,  oligarchical 
and  democratical  tricks  with, 
iv.  9,  §2  ;  13,  §§2,  5;  14, 
§  12  ;  the  rich  should  be  encour- 
aged to  attend,  even  in  demo- 
cracies, vi.  5,  §  5  ;  used  by  the 
demagogues  to  ruin  the  rich,  v. 

3.  §4;  6,  §§  1-5;  vi.  5.  §3- 
Law  courts,  the  possible  varieties 
of,  iv.  16. 
Legislator,  the,  must  have  regard 
to  the  country  and  the  people, 
ii.  6,  §7;  7,  §§  14-17;  must 
pay  attention  to  the  foreign  re- 
lations of  the  state,  ib. ;  ib. ; 
vii.  2,  §18;  must  secure  leisure 
for  his  citizens,  ii.  9,  §  2  ;  11, 
§§  10,  12;  vii.  9,  §§3,  7  (cp. 
vii.  12,  §  7);  must  not  trust  to 
accidents,  ii.  1 1,  §§  15, 17  ;  vii. 
I3i  §§8-io;  must  regard  the 
common  good,  iii.  13,  §12; 
ought  not  to  want  such  a  princi- 
ple as  ostracism,  ib.  §  23  ;  v.  3, 


Index 


3  37 


§  3  ;  must  know  all  possible 
fornis  of  state,  iv.  i ,  §  8 ;  and 
the  causes  of  their  preservation 
and  destruction,  v.  9,  §  9  ;  vi.  5, 
§  2  ;  must  be  able  to  reform  as 
well  as  to  create  a  state,  iv.  i , 
§  7  ;  should  favour  the  middle 
class,  ib.  T2,  §  4;  must  consider 
the  deliberative,  executive,  and 
judicial  elements  in  relation  to 
the  constitution  of  each  state, 
ib.  14,  §  I  ;  must  be  modest  in 
his  designs,  ii.  6,  §  7  ;  viii.  4, 
§  2  ;  should  not  make  conquest 
the  aim  of  his  state,  vii.  2  ; 
must  give  all  the  citizens  a  share 
in  the  administration,  ib.  14, 
§  4  ;  must  have  a  care  of  edu- 
cation, ib,  §§  i,  8;  15, §8;  viii. 
I,  §§  I,  2  ;  must  not  neglect 
physical  education,  vii.  16,  §  i. 

Legislators,  the  best,  belonged  to 
the  middle  class,  iv.  11,  §  J5. 

Leisure,  the,  of  the  citizens,  the 
first  object  of  the  legislator,  ii. 
y,  §  2  ;  II,  §§  IO-12  ;  vii.  9, 
§§  3.  4)  7  (cp.vii.  12,  §  7)  ;  the 
citizen  must  know  the  right  uses 
of,  vii.  14,  §§  1.3-22  ;  viii.  3  ;  .f, 
§  4;  needed  for  virtue,  vii.  9,  §  4. 

Leontini,  v.  10,  §  6  ;  12,  §  13. 

Lesbos,  iii.  13,  §  19. 

Leucas,  ii.  7,  §  7. 

Liberty,  supposed  to  be  the 
characteristic  feature  of  demo- 
cracy, iii.  8,  §  7  ;  iv.  4,  §^  22, 
^3;  8,  §7;  V.  I,  §3;  8,  §6; 
9.  §§  M.  15 ;  vi.  2,  §§  1-4,  9; 
4,  §  20 ;  must  not  be  confused 
with  licence,  v.  9,  §  15 ; — should 
be  held  out  as  a  reward  to  slaves, 
vii.  10.  §  14. 

Life,  action,  not  production,  i.  4, 
§  5  ;  pleasure  of,  iii.  6,  §  5 ;  is 
the  speculative  or  the  practical, 
better?  vii.  2,  §§5-18;  3  :— 
divided  by  the  poets  into  periods 


of  seven  years,  ib.  1 6,  §  1 7  ;  17, 

§  15  : — -simplicity  of,  at  Sparta, 

ii.  6,  §  17;  iv.  9,  §  7. 
Life,  the  good,  not  desired  by 

mankind  in  general,  i.  9,  §  16  ; 

the  object  of  the  existence  of  the 

state,  ib.  2,  §  8  ;  iii.  9,  §§  6-14; 

iv.  4,  §  12  ;  vii.  i,  §  r  ;  2,  §17; 

4,  §  II  ;  8,  §  4 ;  is  it  the  same 

for  states  and  for  individuals  ? 

vii.  I  ;  2  ;  3,  §  10. 
Limit,  a,  necessary  in  the  arts,  i. 

8,  §  14;  9.  §  13;  iii-  13.  §21 ; 
vii.  4,  §  10  ;  in  population,  ii. 
6,  §§6,  10;  7,  §5;  9,  §  19; 
vii.  4,  §§4-11;  5,  §  I  ;  16, 
§15;  in  the  state,  ii.  6,  §  7  ; 
iii.  3>  §§4-7;  vii.  4;  5,  §  >  ; 
in  wealth,  i.  8,  §  14;  9,  §  14; 
ii.  6,  §§8,  9;  7,  §§4-8;  vii.  5, 

§  I.     . 

Locri  (in  Italy),  ii.  7,  §  6;  12, 
§6;  V.  7,  §  10. 

Lot,  use  of  the,  characteristic  of 
democracy,  ii.  11,  §  7;  12,  §  3  ; 
iv.  9»  H;  .i5>  §19;  vi.  2,  §§5, 
8 ;  modes  in  which  it  may  be 
used  in  elections  of  magistrates, 
iv.  15,  §§  16-22. 

Lycophron,  the  Sophist,  iii.  9, 
§8. 

Lyctus,  in  Crete,  ii.  10,  §  2. 

Lycnrgus,the  author  of  the  Lace- 
daemonian constitution,  ii.  10, 
§  2  ;  12,  §  I ;  was  the  guardian 
of  Charilaus,  ib.  10,  §  2  ;  his 
visit  to  Crete,  ib. ;  his  failure  to 
bringthe  women  under  his  laws, 
ib.  9,  §§  II,  12  ;  said  by  some  to 
have  been  a  disciple  of  Thales, 
ib.  12,  §7;  belonged  to  the 
middle  class,  iv.  11,  §  15. 

Lydian  Harmony,  the  :  see  Har- 
mony. 

Lygdamis,  tyrant  of  Naxos,  v.  6, 

§1. 
Lysaudcr,  v.  i,  §10;  7,  §2. 


338 


Index 


Macedonia,  V.  lo,  §8;  vii.  2,§  lo. 

Magistrates,  power  of  calling  to 
account  [see  Account,  power  of 
calling  magistrates  to] ;  division 
of  law-suits  among  the  Lace- 
daemonians and  Carthaginian 
magistrates,  ii.  ii,  §7;  iii.  1, 
§  10  (cp.  iv.  14,  §  3)  ;  election 
of  magistrates  by  merit  charac- 
teristic of  aristocracy,  ii.  11, 
§§7.  9;  iv.  15,  §'io;— for 
wealth,  of  oligarchy,  ii.  6,  §  19; 

1 1 ,  §  9  ;  iv.  1 5,  §  I o ;  choice  by 
lot,  of  democracy,  ii.  6,  §  19  ; 

12,  §  3;  iv.  15,  §  19;  vi.  2, 
§§  5,  9 ;  must  be  taken  from 
those  who  carry  arms,  ii.  8,  §  9 ; 
iv.  13,  §9;  are  very  numerous 
in  democracies,  ii.  11,  §  14; 
ought  to  be  only  the  guardians 
and  interpreters  of  the  law,  iii. 
II,  §19;  16,  §§5,  10-12;  iv. 
4,  §  31 ;  character  and  powers  of 
the  magistrates  in  aristocracies, 
iv,  14,  §  10;  15,  §  13;  vi.  8, 
§  22  ;  in  constitutional  govern- 
ments, iv.  14,  §§10,  16;  in 
democracies,  ib.  §§1-7;  15. 
§§  10-14;  vi.  2,  §§  5-9;  8, 
§§17,    24;    in  oligarchies,  iv. 

14,  §§8,9;  15,  §§  10-14;  vi. 
8,  §§17,  24;  the  magistrates 
jjeculiar  to  each  constitution,  iv. 

15.  §§  "-i.^;  vi.  8,  §§  17,  24; 
defmition  of  the  term  'magis- 
trate,' iv.  15,  §§  1-4;  should  he 
hold  more  than  one  office  ?  ii. 

11,  §13;  iv.  15,  §§  5-10;  vi, 
8,  §  2  ;  the  various  modes  of 
appointment,  iv,  15,  §§  14-21  ; 
vi.  5,  §11;  popular  election 
dangerous,  v.  5,  §  10  ;  6,  §  6  ; 
the  magistrates  should  not  be 
allowed  to  make  money,  ib.  3, 
§  i  ;  8,  §15;  vi,  7,  §5  (cp.  v. 

12,  §14);  undue  power  ac- 
')uired  by  them  a  cause  of  revo- 


lution, V.  3,  §3;  4,  §§8-ii  ; 
great  authority  of  the  ancient 
magistrates,  iii.  16,  §  1 ;  v.  i, 
§10;  5,  §8;  10,  §5  ;  vi.  2, 
§  8  ;  the  magistrates  may  pre- 
vent revolutions  by  prudence,  v, 
8,  §  8 ;  manner  in  which  they 
should  act  in  oligarchies,  vi, 
5,§§  'o.  ";  7;  §64-7;  enume- 
ration of  the  different  magis- 
trates required  by  states,  vi.  8  ; 
the  magistrates  must  know  the 
characters  of  their  fellow- 
citizens,  vii.  4,  §13;  must  sup- 
press obscenity,  ib.  i  7,  §  10  : — 
Magistrates,  certain,  required 
by  law  to  take  their  meals  to- 
gether, vi.  2,  §  7  ;  vii.  12,  §  2. 
Magnesia  (on  the  Maeander),  iv. 

3,  §  3- . 

Magnesians,  the,  ii.  9,  §  3. 

Majority,  the  (in  a  state),  diffi- 
culties about  the  power  which 
should  be  possessed  by,  iii.  10; 

"  ;  13.  §§4-7 ;  vi.  3. 

Male  and  female,  reason  for  the 
union  of,  i.  2,  §  2  ;  the  relation 
of,  part  of  the  household,  ib.  3, 
§  2;  12,  §  I. 

Male,  the,  intended  by  nature  to 
rule  over  the  female,  i.  5,  §  7  ; 
12,  §1. 

Malians,  the,  iv.  13,  §  9. 

Man  a  political  animal,  i.  2, 
§§9.  14,  is;  Jii-  6,  §3;  has 
a  natural  wish  for  posterity,  i. 
2,  §  2  ;  alone  has  the  faculty  of 
speech,  ib.  §  10; — the  sense  of 
good  and  evil,  ib.  §  i  a  ; — the 
power  of  reason,  vii.  13,  §12; 
the  worst  of  animals  when  not 
controlled  by  law  and  justice, 
i.  2,  §§  15,  16;  must  allow 
reason  to  direct  nature  and 
habit,  vii.  13,  §§  11-13;  should 
give  the  soul  rule  over  the  body, 
'•   ht    §§  4~7 ;    ♦he  plants  and 


Index 


339 


animals  created  for  his  sake,  ib. 
S,  §  12  : — Man,  the  virtue  of 
the,  different  from  that  of  the 
woman,  ib.  13,  §§3,  9-11  ;  iii. 

4,  §  16: — Men  are  unlimited 
in  their  desires,  i.  9,  §§  i6-i8  ; 
ii-  7>  §§8,  19;  are  wicked  by 
nature,  ii.  5,  §  12;  are  more 
desirous  of  gain  than  of  honour, 
iv.  13,  §8;  V.  8,  §  16;  vi.  4, 
§  3  ;  are  satisfied  with  a  mode- 
rate amount  of  virtue,  vii.  i, 
§5: — Men,  the  first,  were  or- 
dinary, foolish  people,  ii.  8, 
§  21. 

Alantinea,  battle  of,  v.  4,    §  9  ; 

government   by   representation 

at,  vi.  4,  §  4. 
Marriage,  regulations  respecting, 

vii.  16  ; — the  marriage  relation, 

'•  2,  §2;  3,  §§  1-3;  12;  iii.  4, 

§6. 
Massalia,   v.  6,  §^2,3;   vi.   7, 

§4- 

Master,  the,  in  relation  to  the 
slave,  i.  2,  §§  2-5;  3,  §§  1-3; 
12,  §  I  ;  13,  §§7,  12-14;  has  a 
common  interest  with  the  slave, 
ib.  6,  §  10;  iii.  6,  §  6  ;  vii.  14, 
§  6  ;  ought  to  train  the  slave  in 
virtue,  i.  13,  §  14; — the  science 
peculiar  to,  ib.  3,  §  4 ;  7,  §§  2- 
5  ;  13,  §  14; — the  rule  of,  ib. 
3,  §4;  iii.  4,  §11;  vii.  14,  §6; 
wrongly  supposed  [by  Plato]  to 
be  different  from  political  rule, 
i-  I,  §  2  ;  3,  §4- 

Mean,  importance  of  the,  in 
states,  iv.  11;  v.  9,  §  6 ;  in 
education,  viii.  6,  §  7 ;  7,  §  15. 

Mechanic,  the:  see  Artisan. 

Medes,  the,  iii.   13,  §  19  ;   viii. 

5.  §5- 

Medicine,  i.  9,  S§  i3>  i?;  lOj 
§§3.  4;  iJ-  8,  §18.  (.See 
I'hysician.) 

Megacles,  v.  10,  §  19. 

z 


Megara,  iii.  9,  §  9 ;  iv.  15,  §  15; 
V.  3,  §.';;  5-  §§4,9- 
Messenian  War,  the  (Second),  v. 

7,  §3- 

Messenians,  the,  ii.  9,  §§3,  11. 

Metics :  see  Aliens. 

Midas,  i.  9,  §  II. 

Middle  class,  virtues  of  the,  iv. 
11;  12;  the  middle-class  state 
the  best,  ib.  11,  §§8-15;  12, 
§  4 ;  v.  8,  §  14 ;  9,  §  6  ;  small- 
ness  of  the  middle  class  in 
ancient  states,  i v.  13,  §  11. 

Might  and  right,  i.  6,  §  3  ;  vi.  3, 
§  6;  vii.  2,  §  13. 

Miletus,  i.  II,  §  9;  v.  5,  §  8. 

Minos,  ii.  10,  §  3 ;  vii.  10,  §§  2, 
6. 

Mithridates  (PSatrap  of  Pontus), 
V.  10,  §  25. 

Mitylene,  iii.  14,  §10;  v.  4,  §§5, 
6  ;  10,  §  19. 

Mixo-Lydian  Harmony,  the :  see 
Harmony. 

Mnaseas,  a  Phocian,  v.  4,  §  7. 

Mnason,  a  Phocian,  v.  4,  §  7. 

Moderation  in  politics,  necessary 
for  the  salvation  of  the  state,  iv. 
II,  §§  16-19;  V.  9,  §6;  vi.  5, 
§2. 

Molossians,  the,  in  Epirus,  v.  10, 
§8;  II,  §2. 

Monarchy,  arguments  for  and 
against,  iii.  15-17. 

Monarchy :  see  King,  Royalty, 
and  Tyranny. 

Money,  origin  of,  i.  9,  §  8 ;  its 
conventional  nature,  ib.  §  11  ; 
ought  not  to  be  made  from 
money,  ib.  10,  §  5. 

Money-making,  the  art  of,  how 
related  to  household  manage- 
ment, i.  3.  §  3  ;  8,  §§  I,  2 ;  9, 
§§  I,  12-18;  10,  $§1-4;  the 
natural  kind,  ib.  8,  §§  3-15;  9, 
§§i-8;  10,  §§  1-4;  II,  §§i, 
2 ;  the  unnatural,  ib.  9,  §  1  foil.; 


340 


Index 


10,  §§  4,  5  ;  II,  §  3  ;  the  inter- 
mediate, ib.  II,  §4;  the  un- 
natural pursues  its  end  without 
limit,  ib.  9,  §§  13-15. 

Monopolies,  a  common  method 
ofgaining  wealth,  i.  11,  §§8-13. 

Multitude,  the,  their  claim  to  the 
supreme  power,  iii.  10,  §  i ;  are 
better  collectively  than  the  in- 
dividual, ib.  11;  13,  §4;  15; 
should  have  power  only  to  elect 
and  control  the  magistrates,  ib. 

11,  §7- 

Musaeus,  quoted,  viii.  5,  §  11. 

Music,  subject  to  a  ruling  princi- 
ple, i.  5,  §  4  ;  better  judged  of 
by  the  many  than  by  the  indi- 
vidual, iii.  II,  §3;  useful  (i) 
in  education,  viii.  3;  5  ;  7,  §3; 
(2)  for  the  intellectual  employ- 
ment of  leisure,  ib.  3  ;  5,  §§  8, 
9  ;  7.  §  3  >  (3)  with  a  view  to 
purification,  ib.  7,  §§  3-6  ;  has 
an  effect  upon  morals,  ib.  5, 
§§7.  15-25;  6,  §§i,  6;  7, 
§§  3~7  ;  "Ot  taught  at  Lacedae- 
mon,  ib.  5,  §  7  ;  naturally  plea- 
sant to  men,  ib.  §§  S,  11,  25; 
7,  §6;  produces  enthusiasm,  ib. 
5,  §§  16,  32  ;  7,  §  4 ;  allays  the 
passions,  ib.  6,  §  9  ;  7,  §§  4-6  ; 
a  rattle  for  children  of  a  larger 
growth,  ib.  6,  §  2 ;  cannot  be 
judged  except  by  a  performer, 
ib.  §  4  (but  cp,  c.  5,  §  7) ; 
must  not  be  pursued  to  the 
point  of  professional  excellence, 
ib.6,  §§7, 15;  includes  a  higher 
and  a  lower  kind,  ib.  §8;  7, 
§  6  ;  is  composed  of  melody 
and  rhythm,  ib.  6,  §  18;  6,  §5; 

7,  §!• 
Music,  writers  upon,  viii. 5,  §  23  ; 

7.  §§2,  3,8,  II,  14- 
Musical  Harmony  :  i^^^  Harmony. 
Myron,  tvrant  at  Sicyon,  v.  1 2, 

§12. 


Mytilene :  see  Mitylene. 

Nature,  implants  in  man  a  desire 
of  posterity,  i.  2,  §  2  ;  makes  a 
distinction  between  the  ruler 
and  the  ruled,  ib. ;   4,  §  6;    5  ; 

6,  §  8  ;  12  ;  13,  §  4  ; — between 
the  female  and  the  slave,  ib.  2, 
§  3 ;  her  designs  must  be  sought 
in  things  which  are  uncorrupted , 
ib-  5»  §5  ;  docs  nothing  in  a 
niggardly  fashion,  il).  2,  §3; 
creates  nothing  in  vain,  ib.  §  10 ; 
8,  §  12  ;  ii.  5,  §  8;  gives  to  man 
the  social  instinct,  ib.  2,  §§  10- 
16  ;  iii.  6,  §§  3-5  ;  not  always 
able  to  accomplish  her  inten- 
tions, i.  5,  §  10;  6,  §  8;  sup- 
plies food  for  all,  ib.  8,  §§  9- 1 2 ; 
'o,  §  3 ;  has  given  all  freemen 
a  right  to  rule,  ii.  2,  §6;  iii.  16, 
§§  2,  3  ;  fits  the  young  to  obey, 
the  old  to  command,  vii.  9,  §6; 
permits  proper  relaxation,  viii. 
3,  §  2  ;  herself  suggests  the  pro- 
per harmonies  for  each  age,  ib. 

7,  §  13  ; — forms  one  element  in 
virtue,  vii.  13,  §§  11-13;  'S, 
§  7  ;  must  be  supplemented  by 
art  and  education,  ib.  17,  §  15. 

Naval  force,  the,  which  should 
be  possessed  by  the  state,  vii. 
6,  §i  6-9. 

Naxos,  v.  6,  §  I. 

Nobility,  among  Barbarians  only 
partially  recognized  by  Hellenes, 
i.  6,  §7;  confers  a  claim  to  supe- 
riority in  the  state,  iii.  9,  §  15  ; 
12,  §9;  13.  §§2-5;  iv.  8,  §3; 
may  be  defined  (i)  as  excellence 
of  race,  iii.  13,  §  3  ;  v.  i,  §  7 ; 
(2)  as  ancient  wealth  and  virtue, 
iv.  8,  §  9 ;  confused  by  mankind 
with  wealth,  ib.  §§4,  8;  v.  7, 
§  I  ;  like  virtue,  is  not  often 
found,  v.  I,  §  1 4. 

Nobles,  quarrels  among,  a  cause 


Index 


341 


of  revolutions,  v.  i ,  §  1 6 ;  4,  §  i ; 
6,  §  5  ;  8,  §  9 ;  form  a  demo- 
cracy among  themselves,  ib.  8, 
§  6 ;  should  be  humane  to  the 
subject  classes,  iv.   13,  §  8;  vi. 

5,  §§5-"- 
Notium,  V.  3,  §  15. 

Obedience,  the  necessarj'  prelim- 
inary to  command,  iii.  4,  §§  10, 
14;  vii.  9,  §  6;  14,  §6. 

Odysseus,  viii.  3,  §  9. 

Oenophyta,  battle  of,  v.  3,  §  5. 

Oenotrians,  the  (in  Southern 
Italy),  vii.  10,  §§  3-5. 

Office,  the  '  indefinite, '  in  which 
all  the  citizens  share,  iii.  i, 
§§6-12;    2,  §5. 

Office,  lust  of  mankind  for,  iii.  6, 
§10;  oligarchical  tricks  to  keep 
the  poor  from,  iv.  13,  §§  1-4; 
justice  of  the  various  claims  to, 
iii.  10-13: — Offices,  the,  of  the 
state,  posts  of  honour,  ib.  10, 
§4  ;  therr  distribution,  iv.  15  ; 
vi.  8  ;  their  organization  deter- 
mines the  character  of  each 
constitution,  iv.  i,  §  10 ;  3,  §  5  ; 
in  small  states  must  be  com- 
bined, in  large  ones  specialized, 
ii.  II,  §  14;  iv.  15,  §§  5-7;  vi. 
8,  §  2  ;  in  democracies  restricted 
to  six  months'  tenure,  v.  8,  §  6 ; 
(cp.  vi.  2,  §  5) ;  and  rarely  held 
more  than  once  by  the  same 
person,  iii.  i,  §  6  ;  vi.  2,  §  5  ; 
should  be  divided  into  two 
classes,  v.  8,  §  21  ;  vi.  5,  §  11. 

Offices,  sale  of,  and  pluralism,  at 
Carthage,  ii.  11,  §§  10,  13. 

Oligarchy,  the  government  of  the 
few  for  their  private  interests,  iii. 

6,  §  2  ;  8,  §  3; — or,  more  correctly, 
of  the  wealthy,  ib.  7,  §  5  ;  8, 
§§6,  7;  iv.  4,  §§  1-6,  19;    8, 

§7 ;  Ti,  §§  16-19;  ^- 1.  §.^; 

vi.  2,  §  7 ;  I'lato  wrong  in  think- 


ing that  an  oligarchy  can  ever  be 
called  'good,'  iv.  2,  §3;  oli- 
garchy the  perversion  of  aristo- 
cracy, iii.  7,  §5;  15,  §  12  ;  iv. 
2,  §  2  ;  how  distinguished  from 
it,  ii.  II,  §§5-10;  iv.  5,  §  i; 
7;  8,  §§2-10;  14,  §10;  V.  7, 
§§  5-8  ;  popularly,  supposed, 
like  aristocracy,  to  be  a  'govern- 
ment of  the  best,'  iv.  8,  §  4 ;  v. 
I,  §  14;  analogous  to  tyranny 
in  love  of  wealth,  v.  10,  §  11  ; 
has  more  forms  than  one,  iv.  i , 
§  8;  4,  |§  20-22;  12,  §  3;  13, 
§12;  the  forms  enumerated,  ib. 

5,  §§1-3;  6,  §§7-ii;  14, 
§§8-ii;  vi.  6;  oligarchy  less 
stable  than  democracy,  iv.  Ii, 
§14;  v.  I,  §  15;  7,  §  6;  the 
shortest  lived  of  all  forms  of 
governments,  excepting  tyranny, 
v.  1 2,  §  1  (cp.  vi.  6,  §  4  )  ;  the 
extreme  form  apt  to  pass  into 
tyranny,  iv.  1 1 ,  §  1 1 ;  v.  10,  §  5 ; 
12,  §13;  the  causes  of  revo- 
lutions in  oligarchies,  v.  3, 
§  14  ;  6  ;  12,  §§  15-18  ;  the 
means  of  their  preservation,  ib. 

6,  §  9;  8,  §§  5-21 ;  <i\y\-  6, 
§  5  ;  7  ; — the  Lacedaemonians 
the  champions  of  oligarchy  in 
Hellas,  iv.  11,  §  18;  v.  7,  §  14; 
— the  people  to  whom  oligarchy 
is  suited,  iv.  2,  §  4;  12,  §  3  ; — 
the  military  strength  of  oligarchy 
derived  from  cavalry  and  heavy 
infantry,  ib.  3,  §3;  13,  §10; 
vi.  7,  §  I  ;  — oligarchical  modes 
of  appointing  magistrates  and 
judges,  ii.  6,  §§  19,  20  ;  iv.  14, 
§§  7-11;  15,  §§  14-21  ;  16,  §8; 
magistracies  peculiar  to  oli- 
garchy, iv.  14,  §  14;  15,  §11  ; 
vi.  8,  §§17,  24; — luxury  of 
the  women  in  oligarchies,  iv. 
'.'ij  §  13;  bad  education  of  the 
children,    ib.     11,    §6;    v.    9, 


342 


Index 


§  1 3  : — the  oligarchs  sometimes 
forbidden  to  engage  in  trade,  v, 

12,  §14;  their  tricks  to  keep 
the  power  in  their  own  hands,, 
iv.  9,  §  2  ;  13,  §§  1-4;  14, 
§12;  they  ought  rather  to  give 
the  people  a  share  in  the  go- 
vernment, ib.  14,  §14;  vi.  5, 
§  II  ;  7,  §  4  ;  they  should  not 
take  oaths  against  the  people, 
V.  9,  §§  10,  II  ;  they  should 
not  be  allowed  to  make  money 
by  office,  ib.  3,   §  i  ;    8,  §  15  ; 

vi.  7.  §  5- 
Olympic  Games,  the,  viii.  4,  §  8, 
Olympus,    melodies  of,  viii.    5, 

§  16. 
Onomacritus,  the  Locrian,  ii.  1 2, 

§7. 
Onomarchus,  a   Phocian,   v.  4, 

§7- 
Opici,the,orAusones,vii.  10,  §5. 
Opus  (in  Locris),  iii.  16,  §  i. 
Oratory,  v.  5,  §  7. 
Oreus  :  see  Hestiaea. 
Orthagoras,  v.  12,  §1. 
Ostracism,  how  far  justifiable,  iii. 

13.  §§13-25;    17.  §7;   V.  3, 
§3;  8,  §12. 

Oxylus,  king  of  Elis,  vi.  4,  §  9. 

Paches,  v.  4,  §  6. 

Painters,  combine  their  works 
from  scattered  elements,  iii.  11, 
§  4 ;  like  other  artists,  observe 
a  rule  of  proportion,  ib.  13, 
§  21  ;  those  who,  like  Poly- 
gnotus,  express  moral  ideas,  to 
be  preferred,  viii.  5,  §  21. 

Paintings,  obscene,  not  to  be  al- 
lowed, vii.  17,  §  9. 

Panaetius,  tyrant  of  Leontini,  v. 
10,  §6;  12,  §  13. 

Parent,  the,  relation  of,  to  the 
child,  i.  2,  §2  ;  3,  §  2 ;  12; 
provides  food  for  the  offspring, 
ib.  8,  §  10;  10,  §  3. 


Parrhon,  of  Aenos,  v.  10,  §  18. 

Partheniae,the  (at  Lacedaemon), 
conspiracy  of,  v.  7,  §  2. 

Passion,  intended  by  nature  to  be 
controlled  by  reason,  i.  5,  §  6  ; 
present  in  the  human  soul  from 
the  first,  iii.  15,  §§5,  8;  16, 
§  5  ;  vii.  15,  §  10  ;  blinds  men 
to  danger,  v.  10,  §  34 ;  11,131; 
the  multitude  freer  from  passion 
than  the  individual,  iii.  15,  §  8. 

Patrimony,  laws  forbidding  the 
sale  of  a,  ii.  7,  §  6  ;  9,  §  14 
(cp.  v.  8,  §  20). 

Pausanias,  the  assassin  of  Philip 
of  Macedon,  v.  10,  §  16. 

Pausanias,  son  of  Cleombrotus, 
incorrectly  called  king,  v.  i, 
§10;  vii.  14,  §20;  his  con- 
spiracy, v.  I,  §  10;  7,  §4;  vii. 
14,  §  20. 

Panson,  paintings  of,  viii.  ^, 
§21. 

Payment  of  the  democracy  ;  in- 
troduced at  Athens  by  Pericles 
and  Ephialtes,  ii.  12,  §4;  bad 
effects  of  the  practice,  ib.  7, 
§19;  iv.  6,  §  6;  vi.  2,  §  6; 
how  they  may  be  counteracted, 

vi.  5,  §  5- 
Peace,  the  trne  object  of  war,  vii. 

14.  §§13.  22:  i5>§§  I.  .'?;  the 

dangers  of,  ib.  15,  §3. 
Pediaei,    the   (or    'men   of  the 

plain'),  at  Athens,  v.  5,  §9. 
Peisistratus,     v.     5,     §9;     12, 

§§2,    5  ; — Peisistratidae,    the, 

V.  10,  §§15,   34;  II,  §9;  12, 

§5- 
Peloponnesus,  ii.  10,  §  3;  iii.  3, 

§  5 ; — Peloponnesian  War,  the : 

see  War,  Peloponnesian. 
Penestae,  the,  ii.  5.  §  22  ;  9,  §  2. 
Pentacosio-medimni,      the,      in 

Solon's  constitution,  ii.  12,  §  6. 
Penthalidae,  the,  at  Mitylene,  v. 

10,  §  19. 


Index 


343 


Penthilns  (?  tyrant  of  Mitylene), 

V.  lo,  §  19. 
Periander,  tyrant  of  Ambracia, 

V.  4,  §  9;  10,  §  16. 
Periander,  tyrant  of  Corinth,  iii. 

13,  §16;  V.  10,  §13;  II,  §  4; 

12,  §3. 
Pericles,  ii.  12,  §  4. 
Perioeci  (in  Argos),  v.  3,  §  7  : — 

(in  Crete),  ii.  9,  §3;   10,  §§3, 

5,  8, 16  : — advantageous  to  have 
perioeci  of  foreign  race  as  cul- 
tivators, vii.  9,  §  8  ;  10,  §  13. 

Perrhaebians,  the,  ii.  9,  §  3. 
Persia,     iii,    13,    §  19;     v.     10, 

§§8,  24;    II,  §§4,  6;    vii.  2, 

§  10 ;  viii.  5,  §  5. 
Persian    War,    the :     see    War, 

Persian. 
Penersions,  the,  of  the  true  forms 

of  government,  iii.   i,§§8-io; 

6.  §11;  7;  I7»  §1  ;  IV.  2, 
§§  1-3  ;  8>  §  I ;  all  governments 
perversions  of  the  perfect  state, 
iv.  8,  §  I  (cp.  ii.  II,  §  5)- 

Phalaris,  of  Agrigentum,  v.  10, 
§6. 

Phaleas  of  Chalcedon,  ii.  7,  §  2 ; 
12,  §§7,  12. 

Pharsalus,  v.  6,  §  10. 

Pheidon,  tyrant  of  Argos,  v.  10, 
§6. 

Pheidon,  of  Corinth,  ii.  6,  §  13. 

Philip,  King  of  Macedonia,  v.  10, 
§  16. 

Philolaus,  ii.  12,  §§  8,  10. 

Philosopher,  the,  may  be  allowed 
to  discuss  practical  questions,  i. 
II,  §1;  has  no  difficulty  in 
acquiring  wealth,  ib.  §§8-io; 
must  go  below  the  surface  of 
things,  iii.  8,  §  i  ;  his  life  as 
distinguished  from  that  of  the 
statesman,  vii.  2,  §  6: — philo- 
sophers, the,  not  agreed  about 
slaver)',  i.  6,  §  2  ;  the  opinions 
of  natural  philosophers   about 


marriage,  vii,  16,  §  11  ;  philo- 
sophers who  have  treated  of 
musical  education,  viii.  5,  §  23 ; 
7,  §§2,  3,8,  11,14. 
Philosophy,  especially  necessary 
in  the  prosperous,  vii,  15,  §§3, 

4- 
Philoxenus,  viii.  7,  §5  10,  11. 
Phocis,  v.  4,  §  7. 
Phocylides,  quoted,  iv.  1 1 ,  §  9. 
Phoxus,  tyrant  of  Chalcis,  v,  4, 

§9- 
Phreatto,  court  of,  at  Athens,  iv. 

16,  §3- 

Phrygian  harmony,  the :  see  Har- 
mony. 

Phrynichus,  v,  6,  §  6, 

Phylarchs,  magistrates  at  Epi- 
damnus,  v,  i,  §  10. 

Physician,  the,  must  be  judged  by 
the  physician,  iii.  11,  §§  10-12  ; 
is  healed  by  the  physician,  ib. 
16,  §  8  ;  is  not  expected  to  per- 
suade or  coerce  his  patients,  vii. 
2,  §  13  ;  must  know  both  the 
end  and  the  means  of  his  art, 
ib.  13,  §  2 ;  precepts  of  the 
physicians  about  marriage,  ib. 
16,  §  II ;  law  about  physicians 
in  Egypt,  iii.  15,  §  4. 

Piraeus,  ii.  8,  §  i  ;  v.  3,  §  15. 

Pittacus,  ii,    la,    §13;    iii.  14, 

§§  9»  'o- 
Plato,  criticisms  of; — forms  ol 
government  differ  in  kind,  i.  i , 
§  2;  3,  §4;  7,  §1  ;  the  virtue 
of  men  and  women  not  the  same, 
>•  i3>  §§9-11  ;  slaves  not  al- 
ways to  be  harshly  treated,  ib. 
§  14  ;  disadvantages  of  com- 
munity of  wives  and  children, 
ii.  I.  §  3-c.  5  ;  of  common  pro- 
perty, ib,  5;  vii.  ID,  §9; 
the  unity  of  the  state  may  be 
carried  too  far,  ii.  2,  §  2-c.  3, 
§  4  ;  4,  §  6  ;  5,  §13;  men  and 
women  ought  not  to  have  the 


344 


Index 


same  pursuits,  ib.  5,  §  24  ;  dan- 
ger from  the  rulers  being  always 
the  same,  ib.  §§25,  26;  hap- 
piness should  not  be  confined 
to  one  class,  ib.  §  27  ;  Plato 
has  neglected  the  foreign  rela- 
tions of  his  state,  ib.  6,  §  7 ; 
amount  of  property  allowed  by 
him  insufficient,  ib.  §  9  ;  he 
should  have  limited  population 
as  well  as  property,  ib.  §§  10- 
14;  7,  §4;  he  has  not  said 
how  the  rulers  and  subjects  are 
related,  ib.  6,  §  14;  why  should 
not  property  in  land  be  increased 
to  a  certain  extent  ?  ib.  §  1 5  ;  diffi- 
culty of  living  in  two  houses, 
ib.  §16;  the  best  state  not 
made  up  of  tyranny  and  demo- 
cracy, ib.  §  18  ;  the  state  of 
the  Laws  really  a  mixture  of 
oligarchy  and  democracy,  ib. 
§§18-22;  Plato's  distinctions 
between  good  and  bad  constitu- 
tions, iv.  2,  §  3  ;  his  account  of 
the  classes  necessary  to  a  state, 
ib,  4,  §§  12-15  ;  has  not  recog- 
nized the  '  Polity*  in  his  enu- 
meration of  constitutions,  ib.  7, 
§  1  ;  his  theory  of  revolutions, 
V.  13,  §§7-18;  his  error  in 
saying  that  the  guardians  should 
be  fierce  to  those  whom  they  do 
not  know,  vii.  7,  §§5-8  : — that 
a  valiant  city  needs  no  walls,  ib. 
II,  §  8  : — that  the  crying  of 
children  should  be  checked,  ib. 
17,  §6;  his  inconsistency  in 
retaining  the  Phrygian  mode, 
viii.  7,  §§8-13: — the  merits  of 
Plato's  writings,  ii.  6,  §  6 ;  he 
departs  from  ordinary  practice 
more  than  other  legislators,  ib. 
7,  §  I  ;  peculiarities  suggested 
by  him,  ib.  12,  §  1 2 : — ^justice  of 
his  censure  of  the  Lacedae- 
monian constitution,  ib.  9,  §  34: 


— how  far  right  in  wishing  that 
his  city  should  not  be  near  the 
sea,  vii.  6,  §§1-4  : — speech  of 
Aristophanes  in  the  Symposium 
quoted,  ii.  4,  §  6  : — criticism  of 
the  Republic,  ib.  i,  §  3-c.  5; 
of  the  Laws,  ib.  6. 

Pleasure,  always  sought  by  man- 
kind, i.  9,  §  16;  ii.  7,  §  la  ; 
denied  by  Plato  to  his  guardians, 
ii-  ii  §  27 ;  is  regarded  differ- 
ently by  different  persons,  viii. 
3,  §  5  ;  the  pleasure  of  living, 
iii.  6,  §4;  relation  of  pleasure  to 
happiness, vii.  i,§6;  thenatural 
pleasure  given  by  music,  viii.  5, 
§§  II,  15,  17,  25;  6,  §8:— 
Pleasures,  the,  which  are  unac- 
companied by  pain,  ii.  7,  §  12. 

Poetry,  better  judged  by  the  many 
than  the  individual,  iii.  1 1 ,  §  3. 

Polity:  «<r Government,  theCon- 
stitutional. 

Poly  crates,  v.  1 1 ,  §  9. 

Polygnotus,  the  painter,  viii.  5, 
§21. 
•  Poor,  the,  everywhere  abound, 
iii.  8,  §6;  v.  i,  §14;  covet 
the  goods  of  the  rich,  iv.  11, 
§  9 ;  their  degraded  state  in 
Hellenic  cities,  ib.  §  §  5-7  ; 
willing  to  fight  if  they  are  sup- 
ported by  the  state,  ib.  13,  §  9; 
equal  to  the  rich  in  democracies, 
vi.  2,  §  9 ;  the  surplus  revenue 
distributed  among  them  in  the 
extreme  democracy,  ib.  5,  §  7  ; 
may  cause  a  revolution  if  their 
numbers  increase,  v.  3,  §§  6-8  ; 
begrudge  the  extravagance  of 
courts,  ib.  1 1 ,  §  1 9  ;  should  be 
humanely  treated,  ii.  7,  §  20; 
iv.  13,  §8  ;  should  be  helped 
by  the  rich,  vi.  5,  §§  5-1 1. 

Population,  decline  of,  at  Sparta, 
ii.  9,  §  16;  importance  of  regu- 
lating. ib.6,§§  10-14;  7,  §§4- 


Index 


34f 


6;  9.  §§i4-'9;  vii.  5,  §  i ;  16, 
§15;  changes  of  government 
brought  about  by  the  natural 
increase  of  population  in  Hellas, 
iii.  i5>  §13;  iv.  6,  §5;  13, 
§  10  ;  vi.  5,  §  5  ;  a  limit  of 
population  necessary  to  good 
government,  ii.  6,  §§6,  10;  7, 

§ 5;  9,  §  19;  V"-  4»  §§4-" ; 

5,  §1;  16,  §  15. 
Poverty,  not  the  cause  of  the 
worst  crimes,  ii.  7,  §  10;  always 
antagonistic  to  riches,  iv.4,  §  19 ; 
the  parent  of  revolution  and 
crime,  ii,  6,  §  13  {but  cp.  v.  12, 
§17);  one  of  the  essential 
characteristics  of  democracy,  vi. 

2,  §  7- 

Priests,  are  not  political  officers, 
iv.  15,  §  2  ;  necessary  to  the 
state,  vii.  8,  §§7,9;  should  be 
taken  from  the  aged  citizens 
who  are  past  state  service,  ib. 
9,  §9;  theirduties,  vi.  8,  §§  18- 
20 ;  required  to  take  their  meals 
at  common  tables,  vii.  12,  §  6. 

Property,  a  part  of  the  household, 
i.  4,  §  1  ;  8,  §  I  ;  a  condition 
but  not  a  part  of  the  state,  vii. 
8,  §  4 ;  in  the  sense  of  food, 
provided  by  nature  for  all,  i. 
8,  §  9 ;  10,  §  3 ; — the  pleasure  of 
property,  ii.  5,  §  8  ; — Plato's 
limit  of  property  unsatisfactory, 
ib.  6,  §  9 ;  the  limit  should  be 
such  as  to  enable  a  man  to  live 
both  temperately  and  liberally, 
ib. ;  vii.  5,  §  i  ; — inequality  of 
property  at  Sparta,  ii.  9,  §§  14- 
19;  ^-  7.  §  3.  10;  12,  §  15;- 
a  great  cause  of  revolutions,  ii. 
7,  §§  2-6. 

Property,  community  of;  criti- 
cism  of  Plato's  scheme,   ii.  5 
{see  I'lato) ;  common  property 
opposed  to  human  nature,  ib.    I 
§§4,   16;  exists  in  a  modified    1 


degree  among  friends,  ib.  §§6, 
7;  vii.  10,  §9;  found  to  some 
extent  at  Sparta  and  Tarentum , 
"•  hi  §7;  vi.  5,  §16;  would 
destroy  the  virtues  of  temper- 
ance and  liberality,  ii.  5,  §§  S- 
I  o ;  would  not  produce  the 
marvellous  results  which  Plato 
expects,  ib.  §  11  ; — equalization 
of,  proposed  by  Phaleas,  ib.  7  ; 

12,  §12;  would  not  remedy 
the  deeper  evils  of  human  nature, 
ib.  7,  §§8-13,  18. 

Property  qualification,  required 
in  the  holders  of  various  offices, 
iii.  II,  §  16;  iv.  4,  §  24 ;  5, 
§1;  6,  §§3,  7  ;  vi.  4,  §  5; 
ought  not  to  be  excessive,  iv. 

13,  §  7 ;  in  oligarchies  should 
be  fixed  according  to  two  stan 
dards,  vi.  6,  §  2  ;  changes  in,  a 
cause  of  revolutions,  v.  3,  §§  8, 
10;  6,  §§  16 -iS;  7,  §9 ;  the 
evil  may  be  remedied  by  pe- 
riodical revisions  of  the  census, 
ib.  8,  §§  10,  II. 

Proportion,   importance   of,  iii. 

13,  §  21  ;  iv.  12  ;  V.  i,  §§12- 

15;  3.  §6;  7.  §8;  8,  §12;  9, 

§  7  ;  vii.  4,  §  10. 
Psammetichns,  son  of  Gordius, 

tyrant  at  Corinth,  v.  12,  §  3. 
Pyramids,  the,  of  Egypt,  v.  Ii, 

§9- 

Reason,  an  element  of  virtue,  vii. 
13,  §§10-13;  15,  §7;  is  the 
master  artificer,  i.  13,  §  8;  di- 
vided into  two  parts,  the  specu- 
lative and  the  practical,  vii.  14, 
§  10  ;  is  the  end  towards  which 
nature  strives,  ib.  15,  §8;  in- 
tended by  nature  to  control  the 
passionate  or  irrational  element 
in  the  soul,  i.  5,  §6;  13,  §6; 
vii.  14,  §  9  ;  15,  §  8  ;  is  not 
found  in  the  animals,  i.  2,  §  11; 


34<^ 


Index 


vii.  13,  §  12  ;  exists  in  slaves  to 
alimitedextent,  i. 5,§  9;  13, §3; 
is  not  readily  obeye<l  by  those 
who  have  great  advantages  over 
others,  iv.  ii,  §5;  may  be 
overcome  by  passion,  v.  10, 
§33;  ")§3i;  may  make  mis- 
takes, vii.  15,  §  7. 
Religion,  m.atters  of,  used  to  be 
entrusted  to  the  kings,  iii.  14, 
§§  3,  14  (cp.  vi.  8,  §  20)  ;  the 
tyrant  should  have  a  care  of 
religion,  v.  11,  §25;  the  ex- 
pense of  public  worship  should 
be  borne  by  the  state,  vii.  10, 
§  10: — the  officers  of  religion, 
vi.    8,   §§  18-21  ;  vii.   8,    §  9  ; 

9,  §9- 

Religious  worship,  one  of  the 
conditions  of  the  state,  vii.  8, 
§8. 

Representation,  principle  of,  once 
existed  in  the  government  of 
Mantinea,  vi.  4,  §  4. 

Republic,  the,  ot  Plato  :  see 
Plato. 

Rest  :  see  Leisure. 

Retail  trade,  not  a  natural  mode 
of  money-making,  i.  9,  §§  4, 
1 2  ;  arises  out  of  the  barter  of 
necessary  articles,  ib.  §§9-12. 

Revolutions,  their  objects,  v.  i  ; 
their  causes,  ii.  7,  §§  2,  5,  10; 
v.  2;  3;  4;  10,  §  13;  12, 
§§14-18;  their  occasions,  v. 
4 ;  7,  §11;  the  preventives  of 
them,  ii.  11,  §  15  ;  v.  7,  §  6; 
8  ;  9  ;  1 1 ;  vi.  4,  §§  16-20  ;  5  : 
6  ;  revolutions  in  democracies, 
v.  5  ; — in  oligarchies,  ib.  6; — 
in  constitutional  governments, 
ib.  §  1 7 ;  7,  §  5  ; — in  aristocracies, 
ib.  7; — in  monarchies,  ib.  10; 
— in  tyrannies,  ib. ;  11;  Plato's 
theory  of  revolutions,  criticized, 
ib.  12,  §§7-18; — questions 
raised  after  revolutions:  citizens 


dej'ure  and  de  facto,  iii.  2 ,  §  §  3- 
5  ;  should  old  debts  be  paid? 
ib.  3,  §  I  ; — democratic  mea- 
sures taken  by  Cleisthenes  and 
others  after  a  revolution,  ib.  2, 
§§  3-5  ;  vi.  4,  §  18 ;  revolutions 
may  happen  without  an  imme- 
diate change  in  the  constitution, 
iv.  5.  §  3  ;  V.  1,  §  8. 
Rhegium,   ii.   12,    §  14;   v.  12, 

§13- 

Rhodes,  li.  10,  §  3 ;  v.  3,  §§  4,  5 ; 
5.  §2. 

Rich,  the,  one  of  the  elements  of 
the  state,  iv.  4,  §15;  everj'- 
wherefew  compared  to  the  poor, 
iii.  8,  §6;  v.  i,  §14;  often 
hindered  by  the  cares  of  property 
from  attending  to  public  busi- 
ness, iv.  6,  §  6  {dnicp.  i.  7,  §  5) ; 
possess  the  external  advantages 
of  which  the  want  occasions 
crime,  iv.  8,  §4  (cp.  ii.  7,  §  10); 
have  too  much  power  in  so-called 
aristocratical  governments,  iv. 
12,  §6;  V.  7,  §7;  their  en- 
croachments more  dangerous  to 
the  state  than  those  of  the  poor, 
iv.  1 2,  §  6 ;  constantly  in  antago- 
nism to  the  poor,  ib.  11,  §  7  ; 
V.  9,  §  10 ;  should  be  protected 
against  the  demagogues,  v.  8, 
§  20  ;  vi.  5,  §  3  ;  should  be 
relieved  from  useless  state  ex- 
penses, V.  8,  §  20 ;  vi.  5,  §  9  ; 
should  be  generous  to  the  poor, 
iv.  13,  §  8  ;  vi.  5,  §  10  ;  should 
be  public-spirited  and  munifi- 
cent, vi.  7,  §  6  ;  are  often  spoilt 
by  indulgence  in  childhood,  iv. 
II,  §  6  ;  V.  9,  §  13  ;  can  alone 
afford  the  expense  of  keeping 
horses,  iv.  3,  §  2. 

Riches  and  poverty,  the  opposing 
elements  of  the  state,  v.  i, 
§  14;  8,  §  14;  riches  more  de- 
sired by  men  than  honour,  iv. 


Index 


347 


13,  §8;  V.  S,  §  16;  vi.  4,  §  2; 
Solon  wrong  in  thinking  that 
'  no  bound  has  been  fixed  to 
riches,'  i.  8,  §  14.     See  Wealth. 

Royalty,  the  form  of  government 
in  which  one  rules  for  the  best, 
iii-  7)  §  3  ;  V.  10,  §  3;  analogous 
to  aristocracy,  v.  10,  §§2,  7; 
opposed  to  tyranny,  iii.  7,  §5  ; 
iv.  2,  §  2  ;  V.  10,  §  2  ;  is  it 
better  than  the  rule  of  the  law? 
iii.  15;  16;  arose  (i)  from  the 
government  of  families  by  the 
eldest,  i.  2,  §  6  ;  7,  §  i  ;  12,  §  3; 
(2)  from  services  rendered  by  the 
first  chiefs,  iii.  1 4,  §  1 2  ;  i5,§ii; 
V.  10,  §§3,  8  ;  (3)  from  the 
weakness  of  the  middle  and 
lower  classes,  iv.  1 3,  §  1 1 ;  once 
existed  in  Crete,  ii.  10,  §  6 ;  has 
various  forms :  (i)  the  Lacedae- 
monian (which  is  only  a  general- 
ship for  life),  ii.  9,  §  33  ;  iii.  14, 
§§3,  14;  i5>  §§  i>  2;  16,  §1; 
(2)  the  despotic  (among  Bar- 
barians), iii.  14,  §§6,  14;  iv. 
10,  §  2  ;  (3)  the  ancient  Dicta- 
torships, iii.  14,  §§  8,  14 ;  iv. 
10,  §  2  ;  (4)  the  monarchies  of 
the  heroic  age,  iii.  14,  §§  11-14; 
(5)  the  absolute  monarchy,  ib. 
§  15  ; — the  people  to  whom 
royalty  is  suited,  lb.  c.  17; 
— causes  of  revolutions  in  mon- 
archies, V.  10 ;  means  of  their 
preservation,  ib.  11,  §  §  i  -3  ; 
royalty  more  often  destroyed 
from  within  than  from  without, 
ib.  10,  §  36 ;  true  royalty  un- 
known in  later  Hellas,  ib.  §  37; 
vii.  14,  §3.  .S"^if King, Monarchy. 

Rule  ;  the  various  kinds  of  nile 
essentially  different  from  each 
other,  i.  I,  §  2;  3,  §  4  ;  5,  §  6; 
7,  §  I  ;  12;  13,  §§4-8;  iii.  6, 
§§5-7;  vii.  3,  §2 ;  14.  §6; 
the    distinction     between     the 


ruler  and  the  ruled  found 
throughout  nature,  i.  2,  §  2  ;  5, 
§§  2-7  ;  the  better  the  ruled, 
the  better  the  rule,  ib.  5,  §§  2, 
7  ;  V.  II,  §  34;  the  rule  of  free- 
men better  than  despotic  au- 
thority, vii.  14,  §  19  ;  rule  over 
others,  not  the  highest  object  of 
the  legislator,  ib.  14,  §§  14-22; 
rule  must  be  learnt  by  ol^edience, 
iii.  4,  §§  10,  14;    vii.  9,   §  6  ; 

14.  §  6. 
Ruler,  the,  ought  to  have  moral 
virtue  in  perfection,  i.  13,  §  8  ; 
the  virtue  peculiar  to  him,  iii.  4, 
§  17  ;  must  learn  to  govern  by 
obedience,  ii.  11,  §  14  ;  iii.  4, 
§  14  ;  vii.  9,  §  6  ;  14,  §  6  ;  the 
rulers  ought  to  remain  the  same, 
ii.  2,  §§4-8;  vii.  14,  §  2  ; 
dangers  arising  from  this 
arrangement,  ii.  5,  §§  24-27  ; 
vii.  14,  §3;  the  difficulty  solved, 
if  the  elder  rule,  and  the  younger 
obey,  vii.  9,  §  5;  14,  §  5. 

.Salamis,  victory  of,  v.  4,  §  8. 
Samos,  iii.  13,  §  19  ;  v.  3,  §  12  ; 

II,  §9- 

Sardanapalus,  v.  10,  §  22. 

Science,  the,  of  the  statesman,  i. 
I,  §  2  ;  10,  §  I  ;  iii.  12,  §  i  ; 
iv.  I,  §  3; — of  the  master,  i.  3, 
§  4  ;  7,  §§  2,  4; — of  the  slave, 
ib.  7,  §§  2,  3 ;  in  all  sciences  the 
whole  must  be  resolved  into  the 
parts,  ib.  I,  §  3  ;  every  science 
capable  of  improvement,  ii.  8, 
§18;  the  philosophical  student 
of  science  must  not  neglect  any 
detail,  iii.  8,  §  i ;  all  sciences 
aim  at  some  good,  ib.  1 2,  §  i ; — 
the  political  science  the  highest 
of  all  sciences,  iii.  12,  §  i;  aims 
at  the  good  of  the  state,  vii.  2, 
§  4  ;  the  subjects  which  it  in- 
cludes, iv.  I,  §§  .',-11. 


348 


Index 


Scylax,  vii.  14,  §  3. 

Scylletic  Gulf,  the,  vii.  10,  §  3. 

Scythians,  the,  vii.  2,  §§  10,  11. 

Sedition :  see  Revolution. 

Self-sufficiency,  the,  of  the  state, 
the  end  and  the  best,  i.  2,  §  8  ; 
vii.  5,  §  I  ;  8,  §  8  ;  would  not 
be  promoted  by  extreme  unifi- 
cation, ii.  2,  §  8. 

Senate  :  see  Council  of  Elders. 

Senators :  see  Councillors. 

Servant,  the,  a  kind  of  instrument 
in  the  arts,  i.  4,  §  2  ;  many  ser- 
vants often  less  efficient  than  a 
few,  ii.  3,  §  4 ;  the  servants 
who  are  employed  in  daily  life, 
those  with  whom  we  most  often 
disagree,  ib.  5,  §  4  ;  children 
not  to  be  left  too  much  to  ser- 
vants, vii.  17,  §  7.    See  Slave. 

Sesostris,  king  of  Egypt,  vii.  10, 
§§i,6. 

Seuthes,  v.  10,  §  24. 

Shepherds,  lead  the  laziest  life 
among  men,  i.  8,  §  6  ;  some- 
times combine  brigandage  with 
their  other  occupations,  ib.  §  8  ; 
form  the  second  best  material 
of  a  democracy,  vi.  4,  §§  i,  11; 
make  excellent  soldiers,  ib.  §  1 1. 

Sicily,  ii.  to,  §  4  ;  v.  12,  §  13. 

Sicyon,  v.  12,  §  i. 

Simos  (?),  a  party  leader  at 
Larissa,  v.  6,  §  1 3. 

Sirrhas,  v.  10,  §  17, 

Slave,  the,  does  he  exist  by  nature  ? 
i.  4,  §  6--C.  6  ;  different  from  the 
female  (except  among  Barba- 
rians), ib.  2,  §§  2-4 ;  how  re- 
lated to  his  master,  ib.  §§  2-5  ; 

3,  §§  1-3 ;  4.  §  5 ;  vii.  3,  §  5 ; 

not  always  distinguished  by 
nature  from  the  freeman,  i.  5, 
§10;  6,  §8;  the  relation  be- 
tween slave  and  master,  when 
natural,  does  not  exclude  kind- 
ness,   ib.    6,    §  9 ;    slave    and 


master  have  a  common  interest, 
ib.  2,  §  3  ;  iii.  6,  §  6  ;  the  slave 
must  not  be  addressed  in  the 
language  of  command  only 
[against  Plato,  Laws,  vi.  777],  i. 
13,  §  14;  place  ofthe  slave  in  the 
management  of  the  family,  ib. 
4  ;  5>  §  9 ;  8,  §  I  ;  the  slave  an 
instmment  taking  precedence 
of  other  instrximents,  ib.  4,  §  2  ; 
like  the  animals,  ministers  to 
the  needs  of  life,  ib.  5,  §  9 ; 
the  science  proper  to  him,  i.  7, 
§§2,3;  his  share  in  virtue,  ib. 
13,  §§  2-14  ; — in  reason,  ib.  5, 
§§8,  9;  13,  §  3  ;  has  not  the 
deliberative  faculty,  ib.  13,  §7; 
is  nearer  to  his  master  than  the 
mechanic,  ib.  §  13  ;  ought  to 
be  trained  in  virtue  by  him,  ib. 
§  14  : — Slaves,  how  related  to 
artisans,  i.  13,  §  13;  ii.  7,  ?22; 
iii.  4,  §  12;  5,  §3;  forbidden 
gymnastic  exercises  in  Crete,  ii. 
5,  §  19  ;  difficulty  in  managing 
them,  ib.  §  22  ;  9,  §§  2-4;  vii. 

10,  §  13;  the  different  classes  of 
slaves,  iii.  4,  §  12  ;  children  of 
slaves  only  admitted  to  citizen- 
ship in  extreme  democracies,  ib. 
5»  §  7 ;  vi.  4,  §  16;  slaves  can- 
not form  a  state,  iii.  9,  §  6 ;  can- 
not be  self-sufficient,  iv.  4,  §  II  ; 
licence  allowed  to  them  in 
democracies  and   tyrannies,  v. 

11,  §11;  vi.  4,  §20;  some- 
times emancipated  by  tyrants 
to  serve  as  a  guard,  v.  1 1,  §  32 ; 
should  be  encouraged  by  the 
hope  of  freedom,  vii.  10,  §  14; 
their  company  dangerous  for 
children,  ib.  17,  §  7. 

Slavery,  is  it  according  to  nature  ? 
i.  5;  6. 

Slavery  ; — men  should  not  think 
it  slavery  to  live  according  to 
the  constitution,  v.  9,  §  15. 


Index 


349 


Slave?,  the  art  of"  acquiring,  a 
species  of  hunting  or  war,  i.  7, 
§5  ;  vii.  14,  §21. 

Smerdis,  v.  10,  §  19. 

Society,  political,  the  highest  of 
all  communities,!.  I,  §  i ;  exists, 
not  for  mere  companionship, 
but  for  the  sake  of  noble  actions, 
iii.  9,  §§  12-14;  ™^n  designed 
by  nature  to  take  part  in  society, 
i,  2,  §§  8-16  ;  iii.  6,  §  3  ;  bene- 
fit conferred  on  mankind  by  the 
establishment  of  society,  i.  2, 
§15;  society  cannot  exist  with- 
out judicial  decisions  and  punish- 
ments, vi.  8,  §  9  ;  vii.  13,  §  6. 

Socrates :  see  Plato. 

Soldiers,  according  to  Plato, 
should  be  taught  to  use  both 
hands  alike,  ii.  12,  §12;  shep- 
herds make  excellent  soldiers, 
vi.  4,  §  1 1  ;  relation  of  the  dif- 
ferent kinds  of  soldiers  to  the 
different  constitutions,  ib.  7, 
§  §  1  -3  ;  the  soldier  must  have 
a  good  knowledge  of  the  mili- 
tary art,  vii.  1 1 ,  §12;  soldiers 
as  necessary  to  the  state  as 
artisans  or  husbandmen  [against 
Plato,  Rep.  ii.  369],  iv.  4,  §§  10- 
17;  vii.  4,  §§4-7;  8,  §7;  9, 
§  10  ;  the  soldiers  should  be 
taken  from  the  youth,  the  coun- 
cillors from  the  old,  vii.  9, 
§§  3-10  ;  14,  §  5  ;  should  form 
a  separate  caste,  as  in  Egypt,  ib. 
9,  §  10  ;  10,  §  I  ;  position  of 
the  soldiers  in  the  constitution 
of  Hippodamus,  ii.  8,  §§2,  8- 
12. 

Soldiers,  heavy-armed,citizenship 
in  constitutional  governments 
confined  to  the,  ii.  6,  §  16  ;  iii. 

7.  §4;  17.  §  4;.iv.  13,  §  10; 
growth  of  their  importance  in 
Ilellenic  states,  iv.  13,  §§  9-12  ; 
taken  from  the  roll  of  citizens 


at  Athens,  v.  3,  §  7;  form  (with 
cavalry)  the  natural  military 
force  of  an  oligarchy,  vi.  7, 
§§  1,2  ;  generally  worsted  by  the 
light-armed  in  popular  insurrec- 
tions, ib.  §  3  ; — the  principal 
magistrates  elected  from  those 
who  are  serving,  or  who  have 
served,  ii.  8,  §  9 ;  iv.  13,  §  9. 

Soldiers,  light-armed,  always  at- 
tached to  democracy,  vi.  7,  §  2 ; 
generally  master  the  heavy- 
anned  in  popular  insurrections, 
ib.  §  3  ;  the  younger  citizens  in 
oligarchies  should  be  trained  in 
the  exercises  of  light  infantry, 
ib. 

Solon,  i.  8,  §  14;  ii.  7,  §  6;  12, 
§§  2-6  (cp.  iii.  ii,§  8);  iv.  n, 

§15- 

Sophocles,  quoted,  i.  13,  §  11. 

Soul,  the,  rules  by  nature  over 
the  body,  i.  5,  §§  4-6  ;  poste- 
rior to  the  body  in  order  of 
generation,  vii.  15,  §9;  more 
truly  a  part  of  an  animal  than 
the  body,  iv,  4,  §  14;  the  beauty 
of  the  soul  less  easily  seen  than 
that  of  the  body,  i,  5,  §  11  ; 
the  interests  of  soul  and  body 
the  same,  ib.  6,  §10;  the  ir- 
rational element  in  the  soul 
subject  to  the  rational,  ib.  5, 
§6;  13,  §6;  vii.  14,  §9;  15, 
§  8 ;  the  divisions  of  the  soul, 
i-  5,  §§5-7;  n,  §6;  iii.  4, 
§6;  vii.  14,  §9;  15,  §9;  the 
soul  never  wholly  free  from 
passion,  iii.  15,  §  5  ;  said  to  be 
or  to  possess  harmony,  viii.  5, 

§25. 

Sparta :  see  Lacedaemon. 

Speculation,  life  of,  opposed  to 
that  of  contemplation,  vii.  2  ; 
3;  14.  §§9  22. 

State,  the,  is  the  highest  of  com- 
munities, i.  1 ,  §  I ;  is  based  upon 


35-0 


Index 


the  relations  of  husband  and  wife,  [ 
fatlier  and  child,  master  and  | 
slave,  ruler  and  subject,  ib.  2  ;  i 
'3?  §  '  5  ;  formed  of  a  union 
of  villages,  ib.  2,  §  8  ;  exists  for 
the  sake  of  a  good  life,  ib.  ;  iii. 
9,  §§  6-14;  iv.  4,  §11  ;  vii.  i, 
§1;  8,  §§4,  8;— not  for  the 
sake  of  alliance  and  security,  iii. 
9>  §§6-14;  is  distinguished 
from  an  alliance  because  it  has 
an  ethical  aim,  ii.  2,  §  3  ;  iii.  9, 
§  8  ; — from  a  nation,  because  it 
is  made  up  of  different  elements, 
ii.  2,  §  3 ;  is  not  necessarily 
formed  by  a  number  of  persons 
residing  together,  iii.  3,  §  3  ;  9, 
§§9-12  ;  \but  cp.  ii.  i,  §  2)  ; 
is  a  work  of  nature,  i.  2,  §§  8, 
9 ;  prior  to  the  family  or  the 
individual,  ib.  §  12;  13,  §  15  : — 
composed  of  dissimilar  parts  or 
elements,  ii.  2,  §  3  ;  iii.  i,  §  2  ; 
4,  §§  6-8  ;  iv.  3,  §  I  ;  4,  §  7  ; 
12,  §§  1-4;  V.  I,  §§  12-15;  3> 
§  6 ;  vii,  8  ;  the  parts  not  to  be 
identified  with  the  conditions  of 
the  state,  vii.  8,  §  i ;  the  parts 
and  conditions  enumerated,  iv. 

3,  §§  1-6;  4,  §§7-20;  vii.  8, 
§  7  ; — compared  to  the  parts  of 
animals.iv.  4,  §§  7-9 : — thestate 
depends  for  its  identity  mainly 
on  the  sameness  of  the  constitu- 
tion, iii.  3  ;  must  be  able  to  de- 
fend itself,  ii.  6,  §  7  ;  7,  §§  14- 
'7  ;   io>  §  15;  "i-  12,  §  9  ;  iv. 

4,  §10;  vii.  4,  §6;  15,  §2; 
should  be  self-sufficing,  i.  2,  §8 ; 
ii.  2,§  8;  vii.  4,  §11;  5,  §  i  ;  8, 
§  8  ;  should  not  exceed  a  certain 
size,ii.6,§6;iii.3,§§4-7;  vii.4; 

5,  §  I ; — has  the  same  virtue, 
and  therefore  the  same  life  and 
end,  as  the  individual,  vii.  1-3  ; 
13-15  ;  may,  like  an  individual, 
be  wanting  in  self-discipline,  v.   I 


9,  §12;  must  have  the  virtues 
of  leisure,  vii.  15,  §1  ;  can  lead 
a  life  of  virtuous  activity  isolated 
from  others, ib.  2.  §  16  ;  3,  §§8- 
10 ;  is  not  made  happier  by 
conquest,  ib.  2  ;  3 ;  14,  §§  14- 
22  ;  rests  upon  justice,  i.  2,  §  16; 
vii.  14,  §  3  ;  must  have  a  care 
of  virtue,  iii.  9,  §  8  ;  vii.  13,  §9 
(cp.  iv.  7,  §  4) ;  must  be  happy, 
not  in  regard  to  a  portion  of 
the  citizens,  but  to  them  all,  ii. 
5,  §  27  ;  vii.  9,  §  7  ;  is  united 
by  friendship  among  the  citizens, 
ii.  5,  §6;  iii.  9,  §  13;  iv.  11, 
§7;  V.  II,  §5  ;cp.vi.  5,  §7); 
must  pay  great  regard  to  edu- 
cation, i.  13,  §  15;  ii.  7,  §  8; 
v.  9,  §  1 1 ;  viii.  1 : — must  not  be 
left  to  fortune,  ii.  11,  §§  15, 
16;  vii.  13,  §9;  is  not  the 
growth  of  a  day,  v.  3,  §  1 1  ;  is 
preserved  by  the  principle  of 
compensation,  ii.  2,  §§  4-7;  is 
sometimes  left  at  the  mercy  of 
the  army  by  the  violence  of 
faction,  v.  6,  §  13 ;  its  jjerma- 
nence  can  only  be  secured  by  the 
toleration  of  all  elements,  ii.  9, 
§  32;  iv.  9,  §  10;  12,  §1;  v. 
8,  §  5  ;  9.  §  5 ;  vi.  6,  §  2 ;  any 
state,  however  ill-constituted, 
may  last  a  few  days,  vi.  5,  §  i : 
— the  various  claims  to  autho- 
rity in  the  state,  iii.  9,  §§  1-5, 
14;  10;  12;  13;  iv.8,  §9;  vi. 
3)  §§1-4;  what  share  in  the 
state  may  be  allowed  to  the 
ordinary  citizen?  iii.  il,  §§6- 
8;  iv.  13,  §§5-8;  vi.  4,  §5;  7, 
§  5  (cp.  ii.  12,  §5). 
State,  the  ideal,  of  Aristotle, 
would  require  (i)  a  defensible 
position,  vii.  5,  §  3;  (2)  a  mode- 
rate naval  force,  ib.  §§6-9; 
(3)  courageous  and  intelligent 
citizens,  ib.  7  ;  (4)  the  exclusion 


Index 


3fi 


of  mechanics  and  tradesmen 
from  citizenship,  ib.  9,  §§  1-8  ; 
(5)  slaves  and  Perioeci  to  till 
the  soil,  ib.  §S;  10,  §§9,  13, 
14  ;  (6)  common  meals,  ib.  10, 
§§i-8,  10;  (7)  subdivision  of 
the  land  into  two  parts,  public 
and  private,  ib.  §  1 1 ;  (,8)  \for 
the  city\  a  central  situation,  ib. 
5;  §  3 ;  I '  >  §  2  ; — near,  but  not 
upon,  the  sea,  ib.  6,  §§  1-6;  a 
healthy  site,  ib.  1 1,  §  i  ;  a  good 
water  supply,  ib.  §  3 ;  proper 
fortifications  and  walls,  ib.  §§  5, 
8-12  ;  an  arrangement  of  houses 
and  streets  which  will  combine 
the  advantages  of  beauty  and 
security,  ib.  §  6  ;  an  acropolis, 
for  the  temples,  and  a  '  freemen's 
agora,'  ib.  12,  §§i-6;  govern- 
ment buildings  and  a  trader's 
agora,  ib.  7. 

State,  the  best  [absolutely],  the 
enquirer  into,  must  examine  the 
best  ideal  and  actual  forms  of 
government,  ii.  1 ,  §  i;  differs  from 
the  so-called  aristocracies  be- 
cause the  citizens  are  absolutely 
good,  iii.  13,  §  12  ;  iv.  7,  §  2 
(<^«/cp.  iii.  4,  §5);  presupposes 
the  best  life,  vii.  i  ;  in  compari- 
son with  it,  all  existing  govern- 
ments may  be  called  perversions, 
iv.  8,  §  I. 

State,  the  best  [under  ordinary 
circumstances], iv.  i ,§  3;  1 1 ,  §  2 1 
(cp.  ii.  6,  §  16). 

State,  the  best  [for  mankind  in 
general],  iv.  i,  §  3;  11,  §1. 

Statesman,  the,  is  properly  con- 
cerned with  the  natural  art  of 
acquisition  only,  i.  8,  §  15;  lo, 
§  I ;  ought  also  to  be  acquainted 
with  the  art  of  money-making, 
ib.  II,  §13;  must  be  able  to  re- 
cognize evils  at  their  commence- 
ment, v.  4,  §  3  ;   8,  §  9  ;  must 


not  despise  small  things,  ib.  3, 
§10;  4>  §  1;  7,  §11;  8,  §2; 
must  he  have  virtue,  or  is  skill 
alone  sufficient  ?  ib.  9,  §§1-4; 
must  know  the  real  effect  of 
political  measures,  ib.  §  9 ; 
will  use  fear  as  a  means  to  bind 
the  state  together,  ib.  8,  §  8  ; 
will  not  suppose  that  the  great- 
ness of  the  state  depends  merely 
on  size,  vii.  4,  §  4;  the  life  of  the 
statesman  contrasted  with  the 
life  of  the  philosopher,  ib.  2,§  6. 

Statesman,  the,  the  rule  of,  dif- 
ferent from  other  kinds  of  rule, 
i-  1,  §2;  3,  §4;  7,  §1. 

Stentor,  vii.  4,  §  11. 

Sybaris,  v.  3,  §§  11,  12. 

Symposium,  the,  of  Plato  :  see 
Plato. 

Sjrracuse,  i.  7,  §  2  ;  iii.  15,  §  16; 

V.  3,  §§5j  13;  4,  §§1-4.9;  5. 
§  10;  6,  §  8;  10,  §§6,  23,  28, 
30-2;  II,  §§7,  10;  12,  §§6, 
12. 
Syrtis  (?),  a  district  of  Southern 
Italy,  vii.  10,  §  5. 

Tarentum,  iv.  4.,  §  21  ;  v.  3,  §  7  ; 

7.  §  2  ;  vi.  5,  §  ID. 
Telecles,  of  Miletus,  iv.  14,  §4. 
Tenedos,  iv.  4,  §  21. 
Thales,  of  Miletus,  i.  1 1 ,  §  8  : — 

[probably  the  Cretan  poet],  ii. 
,12,  §7. 
Theagenes,  tyrant  of  Megara,  v. 

5,  §9- 
Thebes,    ii.   9,    §§  10,    16;    12, 
§10;  iii.  5,  §7;  V.  3,  §5;  6, 

.§15;  vi.  7,§4- 
Iheodectes,  quoted,  i.  6,  §  7. 
Theodorus,    the  actor,   vii.   17, 

§13- 
1  heopompus,  king  of  Sparta,  v. 

II,  §  2. 
Thera,  one  of  the  Sporades,  iv. 

4'  §  5- 


3r2 


Index 


Thessaly,  ii.  5,  §  22  ;  9,  §  3; 
vii.  12,  §  3. 

Thetes,  the  (in  Solon's  constitu- 
tion), ii.  12,  §  6. 

Thibron,  vii.  14,  §  17. 

Thirty,  the,  government  of,  at 
Athens,  v.  6,  §  6. 

Thracians,  the,  vii.  2,  §  10. 

Thrasybulus  (brother  of  Hiero), 
V.  10,  §  31  ;  12,  §6. 

Thrasybulus,  tyrant  of  Miletus, 
iii.  13,  §  16;  V.  ro,  §  13. 

Thrasyllns,  viii.  6,  §  12. 

Thrasymachus,  v.  5,  §  4. 

Thurii,  v.  3,  §§11,  12  ;  7,  §§  9, 
12. 

Timophanes  of  Corinth,  v.  6, 
§12. 

Timophanes,  of  Mitylene,  v.  4, 
§6. 

Trade :  see  Commerce. 

Traders,  the  employments  of,  de- 
void of  moral  excellence,  vi.  4, 
§12;  vii.  9,  §  3 ;  ought  to  be 
excluded  from  citizenship,  vii. 
9,  §  3  ;  admitted  to  office  at 
Thebes  after  they  had  retired 
from  business  ten  years,  iii.  5, 

§  7  ;  vi.  7,  §  4- 

Triopium,  promontory  near 
Cnidus,  ii.  10,  §  3. 

Troezen,  v.  3,  §  11 ;  vii.  16,  §  7. 

Tyrannicide,  esteemed  honour- 
able in  Hellag,  v.  10,  §  26. 

Tyranny,  the  government  of  the 
monarch  who  rules  for  his  own 
interests,  iii.  7,  §  5  ;  8,  §  2  ;  iv. 
io»  §  3  ;  V.  10,  §  9 ;  akin  to 
democracy,  iv.  4,  §  27  ;  v.  10, 
§§  II,  30;  II,  §  12  ;  hardly  to 
be  called  a  constitution,  iv.  8, 
§  I  ;  10,  §  I ;  the  perversion  of 
royalty,  iii.  7.  §  5  ;  i7)  §  '  J  iv. 
2,  §  2  ;  4,  §27;  5,  §2;  10, 
§  3  ;  does  not  rest  upon  natural 
justice  or  expediency,  iii.  i7> 
§  I  ;   has  all  the  vices  both  of 


democracy    and   oligarchy,   v. 

10,  §§  II,  30,  35  ;  is  unendur- 
able to  freemen,  iv.  10,  §4  ;  v. 

11,  S  1 3  ;  may  arise  either  from 
extreme  oligarchy  or  democracy, 
iv.  1 1 ,  §  1 1  ;  V.  8,  §  7 ;  in  Sicily, 
often  arose  out  of  oligarchy,  v. 

12,  §13;  was  common  in  an- 
cient times,  owing  to  the  great 
powers  of  the  magistrates,  ib.  5, 
§8;  10,  §  5  ;  always  a  short- 
lived government,  ib.  la,  §  i  ; 
rarely  becomes  hereditary,  ib. 
io>  §  33  >  causes  of  revolution 
in  tyrannies,  ib.  10 ;  means  of 
their  preservation,  ib.  1 1  ; 
governments  into  which  tyranny 
may  change,  ib.  1 2 ,  §  1 1 . 

Tyrant,  the,  is  the  natural  enemy 
of  the  freeman,  iv.  10,  §4;  v. 
II,  §  13  ;  cuts  off  his  rivals,  iii. 

13,  §§  16  19;  y.  10,  §13;  II, 
§  5  ;  rules  over  involuntary  sub- 
jects as  the  king  over  voluntary, 
iii.  14,  §  7;  aims  at  pleasure, 
the  king  at  honour,  v.  10,  §  10; 
is  guarded  by  mercenaries,  iii. 

14,  §  7  ;  V.  10,  §  10  ;  sometimes 
obliged  to  emancipate  the  slaves, 
V.  II,  §  32  ;  is  much  under  the 
influence  of  flatterers,  iv.  4, 
§  28;  V.  II,  §  12  ;  destroys  the 
spirit  and  confidence  of  his 
subjects,  V.  II,  §§4,  13,  15; 
sends  spies  among  them,  ib.  §  7 ; 
incites  them  to  quarrel,  ib.  §  8  ; 
oppresses  them  by  war  and  taxa- 
tion, ib. ;  distrusts  his  friends, 
ib.  §  10  ;  gives  licence  to  slaves 
and  women,  ib.  §11;  vi.  4,  §  20; 
loves  the  bad,  v.  1 1,  §12;  pre- 
fers foreigners  to  citizens,  ib. 
§  14;  is  capable  of  any  wicked- 
ness, ib. ;  is  full  of  self-indul- 
gence and  sensuality,  ib.  §23; 
may  also  preserve  his  tyranny  by 
playing    the     '  father     of    his 


Index 


3f3 


country,'  ib.  §§  17-33;  must  be 
on  his  guard  against  assassins, 
especially  against  those  who 
think  that  they  have  been  in- 
sulted, ib.  §  30  ;  must  conciliate 
the  poor  or  the  rich,  whichever 
is  the  stronger,  ib.  §  32. 

Tyrants,  the,  of  Hellenic  cities 
put  down  by  the  Lacedae- 
monians, iii.  2,  §  3  ;  V.  10,  §  30  ; 
of  Sicily,  by  the  Syracusans,  v. 
10,  §30. 

Tyrants,  most  of  the  ancient, 
originally  demagogues,  v.  5, 
§  6 ;  10,  §  4  ;  sometimes  great 
magistrates,  or  kings,  ib.  5,  §  8 ; 

10,  §5- 

Tyrrhenians,  the,  iii.  9,  §  6. 
Tyrtaeus,  v.  7,  §  4. 

Usury,  the  most  unnatural  mode 
of  money-making,   i.  10,  5  5  5 

11,  §3- 

Utility,  too  much  regarded  by 
Hellenic  legislators,  vii.  14, 
§15;  is  not  the  sole  aim  of 
education,  viii.  2,  §  3;  3,  §  11 ;  is 
not  sought  after  by  men  of  noble 
mind,  ib.  3,  §  12. 

Village,the,acolony  of  the  family, 
i.  3,  §  6 ;  the  state  a  union  of 
villages,  ib.  §  8. 

Virtue,  the  especial  characteristic 
of  aristocratical  governments,  ii. 
II,  §§5-10;  iv.  7;  v.  7,  §§5- 
7 ;  often  allied  to  force,  i.  6,  §  3 ; 
more  a  concern  of  household 
management  than  wealth,  ib. 
1 3>  §  I ;  depends  upon  the  supre- 
macy of  the  rational  principle  in 
the  soul,  ib.  §  6  ;  vii.  14,  §  9  ; 
i5>  §9;  cannot  be  included 
under  a  general  definition,  i.  13, 
§  10 ;  must  be  taught  to  the 
slave  by  liis  master,  ib.  §12; 
ought  to  be  the  aim  and  care 


of  the  state,  iii.  9,  §§6-8;  vii. 
13.  §9  (cp.  iv.  7,  §4);  gives  a 
claim  to  superiority  in  the  state, 
iii.  9,  §§  14,  15;  13,  §1;  has 
many  kinds,  ib.  7,  §  4 ;  cannot 
ruin  those  who  possess  her,  ib. 
10,  §  2  ;  is  a  mean,  iv.  11,  §  3  ; 
how  far  required  in  the  great 
officers  of  state,  v.  9,  §§  1-4; 
must  be  at  least  pretended  by 
the  tyrant,  ib.  ir,  §§  25,  34;  is 
regarded  as  a  secondary  object 
by  mankind,  vii.  i,  §  6  : — can- 
not be  separated  from  happiness, 
vii.  I,  §  3 ;  2,  §  2  ;  3,  §  I  ;  8, 
§5;  9'  §3;  13.  §5;  results 
from  nature,  habit,  and  reason, 
ib.  13,  §§10-13;  1.=).  §§7-io; 
is  not  a  matter  of  chance,  ib.  13, 
§  9  ;  how  far  consistent  with  the 
political  life,  ib.  2 ;  3 ;  should  it 
be  made  the  aim  of  education? 
viii.  2 ;  consists  in  hating  and  lov- 
ing and  rejoicing  aright,  ib.  5, 
§  1 7  : — should  not  (as  is  done  by 
the  Lacedaemonians)  be  sup- 
posed inferior  to  external  goods, 
ii-  9)  §  35  (cp.  vii.  i,  §  5) ;  nor  be 
practised  with  a  view  to  the 
single  object  of  success  in  war, 
ii-  9>  §34;  vii.  2,  §9;  14,  §16; 
i5i  §  6  : — the  virtue  proper  to 
the  slave,  the  woman,  the  child, 
i-  13)  §§  1-3 ;  of  the  ruler  and 
the  subject  different,  ib.  §§  4-6; 
iii.  4,  §§  7-18  ;  of  the  ruler, 
practical  wisdom,  of  the  subject, 
true  opinion,  iii.  4,  §  18 ;  of 
men  and  women  not  the  same, 
'•  13.  §§3,  9-11;  iii-  4.  §16; 
less  required  in^the  artisan  than 
the  slave,  i.  13,  §  12  (cp.  vii. 
9)  §7);  ofthe  citizen  relative  to 
the  constitution,  iii.  4,  §§  1-7  ; 
iv.  7,  §3;  V.  9,  §  I  ;  ofthe  good 
man  absolute,  iii.  4,  §§  1-7  ; 
vii.  I3>  §7;  of  the  good  citizen: 


3^4 


Index 


— is  it  identical  with  that  of 
the  good  man  ?  iii.  4  ;  5,  §  10  ; 
18  ;  vii.  14,  §8;  of  the  citizen 
in  the  perfect  state,  iii.  4,  §  5  ; 
13.  §  12;  iv.  7,  §2. 
Virtue,  military,  is  found  in  the 
masses,  iii.  7,  §  4 ;  the  social, 
is  justice,  i.  2,  §  16;    iii.   13, 

§3- 
Virtues,  the,  of  women  and  child- 
ren important  to  the  state,  i. 
13.  §  15  ;  i'-9i  §5  ;  of  the  state 
and  the  individual  the  same, 
vii.  1,  §  13  ;  of  the  military  life, 
ii.  9,  §§  II,  34;  vii.  15,'  §3; 
of  leisure,  vii.  15,  §  i. 

War,  a  part  of  the  art  of  acqui- 
sition when  directed  against 
wild  beasts  and  against  men  who 
are  intended  by  nature  to  be 
slaves,  i.  7,  §5;  8,  §12;  vii. 

3,  §  15  ;  14,  §  21  ;  exists forthe 
sake  of  peace,  vii.  14,  §§  13,22  ; 
15,  §  I ;  a  school  of  virtue,  ii. 
9,  §  II  ;  a  remedy  against  the 
dangers  of  prosperity,  vii.  15, 
§  3 ;  constant  war  a  part  of 
tyrannical  policy,  v.  11,  §  10  ; 
success  in  war  the  sole  object  of 
the  Lacedaemonian  and  Cretan 
constitutions,  ii.  9,  §§  34,  35  ; 
vii.  2,  §9;  14,  516;  15,  §6; 
progress  in  war  : — invention  of 
tactics,  iv.  13,  §10; — of  siege 
machines,  vii.  II,  §9;  improve- 
ment of  fortifications,  ib.  §  12. 

War,  captives  taken  in,  ought 
they  to  be  made  slaves?!.  6, 
§§  1-8. 

\\  ar,  the  Peloponnesian  ;  losses 
of  the  Athenian  nobility,  v.  3, 
§  7  ;  battle  of  Oenophyta,  ib. 
§  5  ; — capture  of  Mitylene,  ib. 

4,  §  6  ; — battle  of  Mantinea,  ib. 
§  9  ; — the  Sicilian  expedition, 
ib. ; — the    Four     Hundred    at 


Athens,  ib.  §  13  ;  6,  §  6  ; — the 
Thirty,  ib.  6,  §  6. 
War,  the  Persian,  v.  3,  §  7  ;  4, 
§§4,  8  ;  7,  §  4  ;  effect  of,  upon 
Athens,  ii.  12,  §  5  ;  v.  4,  §  8  ; 
viii.  6,  §  II : — the  Sacred,  v.  4, 

§7. 

Wealth,  always  antagonistic  to 
poverty,  iv.  4,  §  19;  forms  an 
element  of  the  state,  ii.  7,  §  16 ; 
iv.  4.  §  '5;  vii.  8,  §§7,9;  in- 
cludes many  varieties,  i.  8,  §  3  ; 
iv.  3,  §  2 ;  [the  true  kind]  has 
a  limit,  i.  8,  §  14  ;  9,  §§  i,  12  ; 
popularly  confused  with  coin, 
ib.  9,  §§  10,  14  ;  not  so  much  a 
concern  of  household  manage- 
ment as  virtue,  ib.  13,  §  1 ;  must 
be  used  with  both  temjjerance  and 
liberality,  ii.  6,  §  8 ;  vii.  5,51. 

Wealth,  too  highly  valued  at 
Sparta    and    Carthage,    ii.    9, 

§§  7,  13;  II,  §§  8-12;  iv-  7, 
§  4 ;  the  chief  characteristic  of 
oligarchy,  ii.  1 1 ,  §  9  ;  iii.  8,  §  7  ; 
iv.  4'  §§3>  19;  V.  10,  511  ;  vi. 
2,  §  7  ;  confers  a  claim  to  supe- 
riority in  the  state,  iii.  9,  §§  4- 
6,  15;  12,  §§8,  9;  13,  §§  1-5; 
popularly  associated  with  good 
birth  and  education,  iv.  8,  §§4, 
8;  V.  7,  §  I.     See  Riches. 

Wealthy,  the,  have  the  external 
advantages  of  which  the  want 
tempts  men  to  crime,  ii.  7,  §  10; 
iv.  8,  §  3  ;  are  apt  to  be  spoiled 
by  the  luxury  in  which  they  are 
reared,  iv.  1 1 ,  §  6  ;  v.  9,  §13; 
form  one  of  the  classes  necessary 
to  the  state,  iv.  14,  §  15;  vii. 
8,  §§7,  9.     See  Rich. 

Whole,  the,  must  be  resolved  into 
its  parts,  i.  i,  §  3  ;  8,  §  i ;  prior 
and  therefore  superior  to  the 
parts, ib.  2,  §§12-14;  ii'-  i7» 
§  7 ;  the  part  belongs  entirely 
to  the  whole,  i.  4,  §  5  ;    every 


Index 


15J 


whole  lias  a  ruling  element, 
ifj-  5.  §  3  ;  the  whole  and  the 
part  have  the  same  iiUetest,  ib. 
6,  §  lo  ;  the  virtue  of  the  parts 
relative  to  the  virtue  of  the 
whole,  ib.  13,  §  i?  ;  the  happi- 
ness of  the  whole  dependent  on 
the  happiness  of  the  parts,  ii.  5, 
§  27  ;  vii.  9,  I  7 ;  the  sophism 
that  •  if  the  parts  are  little  the 
whole  is  little,'  v.  8,  §3;  the 
care  of  the  part  and  the  care  of 
the  whole  inseparable,  viii.  i . 

^^  Oman,  the,  has  a  different 
virtue  to  the  man,  i.  13,  §§  3- 
12  ;  iii.  4,  §  16  ;  shares  in  the 
deliberative  faculty,  i-  13,  §  7- 

^\'omen,  should  be  trained  with 
a  view  to  the  state,  i.  13,  §  15 
(cp.  ii.  9,  §  5) ;  cannot  have 
the  same  pursuits  as  men,  ii.  5, 
§  24;  said  tohave  been  common 
among  certain  Libyan  tribes,  ib. 
3,  §9;  have  great  influence 
among  warlike  races,  ib.  9,  §  7  ; 
caused  great  harm  to  Sparta  by 
their  disorder  and  licence,  ib. 
§§5-13;  possessed  two-fifths  of 
the  land  in  Laconia,  ib.  §  15  ; 
too  proud  in  oligarchies  to  be 
controlled,  iv.  15,  §13;  have 
often  ruined  tyrannies  by  their 
insolence,  v.  11,  §23;  are 
allowed  great  licence  in  demo- 


cracies and  tyrannies,  ib.  11, 
§11;  vi.  4,  §  20 ;  commonly 
cease  to  bear  children  after  fifty, 
vii.  16,  §§5,  16;  should  not 
marry  too  young,  ib.  §  6  ;  im- 
part their  nature  to  their  off- 
spring, ib.  §  14. 
\Vomen  and  children,  the  com- 
munity of,  proposed  by  Plato, 
ii.  I,  §  3  ;  12,  §  12  ;  he  has  not 
explained  whether  he  would 
extend  it  to  the  dependent 
classes, ib.  5,  §§  18-24; — objec- 
tions of  Aristotle:  (i)  unity 
would  not  be  promoted,  ib.  3, 
§  2 ;  ( 2  )  there  would  be  a  genera  1 
neglect  of  the  children,  ib.  §  4  ; 

(3)  the  parentage  of  the  children 
could  not  be  concealed,  ib.  §  8; 

(4)  expiations  would  be  impos- 
sible, ib.  4,  §  I  ;  ,5)  the  conceal- 
ment of  relationship  would  lead 
to  unnatural  crimes,  ib.  §§  1-3, 
10;  (6)  affection  would  be 
weakened,  ib.  §§4-9;  (7) the 
transfer  of  children  to  another 
rank  would  be  found  impractic- 
able, ib.  §  10  ;  (8)  the  household 
would  be  neglected,  ib.  5,  §  24. 

Xerxes,   King  of  Persia,  v.   10, 
§21. 

Zaleucus,  ii.  12,  §  7. 
Zancle,  v.  3,  §  12. 


OXFORD 

PKINTED  AT  THE  CLARENDON   PRESS 

BY  HORACE  HART,   MA. 

PRINTER  TO  THE  UNIVERSITY 


University  of  California 

SOUTHERN  REGIONAL  LIBRARY  FACILITY 

Return  this  material  to  the  library 

from  which  it  was  borrowed. 


UC  SOUTHERN  REGIONAL  LIBRARY  FACILITY 


A     000  191  454     8 


i]|:|lS;'| 

,.;,..;,,   ...^,^^M,„-^ 

1 

