@@ 19
Her mother-in-law, too, had at first been turned against her by the whispering of malicious servants. But she won her over so completely by respectful attention, by patient endurance and by gentleness, that the older woman went of her own accord to her son and exposed the meddling tongues that had been disturbing the peace of the household between herself and her daughter-in-law, and asked him to punish them. So, in obedience to his mother, and for the good order of the family, he had those she had exposed whipped, as she wished. Then she promised the same reward to anyone who spoke badly of her daughter-in-law to her in the hope of pleasing her. After that no one dared to, and the two of them lived together in a remarkable sweetness of mutual kindness.

@@ 20
You also gave this great gift, O my God, my mercy, to that good handmaid of Yours, in whose womb You created me. Wherever she could, she showed herself such a peacemaker between people who disagreed and were at odds that, though she heard the most bitter things from each side, the sort of thing that swollen, undigested resentment tends to belch out when the raw matter of hatred is breathed out in sour conversation to a friend who is present against an enemy who is absent, she never revealed anything of what one said to the other, except what might help to reconcile them. This might seem a small good to me, if I did not know, to my sorrow, countless people who, through some horrible and far-spreading infection of sin, not only report to angry enemies what their angry enemies have said, but even add things that were never said at all. Yet to a humane person it ought to seem too little merely to avoid stirring up or increasing people's hostility by speaking ill, unless he also tries to put it out by speaking well. Such was she, and it was You, her innermost Teacher, who taught her in the school of the heart.

@@ 21
In the end she also won her own husband for You, toward the very close of his earthly life. And once he was a believer, she did not have to mourn in him what she had put up with from him before he believed. She was also the servant of Your servants. Any of them who knew her praised, honored and loved You greatly in her, because they sensed Your presence in her heart, witnessed by the fruits of her holy way of life. For she had been the wife of one husband, had repaid her parents, had managed her household devoutly, and was well known for good works. She had brought up children, going through the labor of giving birth to them again each time she saw them straying from You. Lastly, O Lord, as for all of us Your servants (since by Your gift You allow us to speak), who before she fell asleep in You were already living together as companions, having received the grace of Your baptism, she took care of us as though she had been the mother of us all, and served us as though she had been the child of us all.

@@ 22
As the day drew near on which she was to leave this life, a day You knew and we did not, it happened, through You arranging it, I believe, in Your hidden ways, that she and I were standing alone, leaning on a window that looked out onto the garden of the house where we were staying, there at Ostia. There, far from the crowds, after the hardships of a long journey, we were regaining our strength for the sea voyage. So we were talking together alone, very sweetly. Forgetting the things that are behind and reaching out to the things that are ahead, we were asking each other, in the presence of the Truth, which You are, what the eternal life of the saints would be like, which eye has not seen, nor ear heard, nor has it entered into the heart of man. And yet we opened wide the mouth of our heart to the streams on high from Your fountain, the fountain of life that is with You, so that, sprinkled from it as far as we could take it in, we might in some way think about so great a thing.

@@ 23
And our conversation reached this point: that the greatest delight of the bodily senses, in the purest bodily light, seemed, beside the joy of that life, not only unworthy of comparison but not even worth mentioning. Then, lifting ourselves up with a more burning love toward the "Self-same," we passed step by step through all bodily things, even through the heaven itself from which sun and moon and stars shine down on the earth. And we climbed higher still, by inward thought and talk and wonder at Your works. And we came to our own minds, and went beyond them, to reach that region of unfailing abundance where You feed Israel forever on the food of truth. There life is Wisdom, through whom all these things are made, both those that have been and those that will be; and she herself is not made, but is as she has been, and will be so forever. Or rather, "having been" and "going to be" are not in her at all, but only "being," since she is eternal. For "having been" and "going to be" are not eternal. And while we were speaking of her and longing for her, we touched her slightly, with the whole force of our heart. And we sighed, and left the first fruits of the Spirit bound there, and came back to the sound of our own mouths, where a word has both a beginning and an end. And what is like Your Word, our Lord, who remains in Himself without growing old, and makes all things new?

@@ 24
So we said: Suppose that for someone the tumult of the flesh fell silent; that the images of earth and water and air fell silent; that the poles of heaven fell silent too; that the soul itself fell silent to itself and passed beyond itself by not thinking of itself; that dreams and imagined revelations fell silent, and every tongue and every sign, and everything that exists only by passing away. For if anyone could hear them, all these things say, We did not make ourselves; He made us who remains forever. Suppose that, having said this, they too fell silent, having turned our ears toward Him who made them, and He alone spoke, not through them but through Himself, so that we heard His Word, not through any tongue of flesh, nor the voice of an Angel, nor the sound of thunder, nor the dark riddle of a likeness, but heard Him whom we love in these things, heard His very Self without them, just as we two had now stretched ourselves out and in swift thought touched that eternal Wisdom which remains above all things. Suppose this went on, and all other visions of a far lower kind were taken away, and this one alone seized, absorbed and wrapped up its beholder in these inward joys, so that life might be forever like that one moment of understanding we had sighed for: would this not be, Enter into the joy of your Lord? And when will that be? When we all rise again, though we shall not all be changed?
