@@ 32
"Maker of all things, Lord and Ruler of the heights, who clothe the day in splendid light and pour gentle sleep over the night, so that rest may give our limbs back their strength for work, lift up weary minds that sink and cower, and set anxious sorrows free."

@@ 33
And then, little by little, my old thoughts of Your handmaid came back to me: her devout life toward You, and her holy tenderness and attentiveness toward us, of which I had suddenly been deprived. And I felt like weeping in Your sight, about her and for her, about myself and for myself. And I let the tears I had held back before flow as much as they wanted, and I made them a bed for my heart. It rested on them, because it was Your ears that heard, not those of some man who would have given my weeping a scornful interpretation. And now, Lord, I confess it to You in writing. Let anyone who wants to read it, and interpret it however he likes. And if he finds sin in it, that I wept for my mother for a small part of an hour, the mother who was dead for the time being to my eyes, who had wept for me for so many years so that I might live in Your eyes, let him not laugh at me. Rather, if he is a person of great charity, let him himself weep for my sins before You, the Father of all the brothers of Your Christ.

@@ 34
But now, with my heart healed of that wound, in which it might be blamed for a feeling of the flesh, I pour out to You, our God, on behalf of that handmaid of Yours, a very different kind of tears. They flow from a spirit shaken by the thought of the dangers facing every soul that dies in Adam. Although she had been made alive in Christ, and even before her release from the flesh had lived in such a way that Your name was praised for her faith and her way of life, still I do not dare to say that from the time You gave her new birth in baptism, no word came out of her mouth against Your Commandment. Your Son, the Truth, has said, Whoever says to his brother, You fool, will be in danger of the fire of hell. And woe even to the praiseworthy life of human beings, if You were to set mercy aside and examine it! But because You do not search out our sins to the uttermost, we hope with confidence to find some place with You. And whoever lists his true merits before You, what is he listing but Your own gifts? Oh, if only human beings would recognize that they are human, and that whoever boasts would boast in the Lord!

@@ 35
So I, O my Praise and my Life, God of my heart, setting aside for a while her good deeds, for which I thank You with joy, now plead with You for my mother's sins. Hear me, I beg You, through the Medicine for our wounds, who hung on the tree and who now, sitting at Your right hand, intercedes with You for us. I know that she acted mercifully, and forgave her debtors their debts from her heart. Now You also forgive her debts, whatever she may have run up in all those years since the water of salvation. Forgive her, Lord, forgive her, I beg You; do not enter into judgment with her. Let Your mercy triumph over Your justice, since Your words are true and You have promised mercy to the merciful. It was You who gave them to be merciful, You who will have mercy on whom You will have mercy, and will have compassion on whom You have had compassion.

@@ 36
And I believe You have already done what I am asking. But accept, O Lord, the freely given offerings of my mouth. For when the day of her dissolution was near, she gave no thought to having her body wrapped in costly cloths or embalmed with spices. She did not wish for a special monument, or to be buried in her own country. She gave us no instructions about such things. She wished only that her name be remembered at Your Altar, which she had served without missing a single day. For she knew that from it the holy Sacrifice is given out, by which the written charge against us is wiped away, and through which the enemy was defeated: he who adds up our offenses and looks for something to accuse us of found nothing in Him, in whom we conquer. Who will give back to Him His innocent blood? Who will pay Him back the price with which He bought us, and so take us away from Him? To the Sacrament of this ransom of ours Your handmaid bound her soul with the bond of faith. Let no one tear her away from Your protection. Let neither the lion nor the dragon thrust himself in, whether by force or by trickery. For she will not answer that she owes nothing, in case she is convicted and seized by the cunning accuser. She will answer that her sins have been forgiven her by Him to whom no one can repay the price that He, who owed nothing, paid for us.

@@ 37
So may she rest in peace with her husband, before and after whom she had no other; whom she obeyed, bringing forth fruit for You with patience, so that she might win him for You as well. And inspire, O Lord my God, inspire Your servants, my brothers, Your sons, my masters, whom I serve with voice and heart and pen, so that all who read these Confessions may remember at Your Altar Monnica, Your handmaid, together with Patricius, once her husband, through whose bodies You brought me into this life, how I do not know. May they remember with devout affection those who were my parents in this passing light, my brothers under You our Father in our Catholic Mother, and my fellow citizens in that eternal Jerusalem which Your pilgrim people long for from their setting out until their return there. So may my mother's last request of me be fulfilled for her more richly through the prayers of many, by means of my confessions, than by my prayers alone.
