Chorus. Greetings, maiden Dirkê, majestic, blessed daughter of Acheloüs! Long ago your cool, silvery waters received the child of Zeus, when his father snatched him from the unquenchable lightning and sealed the baby inside his thigh. The Father called aloud, "Come, Dithyrambus! Enter this womb that belongs to no mother. By this name I now proclaim you to Thebes, God of the Bacchanals." Yet, Dirkê, you drive me away when I bring you the glorious sight of his garlanded celebrations! Why am I rejected, disowned and hated? I swear by the abundant clustered beauty of Dionysus' vine that the time will come when your heart welcomes Dionysus and acknowledges him as its lord.

Chorus. Look how Pentheus reveals his earth-born ancestry, betraying the taint of that ancient dragon's blood, the serpent descended from the earth-born Titan Echion. It has made him a grim-faced monster, like the savage race of giants who fought the immortals, rather than a child of mortal parents. He intends to tie me up at once, though I am Bromius' servant. Today he has imprisoned my companion in the revels inside his palace, shut up in darkness! Dionysus, Zeus's son, can you not see his actions, your prophets struggling against tyranny? Rush down the side of Olympus, brandishing your golden thyrsus. Come to us, our King, and restrain this murderous man's insolent rage.

Chorus. Where are you lingering? On Nysa, mother of wild animals, waving your wand to urge your revellers forward? On the peaks of Corycia reaching towards heaven? Or in the remote forests enfolding Olympus' slopes, where Orpheus once played his harp with such mastery that trees and wild beasts gathered around him in adoration? Three times blessed is the land of Pieria; Evius does you honour! See, he is coming, coming at the head of his dances with Bacchanal songs. Swiftly he will cross the waters of Axius, marshalling his Maenads' leaping feet into the sweeping circles of the dance. He will hasten across Lydias, father of rivers and giver of blessings, whose lovely waters, the story says, roll through the country of brave warhorses and make the land fertile all around.

Dionysus (within). Ho there! Listen to my voice, listen! My Bacchanal company, my Bacchanal company! (The members of the Chorus answer one at a time.)

Chorus 1. What was that cry? Where did it sound from? That was my Evian King's voice!

Dionysus (within). Ho there! Ho there! I, Semelê's child and Zeus's offspring, call to you again.

Chorus 2. Ho there! Our master, our master! Ho there! Come now to your celebrating company, King of Clamour, King of Clamour! (An earthquake.) Earth beneath us, are you rocking back and forth? What a tremendous convulsion! Pentheus' palace will soon be shaken to pieces and come crashing down!

Chorus 3. Inside that palace Dionysus is revealing himself as a God! Give him your reverent worship.

Chorus 4. We bow down before him. (An earthquake.) Look at the stone lintels swaying above those pillars! Now the King of Clamour will send his victorious cry ringing through the palace.

Dionysus (within). Light the glaring red torch of the thunderbolt. Let flames spread all around the palace of Pentheus. (A great blaze of light surrounds the palace and Semelê's monument.)

Chorus 5. Ah! Can you not see the raging fire wrapped around the sacred tomb? Look closely: Semelê, struck by thunder, left it as the memorial of her destruction by Zeus's lightning. Throw yourselves to the ground, Maenads, throw down your bodies trembling with terrible fear! Our King is coming, the child of Zeus, to throw that palace into turmoil and ruin. (The Chorus falls face down. Dionysus comes out of the palace.)
