Messenger. House of that ancient Sidonian father, once prosperous throughout Hellas, who sowed the earth-born serpent's dragon teeth in the ground, how I mourn you! I may be a slave, but loyal servants feel the disasters that strike their masters.

Chorus. What has happened? Do you bring news about the Bacchanals?

Messenger. Echion has lost his son: Pentheus is dead.

Chorus. My King Bromius! You have proved yourself a God!

Messenger. What are you saying? Woman, are you celebrating the misfortune that has struck my master?

Chorus. I am a foreigner singing a joyful foreign song, no longer cowering in fear of imprisonment.

Messenger. Do you think Thebes has so few men left?

Chorus. Dionysus rules me, the King of the Vine, and no city of Thebes belonging to you!

Messenger. That might be excusable, women, except that rejoicing over irreversible disaster is shameful.

Chorus. Tell me, tell me how he met his death, that villain who plotted villainy.

Messenger. We left the homesteads of Thebes, crossed the waters of Asopus and began climbing Kithairon's steep slope: Pentheus, myself, for I stayed beside my master, and the man who was guiding us there. First we sat in a grassy hollow, placing our feet silently and holding our tongues so that we could watch without being watched. There was a ravine enclosed by rocks, flowing with little streams and shaded by pines. The Maenad girls sat there, their hands busy with pleasant tasks. Some wound fresh ivy around faded thyrsi until the trailing tendrils waved again. Others answered one another's Bacchic songs, like young horses freed from the carved yokes of wagons. Poor Pentheus could not see the crowd of women clearly. He said, "Stranger, from here I cannot make out these girls pretending to be Maenads. Let me climb a hillock or a tall pine, and I shall have a good view of their indecency." Then I saw the stranger perform a wonder. He seized the top of a towering pine branch and pulled it down, down, all the way to the dark earth. It curved like a bow, or a wheel tracing its circle on a lathe. That was how his hands bent the mountain branch to the ground, a feat beyond mortal strength! He seated Pentheus on the pine's branches and allowed it to rise, slipping gently through his hands, taking great care not to dislodge him. It soared high into the air with my master enthroned on its tip. He was much more visible to the Maenads than they were to him. Almost as soon as he appeared up there, the stranger vanished from sight. A voice came from heaven, most likely Dionysus' voice, calling, "Women, I bring you the man who means to ridicule you and me and my ceremonies. Take your revenge upon him!" As he called, a terrible pillar of shining fire flashed between earth and sky. The heavens fell silent. In that beautiful grassy ravine the leaves were still; no wild creature made a sound. The women had not heard the voice clearly. They sprang up and glanced sharply from side to side. He called out his command a second time. Then Kadmus' daughters recognised the Bacchic God's order beyond doubt. They raced forward, swift as doves straining in flight: his mother Agavê, her two sisters and all the Bacchanals. Maddened by the God's breath, they leapt through the torrent's gorge and over boulders. When they saw my master sitting in the pine, they first climbed a rock to use as a fortress against him and hurled stones from the stream with all their strength. They threw pine branches like spears; others launched their thyrsi through the air at Pentheus, that miserable target! None reached him. He sat above the reach of their fury, horrified, trapped in despair. Finally they tore oak branches crashing from their trunks and used them as wooden levers against the roots. When all their effort achieved nothing, Agavê cried, "Maenads, surround the trunk and seize it! We must catch the beast crouching up there and prevent him from revealing our God's secret rites!" Countless hands grasped the pine and ripped it out of the soil. From his lofty seat Pentheus crashed down, falling with wild scream after scream, for he knew his death was close. His mother began the killing, like a priest initiating a sacrifice, and threw herself upon him. He tore the coif from his hair so that poor Agavê would recognise him and spare him. Touching her cheek, he cried, "Mother, it is I, your own son! Pentheus, whom you bore in Echion's house! Mother, have mercy! Whatever my offence, do not kill your own child, your very son!" But her mouth foamed, her eyes rolled wildly and her reckless mind was clouded with madness. Possessed by Bacchus, she paid him no attention. Gripping his left arm with both hands and planting her foot against his ribs, she tore his shoulder away. It was the God's power, not her own strength, that made it easy. Ino worked at the other side, tearing his flesh; Autonoë pressed in, and the entire Bacchanal crowd with her. A single terrible sound rose from them: the king's screams while he remained alive, mixed with the women's cries of triumph. One carried an arm, another a foot still wearing its sandal. The flesh was torn in strips from his ribs; with blood-covered hands they threw pieces of Pentheus back and forth. His body lies scattered far apart, some beneath jagged rocks, some tangled in deep woodland shade. Finding it will be difficult. His mother happened to seize his wretched head. She fixed it on the tip of her thyrsus and carries it through Kithairon as though it were a mountain lion's, leaving her sisters dancing their Maenad dance. Exulting in that ghastly prey, she is coming inside the city walls, loudly praising Bacchus as her hunting companion and helper in her successful chase. Tears are the only prize of that triumph! I will leave this miserable sight before Agavê reaches the palace. I believe self-restraint and reverence for the Gods are best. By far the wisest course for human beings is to acquire those qualities and hold firmly to them. (He leaves.)

Chorus. Lift our choral song to Bacchus. Shout for the fall of the king descended from the Serpent's blood, who dressed in a woman's robes and gripped the thyrsus, only to find it his pass into Hades' dwelling. A bull guided him to a disgraceful death! Bacchanal girls of Kadmus, you have won glory, a song of victory that lamentation and tears will drown. What a victorious contest, when a mother dips her fingers into her son's blood! But look, I see Pentheus' mother Agavê hurrying towards the palace, her eyes rolling wildly. Welcome the celebration of our God! (Agavê enters carrying Pentheus' head.)

Agave. You Bacchanals from Asia!

Chorus. Tell me why you are calling to me.

Agave. From the mountainside I bring a freshly cut ivy branch to our house, a splendid prize of hunting.

Chorus. I can see it. Welcome to our celebration.

Agave. I caught him myself, without a single trap! It is a lion, clearly a young lion.

Chorus. Where in the wild country? Tell me where.

Agave. On Kithairon.

Chorus. What has happened on Kithairon?

Agave. Kithairon delivered him to the slaughter.

Chorus. Who was the first to strike him down?

Agave. The prize is mine, mine. The revellers sing in my honour, "Happy Agavê!" That is their refrain.

Chorus. Who else, then?

Agave. A daughter of Kadmus.

Chorus. What about Kadmus are you going to tell us?

Agave. His daughter struck the fierce creature after I did, after me! What good fortune in the hunt! Isn't it splendid?

Agave. Come and join the feast now!

Chorus. Alas! What would I be sharing in?

Agave. This cub is still young and tender. A lovely down is only just growing on its jaws below the crest of waving hair.

Chorus. Yes, that could indeed be the hair of a beast from the wilderness.

Agave. A very skilful hunter roused the gathered Maenads to the chase with all his cunning.

Chorus. Yes, our King Bacchus knows how to hunt.

Agave. Are you praising what I did?

Chorus. What can I do except praise it?

Agave. Yes, and Kadmus' family will soon praise it too.

Chorus. Your son Pentheus will join them.

Agave. Yes, my son will praise me for the prey I have caught, this young lion here.

Chorus. What extraordinary prey!

Agave. Caught in an extraordinary way.

Chorus. Are you pleased?

Agave. I rejoice in the victory I have achieved, beautiful and great, visible to the whole country in the spoils my hands have taken.

Chorus. Poor woman, now show everyone the trophy of victory that you have carried here.

Agave. People of this beautifully towered city in the land of Thebes, come and look at the beast we daughters of Kadmus hunted down. We used neither Thessalian javelins whirled by their straps nor nets, only the white fingers of our own hands. What use are the empty boasts of men who acquire weapons made by armourers, when we caught our prey with bare hands and tore all the monster's limbs apart? Where is my old father? Bring him here. And where is Pentheus, my son? Let him set a ladder against the palace wall and nail this head to the triglyphs, this lion's head I am bringing home from the hunt. (Kadmus enters with attendants carrying a bier.)

Kadmus. Follow me to the palace entrance, servants. Follow with this dreadful burden, Pentheus. After a long and arduous search I found his torn limbs scattered through Kithairon's valleys and brought them here. No two were together; they lay everywhere in the trackless wood. I heard what terrible things my daughters had done just as I entered the city with old Teiresias, returning from the Bacchic celebrations. I turned back to the mountain and now bring home my child, killed by Maenads. There I saw Autonoë, who bore Aktaion to Aristaius, and Ino, both still among the oak groves, poor creatures pierced by frenzy. Someone told me Agavê had danced this way in her Bacchic madness. The report was true: I see her here, a miserable sight!

Agave. Father, you may proudly boast that your daughters are by far the finest women alive, all of them, but especially me. I left the shuttle and loom for a great enterprise, hunting beasts with my hands. You see the prize I carry in my arms, ready to hang against your palace wall. Take it into your hands, Father. Rejoicing in the spoils of my hunt, invite your friends to a feast. You are blessed, truly blessed, to have daughters who have accomplished such things.

Kadmus. What immeasurable anguish blasts my eyes! What a murder these unhappy hands have committed! A fine victim to set before the Gods, a fine feast to invite Thebes and me to! Grief for our suffering! For yours first, then mine! How King Bromius has destroyed us! The God's blow is just, but merciless; is he not a member of our family?

Agave. How bitter old men become, how gloomy their eyes are! May my son grow into a mighty hunter in his mother's mould when he goes out with the young Thebans to pursue his prey! Instead, all he knows is how to fight the Gods! Father, we must warn him against taking pleasure in destructive cleverness. Where is he? Who will call him here to see me and witness my happiness?

Kadmus. Alas! When you realise what you have done, your grief will be terrible! If you could remain in your present state until the end of your life, you would not appear utterly cursed, though you would still lack happiness.

Agave. What is wrong here? What is there to grieve about?

Kadmus. First lift your eyes and look up at the sky.

Agave. There, I am looking. Why do you tell me to look at it?

Kadmus. Does it look as it did before, or has it changed for you?

Agave. It seems brighter, clearer than it was a moment ago.

Kadmus. Is your mind still being tossed about by delirium?

Agave. I don't understand. Yet, yet, it is passing, that mood I was in. I am becoming myself again.

Kadmus. Can you listen now, and answer me with a clear mind?

Agave. Father, I have forgotten what we were saying just now.

Kadmus. Whose house did you enter to the sound of wedding songs?

Agave. Echion's; they say he came from the Dragon's seed.

Kadmus. Whom did you bear to your husband in that house?

Agave. Pentheus, born from my union with his father.

Kadmus. Whose head is that you are carrying in your arms? Whose?

Agave. A lion's head, according to the people who hunted it.

Kadmus. Look closely at it. Looking costs very little effort.

Agave. Ah! What am I seeing? What am I holding in my hands?

Kadmus. Keep looking at it until you know for certain.

Agave. I see the worst of all my suffering! How wretched I am!

Kadmus. Does it still appear to you to be a lion's head?

Agave. No! Misery! Misery! It is Pentheus' head I am holding!

Kadmus. I mourned it before you knew what it was.

Agave. Who killed him? How did he come into my hands?

Kadmus. What a pitiful truth, arriving at this cruel moment!

Agave. Tell me! My heart is pounding as it waits for its sentence.

Kadmus. You did! You and those sisters of yours killed him.

Agave. Where did he die? Was he at home, or somewhere else?

Kadmus. Where the hounds once tore Aktaion to pieces.

Agave. How did the poor boy come to be on Kithairon?

Kadmus. He went to ridicule the God and the wild rites you performed.

Agave. But why had we ourselves travelled to that place?

Kadmus. Madness possessed you. The whole of Thebes was wild with Bacchus.

Agave. Dionysus has destroyed us! Now I understand it.

Kadmus. You mocked him and refused to accept that he was a God.

Agave. Father, where is the body of my beloved son?

Kadmus. I have brought it here, after a difficult search to find it.

Agave. Have all the limbs been properly joined together again?

Kadmus. Yes; now I place this dearly loved head with them.

Agave. But what part did Pentheus play in my madness?

Kadmus. Like you, he refused to honour the God. So the God overwhelmed you all in a single disaster, you and this prince, destroying our entire house and me as well. I had no son of my own, and now, unhappy daughter, I see the child you bore killed in this horrible, shameful way. My son, our household looked to you as the support of my ancient home, my daughter's child. The city feared you. No one who saw you, noble head, dared to mock the old man; you would have made him pay for it! Now I shall be driven from my palace in disgrace, great Kadmus, who sowed the seed of Thebes and reaped the finest harvest in the world. My dearest child! Even though you are gone, you will always remain my dearest. Never again will you stroke my head, embrace me and call me "Mother's father." Never again will you say, "Who has wronged you, old man? Who has mocked you? Who is troubling you and disturbing your peace? Tell me, Father, so I can punish the wrong." Now anguish has struck me down, and you are wretched, your mother sorrowful, her sisters wretched too! Let anyone who despises the Gods consider this man's death and learn to believe.

Chorus. Kadmus, I share your grief. Your daughter's son has met a just fate, but it is bitter indeed for you.

Agave. Father, you can see the change that has come over me.

Dionysus. You will be transformed into a serpent. Your wife Harmonia, Ares' daughter whom you married as a human, will likewise become a snake. Zeus's oracle declares that you and your wife will drive an ox-drawn wagon at the head of foreign hordes. With your innumerable army you will sack many cities. But when they plunder Loxias' shrine, a bitter journey home awaits them. Ares will rescue you and Harmonia and settle you in the Blessed Land to live. I, Dionysus, say this, born of Zeus and no mortal father. If you had learned wisdom when you refused it, you would now be blessed, with Zeus's son standing as your defender.

Agave. Dionysus, hear our plea! We admit our wrongdoing.

Dionysus. You acknowledge me too late; you refused when the time was yours.

Agave. We admit that, but your revenge has gone beyond all measure.

Dionysus. You treated me with contempt, though I am a God.

Agave. Gods should not behave like human beings in their anger.

Dionysus. My father Zeus decided this long before today.

Agave. Alas! Our miserable fate of exile is now fixed!

Dionysus. Why postpone the fate that must happen? (He leaves.)

Kadmus. Daughter, what dreadful misery has fallen upon us, upon you—poor child!—your sisters and your son! I must travel in sorrow among foreign peoples, a grey-haired wanderer. I am also condemned to lead a mixed foreign army against the Greeks. As a serpent I shall take my wife Harmonia, Ares' child, herself a snake, against the altars and tombs of our own Hellas, commanding armed men. Alas, there will be no rest from suffering for me! I shall not even cross Acheron's rushing waters and find peace!

Agave. Father, I shall go into exile deprived of you!

Kadmus. Why wrap your arms round me, unhappy child, like a white swan caring for its helpless father?

Agave. Where can I go, banished from my own country?

Kadmus. I cannot tell you, child. Your father has little help to offer.

Agave. Goodbye, my home, goodbye, towers of my native city! In desperate anguish I leave my marriage chamber and go into exile.

Kadmus. My child, go to the house of Aristaius. Make your home there.

Agave. Father, I grieve for you!

Kadmus. And I grieve for you, my child, and weep for your sisters as well.

Agave. For the tyrannical power of Dionysus has brought this shame down on your household in the most terrible way.

Kadmus. Yes; you committed a dreadful outrage against him by treating his name with contempt in Thebes.

Agave. My father, goodbye.

Kadmus. Goodbye, my unhappy daughter! Ah, how hard you will find it to fare well!

Agave. Guide me to my sisters, my companions in the misery of exile. If only I could hide far away, where accursed Kithairon could not look upon me and my own eyes would never see Kithairon, where nothing recalls the thyrsus-spear! Let other Bacchanals love those things.

Chorus. The Gods reveal their works in many different forms, bringing about many things that no one expected. What we expected, they refuse to fulfil; paths our eyes could not discover, they open before us. That is how this astonishing event has come to pass. (Everyone leaves.)
