@@ 19
But why did I hate Greek so much, which I was taught as a boy? Even now I do not fully understand it. For I loved Latin; not what my first teachers taught me, but what the so-called grammarians taught. Those first lessons, where you learn to read, write and count, I found just as much of a burden and a punishment as any of the Greek. Yet where did this come from too, if not from the sin and vanity of this life, since I was flesh, and a breath that passes away and does not come back? Those first lessons were certainly better, because they were more certain: through them I gained, and still keep, the ability to read whatever I find written and to write whatever I wish myself. In the others, by contrast, I was made to learn by heart the wanderings of some Aeneas or other while forgetting my own, and to weep for dead Dido because she killed herself for love; and all the while, with dry eyes, I put up with my own wretched self dying among these things, far from You, O God my life.

@@ 20
For what is more wretched than a wretch who has no pity on himself, who weeps over the death of Dido, which came from loving Aeneas, but does not weep over his own death, which came from not loving You, O God? You light of my heart, You bread of my inmost soul, You Power who give strength to my mind and life to my thoughts: I did not love You. I committed fornication against You, and all around me, as I did so, the cry rang out, "Well done! Well done!" For the friendship of this world is fornication against You, and "Well done! Well done!" keeps ringing out until a man is ashamed not to be that kind of man. And I did not weep over this, I who wept for Dido, dead, "seeking by the sword a stroke and wound extreme," while I myself was seeking a worse extreme, the furthest and lowest of Your creatures, having abandoned You, earth going down into earth. And if I had been forbidden to read all this, I would have been upset at not being able to read what upset me. Madness like this is considered a nobler and richer kind of learning than the lessons in which I learned to read and write.

@@ 21
But now, my God, cry out in my soul, and let Your truth tell me, "Not so, not so. That first schooling was far better." For look, I would sooner forget the wanderings of Aeneas and everything of that kind than forget how to read and write. It is true that curtains hang over the entrances of the grammar schools; but they are not so much a sign of some hidden mystery as a cover for error. Let those I no longer fear not shout me down, while I confess to You, my God, whatever my soul wishes, and accept the condemnation of my evil ways, so that I may love Your good ways. Let neither the sellers nor the buyers of grammar shout me down. For if I ask them whether it is true, as the poet says, that Aeneas once came to Carthage, the less educated will answer that they do not know, and the more educated that he never did. But if I ask how the name "Aeneas" is spelled, everyone who has learned this will give me the right answer, according to the signs people have agreed on among themselves. And again, if I ask which could be forgotten with less harm to the business of life, reading and writing or these poetic fictions, who cannot foresee the answer that anyone would give who has not entirely forgotten himself? So I sinned as a boy when I preferred those empty studies to the more useful ones, or rather, when I loved the one and hated the other. "One and one make two"; "two and two make four": to me this was a hateful singsong; while "the wooden horse full of armed men," and "the burning of Troy," and "Creusa's shade and sad similitude" were the spectacle my vanity loved most.

@@ 22
Why, then, did I hate Greek literature, which tells the same kind of tales? For Homer too was skilled at weaving such fictions, and is most sweetly vain; yet to me as a boy he tasted bitter. I suppose Virgil would taste the same to Greek boys, if they were forced to learn him the way I was forced to learn Homer. It was the difficulty, of course, the sheer difficulty of a foreign language, that sprinkled gall, as it were, over all the sweetness of the Greek stories. I did not understand a single word, and I was pressed hard, with cruel threats and punishments, to make me understand. There was a time too, in infancy, when I knew no Latin at all; yet I learned it just by paying attention, without any fear or pain, amid the cuddles of my nurses and the jokes of people who smiled at me and played with me and cheered me on. I learned it without any pressure of punishment driving me, because my own heart drove me to bring its thoughts to birth, and I could only do that by learning words, not from people who taught me but from people who talked with me, and into whose ears I in turn brought to birth whatever I was thinking. This makes it plain that free curiosity does more to help us learn such things than frightening compulsion. Yet compulsion holds in check the wanderings of that freedom, through Your laws, O my God, Your laws, from the teacher's cane to the trials of the martyrs; for Your laws are able to mix for us a healthy bitterness, calling us back to You from the deadly pleasure that lures us away from You.

@@ 23
Hear my prayer, Lord; do not let my soul give way under Your discipline, and do not let me give up confessing to You all Your mercies, by which You have pulled me out of all my worst ways, so that You might become sweeter to me than all the attractions I used to chase; so that I may love You with all my strength and hold on to Your hand with all my heart, and so that You may still rescue me from every temptation, right to the end. For look, O Lord, my King and my God: let whatever useful thing I learned as a boy serve You; let it serve You that I speak, write, read and count. For while I was learning vain things, You gave me Your discipline, and You have forgiven me the sin of taking delight in those vain things. It is true that I learned many useful words in them; but those words can just as well be learned in things that are not vain, and that is the safe road for young feet to walk.

@@ 24
But woe to you, you torrent of human custom! Who can stand against you? How long before you run dry? How long will you keep rolling the sons of Eve into that vast and terrifying ocean, which even those who have climbed onto the cross can barely cross? Did I not read in you of Jove, the thunderer and the adulterer? Of course he could not have been both; but this way the pretended thunder could give sanction to real adultery and act as its go-between. And which of our gowned teachers now gives a serious hearing to a man from their own school who cries out, "These were Homer's fictions; he transferred human things to the gods. If only he had brought divine things down to us!" Yet it would be truer to say, "These are his fictions, certainly; but by giving a divine nature to wicked men, he made sure that crimes would no longer be counted as crimes, and that whoever committed them would seem to be imitating not depraved men but the gods of heaven."

@@ 25
And yet, you hellish torrent, the sons of men are thrown into you, with fees paid, to learn such things; and it is made into a grand public affair when this goes on in the forum, in full view of laws that grant a salary on top of the pupils' fees. And you pound against your rocks and roar, "This is where words are learned; this is where you gain eloquence, which is essential for winning your case and setting out your views." As if we would never have known words like "golden shower," "lap," "beguile," "temples of heaven," or the other words in that passage, unless Terence had brought a worthless young man onto the stage who holds up Jupiter as his model for seduction,
