@@ 26
"Gazing at a painting where the tale was shown, Of Jove descending in a golden shower Into the lap of Danae, to beguile a woman."

@@ 27
And then see how he stirs himself up to lust, as if on heaven's authority:

@@ 28
"And what a god! Great Jove, Who makes heaven's highest temples tremble at his thunder,

@@ 29
And I, a poor mortal man, am I not to do the same? I did it, and I did it with all my heart."

@@ 30
The words are not learned one bit more easily because of all this filth; but thanks to the words the filth is committed with less shame. I do not blame the words, which are like choice and precious vessels, but the wine of error that drunken teachers poured out for us in them; and if we did not drink it too, we were beaten, and there was no sober judge to whom we could appeal. And yet, O my God, in whose presence I can now remember this without harm, I learned all this willingly, poor wretch, and took great delight in it, and for this I was called a promising boy.

@@ 31
Bear with me, my God, while I say something about my intelligence, which was Your gift, and about the nonsense I wasted it on. A task was set for me, which troubled my soul a good deal, with praise or disgrace depending on how I did, and the fear of a beating as well: I had to speak the words of Juno, raging and grieving that she could not

@@ 32
"Turn back this Trojan prince from Latium."

@@ 33
I had heard that Juno never said any such words; but we were made to go astray, following in the footsteps of these poetic fictions, and to say in prose roughly what the poet had said in verse. And the one whose speech won the most applause was the one in whom the passions of rage and grief stood out most strongly, clothed in the most fitting language, while the dignity of the character was kept up. What good was it to me, O my true life, my God, that my recitation was applauded above so many others of my own age and class? Was not all that smoke and wind? Was there nothing else on which I could exercise my wit and my tongue? Your praises, Lord, Your praises, through Your Scriptures, could have propped up the still tender shoot of my heart; then it would not have trailed away among these empty trifles, a filthy prey for the birds of the air. For there is more than one way of offering sacrifice to the rebellious angels.

@@ 34
But why wonder that I was carried away into vanities like this, and wandered out of Your presence, O my God, when the models set before me were men who were ashamed and embarrassed if they were criticized for some barbarism or solecism in telling about something they had done that was not bad in itself, yet who gloried in the praise they got when they told about their own disordered lives in rich, polished and well-ordered speech? You see these things, Lord, and You keep silent: long-suffering, and plenteous in mercy and truth. Will You keep silent forever? Even now You are drawing out of this horrible pit the soul that seeks You and thirsts for Your delights, whose heart says to You, I have sought Your face; Your face, Lord, will I seek. For to be in darkened affections is to be far from You. It is not with our feet, or by moving from place to place, that we leave You or come back to You. Did that younger son of Yours look for horses or chariots or ships, or fly off on visible wings, or travel by the movement of his legs, so that in a far country he could squander in riotous living everything You had given him when he set out? You were a loving Father when You gave it, and more loving still to him when he came back with nothing. So it is in lustful affections, which is to say darkened ones, that the true distance from Your face lies.

@@ 35
Look, O Lord God, look patiently, as You always do, at how carefully the sons of men keep the agreed rules of letters and syllables handed down by those who spoke before them, while they neglect the eternal covenant of everlasting salvation that they have received from You. So much so, that someone who teaches or learns the inherited rules of pronunciation will give more offense to people by dropping the aspirate and saying "uman being," against the laws of grammar, than if he, a "human being," hates a "human being," against Your laws. As if any enemy could do him more harm than the hatred that inflames him against that enemy; or as if he could wound the one he persecutes more deeply than he wounds his own soul by his hostility. Surely no knowledge of letters is so deeply ingrained as what is written in the conscience: "that he is doing to another what he would hate to suffer from another." How hidden You are, O God, who alone are great, dwelling in silence on high, and by an unwearying law scattering the blindness that punishes lawless desires! A man in pursuit of a reputation for eloquence, standing before a human judge, surrounded by a crowd of human beings, and attacking his enemy with the fiercest hatred, will be extremely careful not to murder the word "human being" by a slip of the tongue; but he takes no care at all not to murder a real human being through the fury of his spirit.

@@ 36
This was the world at whose door I lay as a boy, unhappy as I was; this was the arena where I was more afraid of committing a barbarism than I was careful, if I did commit one, not to envy those who had not. I say these things and confess them to You, my God: the things for which I was praised by the people whom at the time I thought it the whole of virtue to please. For I did not see the pit of vileness into which I had been cast away out of Your sight. In their eyes, what could have been fouler than I already was, when I displeased even people like them? With countless lies I deceived my tutor, my teachers and my parents, out of love of play, eagerness to watch silly shows, and a restless urge to imitate them. I also stole from my parents' cellar and table, either because greed had me in its grip or so that I would have something to give other boys, who sold me their games, though they enjoyed them every bit as much as I did. In these games, too, I often hunted for unfair victories, while being beaten myself by a vain desire to come out on top. And what did I so hate to put up with, and attack so fiercely when I caught it, as the very thing I was doing to others? And if I was caught and attacked for it, I would rather fight than give in. Is this the innocence of childhood? No, Lord, it is not. I beg Your mercy, my God. For these very sins, as the years go by, pass over from tutors and teachers, from nuts and balls and sparrows, to magistrates and kings, to gold and estates and slaves, just as heavier punishments take over from the cane. So it was the small stature of childhood, O our King, that You praised as a sign of humility, when You said, Of such is the kingdom of heaven.

@@ 37
And yet, Lord, to You, the most excellent and most good Creator and Ruler of the universe, thanks would be due to You, our God, even if You had meant me to be no more than a boy. For even then I existed, I was alive, I could feel; and I had an instinct to take care of my own well-being, a trace of that mysterious Unity from which I came. With an inner sense I watched over the wholeness of my senses, and in these small pursuits, and in my thoughts about small things, I learned to delight in truth. I hated being deceived; I had a strong memory; I was well equipped with speech; I was comforted by friendship; I avoided pain, degradation and ignorance. In so small a creature, what was not wonderful, what was not worthy of praise? But all these are gifts of my God. I did not give them to myself; and they are good, and all of them together are me. So He who made me is good, and He is my good, and before Him I rejoice in every good thing I had, even as a boy. For this was my sin: that I looked for pleasures, heights and truths not in Him but in His creatures, myself and others, and so I fell headlong into sorrows, confusions and errors. Thanks be to You, my joy, my glory and my confidence, my God; thanks be to You for Your gifts; but keep them safe for me. For in that way You will keep me safe, and what You have given me will grow and be made complete, and I myself will be with You, since it was You who gave me even my being.
