@@ 0
I came to Carthage, and all around me a cauldron of shameful loves sizzled and sang in my ears. I was not yet in love, yet I was in love with loving, and out of a need hidden deeper within me I hated myself for needing too little. I went looking for something to love, in love with love itself; I hated safety, and a road without snares. For inside me there was a famine of that inward food, Yourself, my God; yet that famine did not make me hungry. I had no longing at all for food that does not perish, not because I was full of it, but because the emptier I was, the more it disgusted me. That is why my soul was sick and covered in sores; it threw itself outward in misery, craving to be scratched by contact with things of the senses. Yet if those things had no soul, they would surely not have been loved. To love and to be loved was sweet to me, and sweeter still if I could also enjoy the body of the one I loved. So I fouled the spring of friendship with the filth of concupiscence, and clouded its brightness with the hell of lust; and though I was foul and disgraceful, in my overflowing vanity I longed to seem elegant and refined. So I rushed headlong into love, in which I wanted to be caught. My God, my Mercy, with how much gall did You in Your goodness sprinkle that sweetness for me! For I was loved, and I secretly reached the bond of enjoyment, and I let myself be happily tied up in painful chains, so that I might be beaten with the red-hot iron rods of jealousy, and suspicions, and fears, and angers, and quarrels.

@@ 1
The theater also swept me away, full of pictures of my own miseries and of kindling for my own fire. Why is it that a person wants to be made sad by watching mournful and tragic events, which he would never want to suffer himself? Yet as a spectator he wants to feel grief over them, and that very grief is his pleasure. What is this but a pitiful madness? For the less free a man is from such feelings himself, the more these scenes move him. And yet, when he suffers in his own person, it is usually called misery; when he suffers along with others, it is called mercy. But what kind of compassion is it that is spent on invented, staged sufferings? The listener is not called on to help, only invited to grieve; and the more he grieves, the more he applauds the actor who plays these fictions. And if the disasters of these people, whether from ancient history or pure invention, are acted in such a way that the spectator is not moved to grief, he walks out bored and finding fault; but if he is moved, he stays riveted, and weeps with enjoyment.

@@ 2
So are sorrows loved too? Surely everyone wants to be happy. Or is it that, while no one likes being miserable, people do like being merciful, and since mercy cannot exist without feeling pain, sorrows are loved for this one reason? This too flows from that vein of friendship. But where does that vein go? Where does it flow? Why does it run down into a torrent of boiling pitch, into the monstrous surges of foul lusts, into which it changes and turns of its own accord, twisted and thrown down from its heavenly clearness? Should compassion then be rejected? Not at all. Let sorrows sometimes be loved, then. But beware of uncleanness, my soul, under the protection of my God, the God of our fathers, who is to be praised and exalted above all forever; beware of uncleanness. For I have not stopped feeling pity now. But back then, in the theaters, I rejoiced with the lovers when they wickedly enjoyed each other, even though this was only make-believe in the play; and when they lost each other, I grieved with them as though I were full of compassion, and yet I delighted in both. Now, though, I pity far more the man who rejoices in his wickedness than the man who is thought to have suffered hardship by losing some ruinous pleasure and missing some wretched happiness. This is certainly the truer mercy, but there is no pleasure in its grief. For although the one who grieves for the wretched is approved for performing a duty of love, the one who is truly compassionate would still much rather there were nothing for him to grieve over. For if there were such a thing as ill-willed good will (which can never be), then the one who pities truly and sincerely could wish that there were wretched people, so that he might pity them. So some grief may be approved, but none should be loved. That is how it is with You, O Lord God: You love souls far more purely than we do and pity them far more incorruptibly, yet You are wounded by no sorrow. And who is equal to these things?

@@ 3
But I, wretched as I was, loved to grieve back then, and went looking for something to grieve over. When the suffering was someone else's, and invented, and acted out on a stage, the performance that pleased me most and drew me most powerfully was the one that brought tears to my eyes. What wonder is it that I, an unhappy sheep straying from Your flock and impatient of Your care, became infected with a foul disease? That is where my love of sorrows came from: not sorrows that would pierce deep into me, for I did not love to suffer the things I loved to watch, but sorrows that, when I heard those fictions, would lightly scratch my surface. Yet after them, as after poisoned fingernails, came burning swelling, abscesses, and festering sores. When my life was like this, was it life at all, O my God?

@@ 4
And all the while Your faithful mercy hovered over me from far off. In what grievous sins I wasted myself away! I followed a sacrilegious curiosity, so that, having abandoned You, it led me down into faithless depths and the deceitful service of demons, to whom I offered my evil deeds as sacrifices; and in all of it You were scourging me. I even dared, while Your feasts were being celebrated within the walls of Your Church, to desire and to carry on an affair that deserved death as its fruit. For this You struck me with heavy punishments, though they were nothing compared with my guilt, O You my exceedingly great mercy, my God, my refuge from those terrible destroyers among whom I wandered with a stiff neck, drawing ever further away from You, loving my own ways and not Yours, loving the freedom of a runaway.

@@ 5
The studies that were called respectable were also aimed at the law courts and their quarrels, so that I might excel there, where the craftier a man is, the more he is praised. Such is the blindness of human beings that they even boast of their blindness. And now I was at the top of the school of rhetoric, and I was proudly pleased with myself and swollen with arrogance. Yet I was far calmer, Lord, as You know, and had nothing at all to do with the subversions carried out by the "Subverters." That ill-omened and devilish name was worn as a badge of sophistication. I lived among them with a shameless shame, because I was not like them. I lived with them, and sometimes I enjoyed their friendship, though I always hated what they did, that is, their "subversions," in which they insolently attacked the shyness of newcomers, harassing them with unprovoked mockery and feeding their own malicious mirth on it. Nothing could be more like the actions of demons than this. So what could they be more truly called than "Subverters"? They were themselves subverted and wholly perverted first, while deceiving spirits secretly mocked and led them astray in the very thing they loved to do, mocking and deceiving others.

