@@ 6
It was among people like these, at that unsteady age, that I was studying the books of eloquence, in which I wanted to shine, for a damnable and empty purpose: the joys of human vanity. Following the usual course of study, I came upon a certain book by Cicero, whose language almost everyone admires, though not his heart. This book of his contains an exhortation to philosophy and is called "Hortensius." But this book changed my feelings. It turned my prayers toward You Yourself, O Lord, and gave me different aims and desires. Every empty hope suddenly lost its worth for me, and with an unbelievable burning of heart I longed for the immortality of wisdom, and I began to rise, so that I might return to You. For I did not use that book to sharpen my tongue, which was what I seemed to be buying with my mother's money in my nineteenth year, my father having died two years before. No, I did not use that book to sharpen my tongue; what won me over was not its style but what it said.

@@ 7
How I burned then, my God, how I burned to fly back from earthly things to You, and I did not know what You were doing with me! For with You is wisdom. Now the love of wisdom has a Greek name, "philosophy," and it was with this love that that book set me on fire. There are some who lead people astray through philosophy, painting over and disguising their own errors with that great, attractive and honorable name; and nearly all who were like this, in that author's own age and before it, are criticized and exposed in that book. There, too, is made plain that saving warning of Your Spirit through Your good and devout servant: Beware lest anyone spoil you through philosophy and vain deceit, after the tradition of men, after the rudiments of the world, and not after Christ. For in Him dwells all the fullness of the Godhead bodily. At that time, as You know, O light of my heart, these words of the Apostle were not yet known to me. Even so, the one thing that delighted me in that exhortation was that it stirred me up and kindled and inflamed me to love and seek and win and hold and embrace, not this sect or that, but wisdom itself, whatever it might be. And the only thing that held me back in all this blaze was that the name of Christ was not in it. For this name, by Your mercy, O Lord, this name of my Savior, Your Son, my tender heart had devoutly drunk in with my mother's milk and kept deep within it; and whatever lacked that name, however learned, polished or true, did not take complete hold of me.

@@ 8
So I made up my mind to turn my attention to the holy Scriptures and see what they were like. And look, what I see is something not discovered by the proud, nor laid bare to children, humble at the entrance but lofty further in, and veiled in mysteries; and I was not the kind of person who could enter it, or bend my neck to follow its steps. For when I first turned to those Scriptures, I did not feel as I speak about them now. Instead they seemed to me unworthy to be compared with the dignity of Tully. My swollen pride recoiled from their plainness, and my sharp mind could not get through to what lay inside them. Yet they were the kind of thing that grows up along with little ones. But I scorned to be a little one, and, puffed up with pride, I thought myself a great one.

@@ 9
And so I fell in with men who were proud and raving, far too carnal and far too talkative, in whose mouths were the snares of the Devil, a birdlime made from a mixture of the syllables of Your name, and of our Lord Jesus Christ, and of the Holy Spirit, the Paraclete, our Comforter. These names never left their lips, but only as sound and the clatter of the tongue; their hearts were empty of truth. Still, they kept crying "Truth, Truth," and talked to me about it a great deal, yet it was nowhere in them. They spoke falsehoods, not only about You, who truly are Truth, but even about the elements of this world, Your creatures. And yet for love of You, my Father, supremely good, Beauty of all things beautiful, I should have passed beyond even the philosophers who spoke truly about those things. O Truth, Truth, how deeply even then did the very marrow of my soul sigh for You, while those men sounded Your name at me often and in many ways, with the voice alone and in many huge books, though it was only an echo! These were the dishes on which, when I was hungry for You, they served me, instead of You, the sun and the moon, beautiful works of Yours, but still Your works, not You Yourself, and not even Your first works. For Your spiritual works come before these bodily works, bright and heavenly as they are. But it was not even those first works of Yours that I hungered and thirsted for, but You Yourself, the Truth, in whom is no variableness, neither shadow of turning. Yet they still kept setting before me on those dishes glittering fantasies. It would have been better to love this real sun, which is at least true to our eyes, than those falsehoods, which deceive the mind through the eyes. Still, because I thought they were You, I fed on them. I did not eat eagerly, for You did not taste in my mouth as You really are, since You were not those empty inventions; and I was not nourished by them, but rather drained. Food in dreams is very like the food of people who are awake, yet sleepers are not nourished by it, because they are asleep. But those fantasies were not like You in any way at all, as You have now told me, for they were bodily fantasies, false bodies. These true bodies that we see with our fleshly sight, whether in the heavens or on earth, are far more certain than they are. The beasts and birds see these things as well as we do, and they are more certain than when we imagine them. And again, we imagine them with more certainty than we use them to guess at other, larger and infinite bodies that do not exist at all. Such empty husks were what I was fed on then, and I was not fed. But You, my soul's Love, for whom I faint so that I may become strong, are neither those bodies we see, even in heaven, nor those we do not see there; for You created them, and You do not count them among Your highest works. How far, then, You are from those fantasies of mine, fantasies of bodies that do not exist at all! The images of bodies that do exist are far more certain than they are, and the bodies themselves more certain still; yet You are not those bodies. Nor are You the soul, which is the life of bodies, and so the life of bodies is better and more certain than the bodies are. But You are the life of souls, the life of lives, living by Yourself, and You do not change, O life of my soul.

