@@ 0
Let me know You, O Lord, who know me: let me know You, even as I am known. Power of my soul, come into it and fit it for Yourself, so that You may have and hold it without spot or wrinkle. This is my hope, and that is why I speak; and in this hope I rejoice, whenever my rejoicing is sound. As for the other things of this life, the more people weep over them, the less they deserve weeping; and the more they deserve weeping, the less people weep over them. For see, You love the truth, and whoever does it comes to the light. This is what I want to do: in my heart, before You, in confession, and in my writing, before many witnesses.

@@ 1
And indeed, O Lord, to Your eyes the abyss of human conscience lies bare; so what in me could be hidden from You, even if I were unwilling to confess it to You? I would only be hiding You from me, not me from You. But now that my groaning bears witness that I am displeased with myself, You shine out, and You are pleasing, and loved, and longed for, so that I may be ashamed of myself, and cast myself away, and choose You, and please neither You nor myself except through You. So to You, O Lord, I lie open, whatever I am; and I have already said what fruit I gain by confessing to You. Nor do I do it with words and sounds of the flesh, but with the words of my soul and the cry of my thought, which Your ear knows. For when I am evil, confessing to You is nothing other than being displeased with myself; but when I am holy, it is nothing other than not claiming the credit for myself, because You, O Lord, bless the righteous, but first You justify him when he is ungodly. So my confession, O my God, is made in Your sight silently and yet not silently. It is silent in sound, but in feeling it cries aloud. For I say nothing right to people that You have not first heard from me; nor do You hear anything of that kind from me that You have not first said to me.

@@ 2
What, then, do I have to do with people, that they should hear my confessions, as though they were the ones to heal all my infirmities? They are a race eager to know other people's lives, and lazy about correcting their own. Why do they want to hear from me what I am, when they do not want to hear from You what they are? And when they hear about me from me myself, how do they know whether I am telling the truth, since no one knows what goes on in a man except the spirit of man that is in him? But if they hear about themselves from You, they cannot say, "The Lord is lying." For what is hearing about themselves from You, if not knowing themselves? And who knows something and then says, "It is false," unless he himself is lying? But because love believes all things (at least among those whom it binds to itself and makes one), I too, O Lord, confess to You in such a way that people may hear, even though I cannot prove to them whether my confession is true; yet those whose ears love opens to me believe me.

@@ 3
But You, my inmost Physician, make clear to me what fruit I gain by doing this. For the confessions of my past sins, which You have forgiven and covered so that You might make me blessed in You, changing my soul by faith and Your Sacrament, stir up the heart when they are read and heard. They keep it from sleeping in despair and saying, "I cannot," and wake it instead in the love of Your mercy and the sweetness of Your grace, by which everyone who is weak becomes strong, once through it he has become aware of his own weakness. And good people are glad to hear of the past evils of those who are now free of them, not because they are evils, but because they once were and now are not. With what fruit, then, O Lord my God, to whom my conscience confesses every day, trusting more in the hope of Your mercy than in its own innocence, with what fruit, I ask, do I through this book confess to people as well, in Your presence, what I am now, not what I have been? For that other fruit I have seen and spoken of already. But what I am now, at this very time of making my confessions, many people want to know, some who know me and some who do not, some who have heard something from me or about me; yet their ear is not at my heart, where I am whatever I am. So they want to hear me confess what I am within, where neither their eye nor their ear nor their mind can reach. They want this as people ready to believe; but will they know? For love, which makes them good, tells them that I am not lying when I confess about myself, and it is love in them that believes me.

@@ 4
But for what fruit do they want to hear this? Do they wish to rejoice with me when they hear how near I come to You by Your gift, and to pray for me when they hear how much I am held back by my own weight? To people like that I will show myself. For it is no small fruit, O Lord my God, that many should give thanks to You on our account, and that many should ask You on our behalf. Let a brother's mind love in me what You teach is to be loved, and grieve in me over what You teach is to be grieved over. Let it be a brother's mind that does this, not a stranger's, not the mind of the strange children, whose mouth speaks vanity, and whose right hand is a right hand of iniquity, but that brotherly mind which rejoices for me when it approves of me, and is sad for me when it disapproves of me, because whether it approves or disapproves, it loves me. To people like that I will show myself. Let them breathe freely at my good deeds and sigh over my bad ones. My good deeds are Your work and Your gifts; my bad ones are my offenses and Your judgments. Let them breathe freely at the one and sigh over the other, and let hymns and weeping rise into Your sight from the hearts of my brothers, which are Your censers. And You, O Lord, delighted by the fragrance of Your holy temple, have mercy on me according to Your great mercy, for Your name's sake; and never abandoning what You have begun, make my imperfections perfect.

@@ 5
This is the fruit of confessing what I am, not what I have been: to confess it not only before You, in a secret exultation with trembling and a secret sorrow with hope, but also in the ears of the believing sons of men, who share my joy and share my mortality, my fellow citizens and fellow pilgrims, those who have gone before, those who will follow, and those who walk with me on my way. These are Your servants, my brothers, whom You have willed to be Your sons; they are my masters, whom You have commanded me to serve, if I want to live with You and from You. But this Word of Yours would mean little to me if it only commanded by speaking and did not go before me by doing. So I do this in deed and in word; I do it under Your wings, and the danger would be far too great, were it not that under Your wings my soul is subject to You and my weakness is known to You. I am a little child, but my Father lives forever, and my Guardian is enough for me. For He who begot me is the same One who protects me; and You Yourself are all my good, You, the Almighty, who are with me even before I am with You. So to those You command me to serve I will reveal, not what I have been, but what I am now and what I still am. But I do not judge myself either. This, then, is how I want to be heard.
