@@ 27
But what about when the memory itself loses something, as happens when we forget something and look for it so as to recall it? Where do we search in the end, if not in the memory itself? And there, if one thing happens to be offered to us in place of another, we reject it until the thing we are looking for comes to meet us; and when it does, we say, "This is it." We would not say that unless we recognized it, and we would not recognize it unless we remembered it. So we had certainly forgotten it. Or had the whole of it not slipped away, and was the lost part being sought by means of the part we still had hold of? Was it that the memory felt that it was not turning over together everything it used to hold together, and, limping as it were because its old habit had been cut short, demanded the return of what was missing? For example, if we see or think of someone we know and have forgotten his name and try to recover it, anything else that comes to mind does not connect with him, because it was not used to being thought of together with him; so it is rejected, until that name presents itself on which our knowledge can rest evenly, as on what it is accustomed to. And where does it present itself from, if not out of the memory itself? For even when we recognize it after someone else reminds us, that is where it comes from. We do not believe it as something new; we remember, and agree that what was named is right. But if it were wiped out of the mind entirely, we would not remember it even when reminded. For we have not yet entirely forgotten something if we remember that we have forgotten it. So what we have entirely forgotten, we cannot even look for as something lost.

@@ 28
How, then, do I look for You, O Lord? For when I look for You, my God, I am looking for the happy life. I will look for You, so that my soul may live. For my body lives by my soul, and my soul lives by You. How, then, do I look for the happy life, since I do not have it until I can say, where I ought to say it, "It is enough"? How do I look for it? By remembering, as though I had forgotten it and still remembered that I had forgotten it? Or by wanting to learn it as something unknown, either something I never knew or something I have forgotten so completely that I do not even remember having forgotten it? Is the happy life not the very thing that everyone wants, and is there anyone at all who does not want it? Where did they come to know it, that they want it so much? Where did they see it, that they love it so? Clearly we have it, how I do not know. There is indeed one way of having it, in which a person who has it is then happy; and there are those who are happy in hope. These have it in a lower way than those who are already happy in reality, but they are still better off than those who are happy neither in reality nor in hope. Yet even these, if they did not have it in some way, would not want so much to be happy; and that they do want it is quite certain. So they have come to know it, I do not know how, and they have it through some kind of knowledge, I do not know what; and I am troubled over whether it is in the memory. For if it is there, then we were once happy. Whether each of us was happy individually, or in that man who first sinned, in whom we all died too, and from whom we are all born into misery, I do not ask now; I ask only whether the happy life is in the memory. For we would not love it unless we knew it. We hear the name, and we all admit that we desire the thing itself; for it is not the mere sound that delights us. For when a Greek hears it in Latin, he is not delighted, since he does not know what has been said; but we Latins are delighted, just as he would be if he heard it in Greek, because the thing itself is neither Greek nor Latin, the thing that Greeks and Latins and people of every other language long so eagerly to obtain. So it is known to everyone; for if they could all be asked with one voice whether they want to be happy, they would answer without any hesitation that they do. And this could not happen unless the thing itself, of which this is the name, were held in their memory.

@@ 29
But is it held there in the way that someone who has seen Carthage remembers it? No. For the happy life is not seen with the eyes, because it is not a body. Is it, then, the way we remember numbers? No. For whoever has numbers in his knowledge does not go on seeking to obtain them; but the happy life we have in our knowledge, and that is why we love it, and yet we still want to obtain it, so that we may be happy. Is it, then, the way we remember eloquence? No. For although some people, on hearing this name too, call the thing to mind, even though they are not yet eloquent, and many want to be (which shows that it is in their knowledge), still these people have noticed through their bodily senses that others are eloquent, and have been delighted, and want to be like them (though in fact they would not be delighted except through some inward knowledge of it, and would not want to be like them unless they were delighted); whereas the happy life is something we do not experience in others through any bodily sense. Is it, then, the way we remember joy? Perhaps so. For I remember my joy even when I am sad, as I remember the happy life when I am unhappy; and I never saw, heard, smelled, tasted or touched my joy with any bodily sense, but I experienced it in my mind when I rejoiced, and the knowledge of it clung to my memory, so that I can call it back, sometimes with disgust and sometimes with longing, depending on the kind of things I remember having rejoiced in. For I have been steeped in a kind of joy over shameful things too, which now, when I recall it, I detest and curse; and at other times over good and honorable things, which I recall with longing, though perhaps they are no longer present, and so I recall my former joy with sadness.

@@ 30
Where, then, and when did I experience my happy life, so that I remember it and love it and long for it? And it is not I alone, or a few others with me, but all of us who want to be happy; and unless we knew it by some sure knowledge, we would not want it with so sure a will. But what does this mean? If two people are asked whether they want to join the army, it may happen that one answers that he does and the other that he does not; but if they are asked whether they want to be happy, both would say at once, without any hesitation, that they do. And the one wants to join the army and the other does not for no other reason than to be happy. Is it perhaps that, though one finds his joy in this thing and another in that, they all agree in wanting to be happy, just as they would agree, if they were asked, that they want to have joy, and this joy is what they call the happy life? So although one reaches this joy by one route and another by another, there is one goal they are all striving to reach, and that is to have joy. And since this is something no one can say he has never experienced, it is found in the memory and recognized whenever the name of the happy life is heard.

@@ 31
Far be it, Lord, far be it from the heart of Your servant who is confessing to You here, far be it from me to think myself happy because of any and every joy I may rejoice in. For there is a joy that is not given to the ungodly, but to those who worship You for Your own sake, whose joy You Yourself are. And this is the happy life: to rejoice toward You, in You, and for Your sake; this is it, and there is no other. Those who think there is another pursue some other joy, and not the true one. Yet their will is not turned away from some image of joy.

@@ 32
So it is not certain that everyone wants to be happy, since those who do not want to rejoice in You, which is the only happy life, do not really want the happy life. Or does everyone want this, but because the flesh lusts against the Spirit and the Spirit against the flesh, so that they cannot do what they want, they fall back on what they can do and are content with it, because what they are not able to do they do not want strongly enough to make them able? For I ask everyone whether they would rather rejoice in truth or in falsehood. They will no more hesitate to say "in the truth" than they hesitate to say that they want to be happy. For the happy life is joy in the truth: that is, joy in You, who are the Truth, O God, my light, the health of my countenance, my God. This is the happy life that everyone wants; this life, which alone is happy, everyone wants; joy in the truth is what everyone wants. I have met many people who wanted to deceive, but no one who wanted to be deceived. Where, then, did they come to know this happy life, if not where they also came to know the truth? For they love the truth too, since they do not want to be deceived. And when they love the happy life, which is nothing other than joy in the truth, they certainly love the truth as well; and they would not love it unless there were some knowledge of it in their memory. Why, then, do they not rejoice in it? Why are they not happy? Because they are more strongly taken up with other things, which have more power to make them miserable than that which they remember so faintly has to make them happy. For there is still a little light in people. Let them walk, let them walk, so that the darkness does not overtake them.

@@ 33
But why does "truth breed hatred," and why does Your servant, when he preaches the truth, become an enemy to them, when the happy life, which is nothing other than joy in the truth, is loved? Is it not because truth is loved in such a way that those who love something else want the thing they love to be the truth; and because they do not want to be deceived, they do not want to be shown that they are deceived? So they hate the truth for the sake of the thing they love in place of the truth. They love the truth when it shines on them, and hate it when it rebukes them. For since they do not want to be deceived, and do want to deceive, they love it when it reveals itself to them, and hate it when it reveals them. And so it will repay them: those who did not want to be exposed by it, it will expose against their will, while it does not reveal itself to them. Thus, thus, yes, thus the human mind, blind and sick, foul and unsightly as it is, wants to stay hidden itself, but does not want anything to be hidden from it. But the opposite is what it gets in return: it cannot hide from the Truth, while the Truth is hidden from it. Yet even in this misery it would rather rejoice in truths than in falsehoods. So it will be happy when, with nothing coming in between to distract it, it rejoices in that one Truth by whom all things are true.
