@@ 40
You certainly command me to be continent from the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the ambition of the world. You have commanded me to abstain from sexual union, and as for marriage itself, You have counseled something better than what You have allowed. And since You gave me the gift, it was done, even before I became a minister of Your Sacrament. But there still live in my memory, of which I have said so much, the images of such things, fixed there by my bad habit. They come at me when I am awake, but then they have no strength; in sleep, however, they bring me not only to pleasure but even to consent, and to something very like the act itself. The illusion of the image has such power in my soul and in my flesh that false visions persuade me when I am asleep to what true sights cannot persuade me when I am awake. Am I not myself at such a time, O Lord my God? And yet what a difference there is between myself and myself in the moment in which I pass from waking into sleep, or come back from sleep to waking! Where is my reason then, the reason which resists such suggestions when I am awake, and which remains unshaken even if the things themselves are pressed upon it? Is it shut along with the eyes? Is it lulled to sleep along with the bodily senses? And how is it that often, even in sleep, we resist, and, mindful of our resolve and holding to it most chastely, give no consent to such enticements? And yet the difference is so great that when it turns out otherwise, we return on waking to peace of conscience; and by this very difference we discover that we did not do what we still grieve was somehow done in us.

@@ 41
Are You not mighty, God Almighty, able to heal all the diseases of my soul, and by Your more abundant grace to quench even the impure motions of my sleep! You will increase Your gifts in me more and more, Lord, so that my soul may follow me to You, freed from the birdlime of concupiscence; so that it may not rebel against itself, and so that even in dreams it may not only refrain from committing, through sensual images, those degrading corruptions that go as far as the defilement of the flesh, but may not even consent to them. For to bring it about that nothing of this sort should have even the slightest hold over the chaste affections of a sleeper, not even so slight a one as a passing thought could check, and to do this not only in this life but even at my present age, is no great thing for the Almighty, for You are able to do more than we ask or think. But what I still am in this kind of evil of mine, I have told my good Lord, rejoicing with trembling in what You have given me and mourning over what is still unfinished in me, hoping that You will perfect Your mercies in me, even to that perfect peace which my inner and outer man will have with You, when death is swallowed up in victory.

@@ 42
There is another evil of the day, and I wish it were sufficient for it. For by eating and drinking we repair the daily decay of our body, until You destroy both belly and food, when You will slay my emptiness with a wonderful fullness, and clothe this corruptible body with an eternal incorruption. But for now the necessity is sweet to me, and I fight against that sweetness so as not to be taken captive by it. I wage a daily war by fasting, often bringing my body into subjection, and my pains are driven away by pleasure. For hunger and thirst are pains of a kind; they burn and kill like a fever unless the medicine of food comes to our aid. And since that medicine is ready to hand through the comfort of Your gifts, by which land and water and sky serve our weakness, our affliction is called a delight.

@@ 43
This You have taught me: that I should come to taking food as I would to taking medicine. But while I am passing from the discomfort of hunger to the contentment of being filled, in the very passage the snare of concupiscence lies in wait for me. For the passage itself is pleasure, and there is no other way of passing to where necessity compels us to pass. And although health is the reason for eating and drinking, a dangerous pleasure attaches itself to it like a servant following behind, and most of the time tries to go in front, so that I end up doing for pleasure's sake what I say, or intend, that I am doing for health's sake. Nor do the two have the same measure: what is enough for health is too little for pleasure. And it is often unclear whether it is the necessary care of the body still asking for support, or whether a pleasure-loving and deceitful greed is offering its services. The unhappy soul is glad of this uncertainty, and makes ready in it an excuse to defend itself, pleased that it is not clear what is enough for the moderate needs of health, so that under the cover of health it may hide the business of pleasure. I try every day to resist these temptations, and I call on Your right hand and bring my perplexities to You, because I have not yet reached a settled judgment on this matter.

@@ 44
I hear the voice of my God commanding, Let not your hearts be weighed down with overeating and drunkenness. Drunkenness is far from me; You will have mercy, so that it does not come near me. But overeating sometimes creeps up on Your servant; You will have mercy, so that it may be put far from me. For no one can be continent unless You give it. You grant us many things when we pray for them, and whatever good we received before we prayed, we received from You; and we received it from You so that we might afterwards know this. I have never been a drunkard, but I have known drunkards made sober by You. So it was Your doing that those who never were drunkards did not become so, just as it was Your doing that those who had been did not remain so forever; and it was Your doing that both should know whose doing it was. I heard another voice of Yours: Do not go after your lusts, and turn away from your pleasure. And by Your favor I have heard this saying too, which I have loved very much: neither if we eat shall we have more, nor if we do not eat shall we have less; that is to say, the one will not make me rich, nor the other wretched. I heard yet another: for I have learned, in whatever state I am, to be content with it; I know how to abound, and I know how to suffer need. I can do all things through Christ who strengthens me. Here is a soldier of the heavenly camp, not the dust that we are. But remember, Lord, that we are dust, and that from dust You made man; and he was lost, and is found. Nor could that man do this of himself, for he too was of the same dust, the man whom I have so loved for saying this by the breath of Your inspiration: I can do all things, he says, through Him who strengthens me. Strengthen me, so that I can. Give what You command, and command what You will. He confesses that he has received, and when he glories, he glories in the Lord. I have heard another begging that he might receive: Take from me, he says, the desires of the belly. From this it is clear, O my holy God, that it is You who give, whenever what You command to be done is done.

@@ 45
You have taught me, good Father, that to the pure all things are pure, but that it is evil for the man who eats with offense; and that every creature of Yours is good, and nothing is to be refused that is received with thanksgiving; and that food does not commend us to God; and that no one should judge us in food or drink; and that the one who eats should not despise the one who does not eat, and the one who does not eat should not judge the one who eats. These things I have learned, thanks be to You, praise be to You, my God, my Teacher, who knock at my ears and enlighten my heart: deliver me from all temptation. It is not the uncleanness of food I fear, but the uncleanness of craving. I know that Noah was permitted to eat every kind of flesh that was fit for food; that Elijah was fed with flesh; that John, endowed with wonderful abstinence, was not defiled by feeding on living creatures, namely locusts. I know too that Esau was deceived by craving for lentils, that David blamed himself for longing for a drink of water, and that our King was tempted not with flesh but with bread. And so the people in the wilderness also deserved to be rebuked, not for desiring flesh, but because in their desire for food they murmured against the Lord.

