@@ 52
What countless things, made by all sorts of arts and crafts, in clothing, shoes, vessels and every kind of manufacture, in paintings too and images of every kind, far exceeding all necessary and moderate use and all devout meaning, have people added to entice their own eyes! Outwardly they follow what they themselves make; inwardly they abandon Him by whom they themselves were made, and destroy what they themselves were made to be. But I, my God and my Glory, even from this sing a hymn to You, and offer praise to Him who sanctifies me, because the beautiful designs that pass through people's souls into their skillful hands come from that Beauty which is above our souls, which my soul sighs after day and night. But those who make and pursue outward beauties draw from there the rule for judging them, but not the rule for using them. And He is there, though they do not see Him, so that they might not wander off, but keep their strength for You, and not squander it on pleasures that only weary them. And I, though I say this and see it clearly, still entangle my steps in these outward beauties; but You pluck me out, O Lord, You pluck me out, because Your loving-kindness is before my eyes. For I am caught miserably, and You pluck me out mercifully; sometimes without my noticing, when I had only lightly landed on them, and at other times painfully, because I had already stuck fast in them.

@@ 53
To this is added another form of temptation, dangerous in many more ways. For besides the concupiscence of the flesh, which lies in the delight of all the senses and pleasures, and whose slaves, going far from You, waste away and perish, the soul has, through those same bodily senses, a certain vain and curious desire, cloaked under the name of knowledge and learning: a desire not to take delight in the flesh, but to gain experience through the flesh. Because this desire has its seat in the appetite for knowing, and because sight is the chief of the senses for gaining knowledge, it is called in the language of Scripture the lust of the eyes. For seeing belongs properly to the eyes; yet we use this word for the other senses too, when we employ them in seeking knowledge. We do not say, listen how it flashes, or smell how it glows, or taste how it shines, or feel how it gleams; for all these things are said to be seen. Yet we say not only, see how it shines, which only the eyes can perceive, but also, see how it sounds, see how it smells, see how it tastes, see how hard it is. And so the general experience of the senses, as was said, is called the lust of the eyes, because the function of seeing, in which the eyes hold first place, is borrowed by the other senses by way of likeness whenever they explore any kind of knowledge.

@@ 54
From this it can be seen more clearly what part pleasure plays and what part curiosity plays in the use of the senses. Pleasure goes after what is beautiful, melodious, fragrant, tasty and soft; but curiosity, for the sake of the experiment, goes after the opposite as well, not in order to suffer discomfort, but out of the lust for trying and knowing things. For what pleasure is there in looking at a mangled corpse that makes you shudder? And yet if one is lying somewhere nearby, people flock to it, to be made sad and turn pale. They are even afraid of seeing it in their sleep, as if someone had forced them to look at it while they were awake, or some report of its beauty had drawn them there! It is the same with the other senses, which it would take too long to go through. From this disease of curiosity come all the strange spectacles exhibited in the theater. From this people go on to search out the hidden workings of nature, which lies outside us, which it profits nothing to know, and which people desire to know simply for the sake of knowing. From this, too, comes any inquiry by magical arts undertaken for the same end of perverted knowledge. From this, even in religion itself, God is put to the test, when signs and wonders are demanded of Him, desired not for any saving purpose but merely for the experience.

@@ 55
In this vast forest, so full of snares and dangers, see how many of them I have cut away and driven out of my heart, as You have enabled me to do, O God of my salvation. And yet when would I dare to say — since so many things of this kind buzz around our daily life on every side — when would I dare to say that nothing of this sort catches my attention to make me look, or captures me with idle interest? True, the theaters no longer carry me away, I do not care to know the courses of the stars, and my soul has never sought answers from the spirits of the dead; I detest all sacrilegious rites. Yet, O Lord my God, to whom I owe humble and single-hearted service, with what schemes and suggestions the enemy works on me to make me ask You for some sign! But I beg You, by our King and by our pure and holy homeland, Jerusalem, that as any consent to this is far from me now, so it may always be further and further away. But when I pray to You for someone's salvation, my purpose and intention are very different. You grant me, and will grant me, to follow You willingly as You do what You will.

@@ 56
And yet in how many very small and contemptible things is our curiosity tempted every day, and how often do we slip, who can count? How often, when people tell idle stories, do we begin by seeming merely to put up with them, so as not to offend the weak, and then little by little listen with real interest! I no longer go to the circus to watch a dog chasing a hare; but in the countryside, if I happen to be passing by, that same chase may well distract me even from some serious thought and draw me after it: not so that I turn my mount aside, but so that my heart leans that way. And unless You, having shown me my weakness, quickly warned me either to rise up to You through some reflection on the sight itself, or to despise it altogether and pass on, I stand there dull and absorbed. What about when I am sitting at home, and a lizard catching flies, or a spider entangling them as they rush into her web, often holds my attention? Is it a different thing because they are only small creatures? From them I go on to praise You, the wonderful Creator and Orderer of all things, but that is not what first catches my attention. It is one thing to get up quickly, another not to fall at all. My life is full of such things, and my one hope is Your wonderfully great mercy. For when our heart becomes a storehouse for such things and is loaded with crowds of this abundant vanity, then our prayers too are often interrupted and disturbed by it; and while, in Your presence, we direct the voice of our heart to Your ears, so great a matter is broken off by the rush of who knows what idle thoughts. Shall we then count this, too, among things of little importance? Or will anything bring us back to hope except Your full mercy, since You have begun to change us?

@@ 57
And You know how far You have already changed me, You who first healed me of the lust to vindicate myself, so that You might forgive all the rest of my iniquities, and heal all my infirmities, and redeem my life from corruption, and crown me with mercy and pity, and satisfy my desire with good things; You who curbed my pride with Your fear and tamed my neck to Your yoke. And now I bear it, and it is light to me, because this is what You promised and what You have done; and truly it was so, and I did not know it, when I was afraid to take it on.

