@@ 58
But, O Lord, You who alone rule without pride, because You are the only true Lord, who has no lord over You: has this third kind of temptation also ceased for me, or can it cease at all in this whole life? I mean the wish to be feared and loved by people for no other reason than to get from it a joy that is no joy. It is a wretched life and an ugly boastfulness! It is above all from this that people neither love You purely nor fear You purely. And that is why You resist the proud and give grace to the humble; You thunder against the ambitions of the world, and the foundations of the mountains tremble. Now, because certain duties of human society make it necessary for us to be loved and feared by people, the adversary of our true happiness presses hard upon us, spreading everywhere his snares of "well done, well done," so that while we greedily snatch them up we may be caught off our guard, and detach our joy from Your truth and place it in the deceitfulness of men; so that we may enjoy being loved and feared, not for Your sake, but in Your place. In this way he may keep those who have been made like himself as his own, bound not in the harmony of love but in the fellowship of punishment: he who resolved to set his throne in the north, so that, dark and chilled, they might serve him as he imitates You in a perverse and crooked way. But we, O Lord, see, we are Your little flock; take us as Your own. Stretch out Your wings over us, and let us flee beneath them. Be our glory; let us be loved for Your sake, and let Your word be feared in us. Whoever wants to be praised by people while You blame him will not be defended by people when You judge, nor rescued when You condemn. But when it is not the sinner who is praised in the desires of his soul, nor the one who does wickedly who is blessed, but a man is praised for some gift You have given him, and he rejoices more that he himself is praised than that he has the gift for which he is praised, then he too is praised while You blame him; and the one who gave the praise is better than the one who received it. For the one was pleased by the gift of God in a man, while the other was better pleased by the gift of man than by the gift of God.

@@ 59
We are tempted by these temptations every day, O Lord; we are tempted without ceasing. Our daily furnace is the human tongue. In this area too You command us to be continent. Give what You command, and command what You will. You know the groans of my heart on this matter, and the floods from my eyes. For I cannot easily work out how far I have been cleansed of this plague, and I greatly fear my hidden faults, which Your eyes know, though mine do not. In other kinds of temptation I have some sort of means of examining myself; in this one, almost none. For with the pleasures of the flesh and idle curiosity, I can see how far I have succeeded in restraining my mind when I do without them, whether by choice or because they are absent. Then I ask myself how much more or less it troubles me not to have them. As for riches, which are sought so that they may serve one or two or all three of these concupiscences, if the soul cannot tell whether it despises them while it has them, they can be given up, so that it may put itself to the test. But in order to do without praise and test our strength in that, must we live badly, so recklessly and monstrously that no one who knows us does not detest us? What greater madness could be spoken or imagined? But if praise usually does and ought to accompany a good life and good works, we ought no more to give up its company than the good life itself. Yet I do not know whether I can do without something calmly or only with difficulty, until it is gone.

@@ 60
What, then, do I confess to You in this kind of temptation, O Lord? What else but that I take delight in praise, though I delight more in truth itself than in praise? For if I were asked whether I would rather be praised by everyone while raving mad and wrong about everything, or be blamed by everyone while steady and utterly settled in the truth, I can see which I would choose. Yet I would not wish another person's approval to add even a little to my joy in any good that is in me. But I admit that it does add to it, and not only that: blame takes away from it. And when I am troubled by this wretchedness of mine, an excuse slips in, and how much it is worth, You know, O God, for it leaves me uncertain. You have commanded us not only continence, that is, what things to hold our love back from, but also righteousness, that is, on what to bestow it; and You have willed that we love not only You but also our neighbor. So often, when I am pleased by the praise of someone who understands, I seem to myself to be pleased by my neighbor's progress or promise; and again, to be grieved by the fault in him when I hear him criticize what he does not understand, or what is good. For I am sometimes saddened by my own praise, either when things are praised in me that I myself dislike, or when lesser and trivial goods are valued more highly than they deserve. But then again, how do I know whether I feel this way because I do not want the one who praises me to disagree with me about myself, not because I am moved by concern for his good, but because the same good things that please me in myself please me more when they also please someone else? For in a way it is not I who am praised when my own judgment of myself is not praised, since either things are praised that displease me, or things are praised more that please me less. Am I then uncertain about myself in this matter?

@@ 61
See, in You, O Truth, I see that I ought to be moved by my own praises not for my own sake but for the good of my neighbor. And whether I am like that, I do not know. For in this I know myself less than I know You. I beg You, O my God, show me to myself as well, so that I may confess to my brothers, who are going to pray for me, whatever I find wounded in me. Let me question myself again, more carefully. If in my praises I am moved by my neighbor's good, why am I less moved when someone else is unjustly blamed than when I am? Why does an insult hurled at me sting me more than one hurled at another in my presence with the same injustice? Do I not know this either? Or is it finally the case that I deceive myself, and do not do the truth before You in my heart and on my tongue? Put this madness far from me, O Lord, lest my own mouth be to me the sinner's oil to anoint my head. I am poor and needy; yet I am better when, in hidden groaning, I am displeased with myself and seek Your mercy, until what is lacking in my failing state is restored and made perfect, on to that peace which the eye of the proud does not know.

@@ 62
Yet the word that comes out of the mouth, and deeds that become known to people, carry a most dangerous temptation from the love of praise, which begs for and gathers up people's votes to build up some private excellence of its own. It tempts me even when I condemn it in myself, and precisely because I condemn it; and often it glories all the more vainly in its very contempt for vainglory, and so it is no longer contempt for vainglory that it glories in, for it does not despise vainglory while it glories.

@@ 63
Within, too, deep within, there is another evil arising from the same kind of temptation, by which people become empty, pleasing themselves with themselves, even if they do not please others, or even displease them, or do not care to please them. But in pleasing themselves they greatly displease You, not only by taking pleasure in things that are not good as though they were good, but in Your good things as though they were their own; or, if as Yours, then as though earned by their own merits; or, if as coming from Your grace, then not rejoicing in fellowship with others but begrudging that grace to them. In all these and similar dangers and struggles You see the trembling of my heart, and I feel my wounds being healed by You again and again, rather than no longer being inflicted by me.

