@@ 64
Where have You not walked with me, O Truth, teaching me what to guard against and what to desire, when I brought to You what I could discover here below and consulted You? With my outward senses, as far as I could, I surveyed the world, and I observed the life that my body has from me, and these senses of mine. From there I entered the recesses of my memory, those manifold and spacious chambers, wonderfully filled with countless stores; and I considered them, and I was struck with awe. I could make out none of these things without You, and I found that none of them was You. Nor was I myself You, I who discovered these things, who went through them all and labored to distinguish them and to value each according to its worth, receiving some things on the report of my senses, questioning others that I felt to be mingled with myself, numbering and distinguishing the messengers themselves, and, in the wide treasure-house of my memory, turning some things over, storing others away, drawing others out. Nor was I myself You when I was doing this, that is, the power by which I did it was not You, for You are the abiding light which I consulted about all these things, whether they existed, what they were, and how much they were worth; and I heard You teaching me and commanding me. And I often do this; it delights me, and whenever I can get free from necessary duties, I take refuge in this pleasure. Yet in all these things that I run through as I consult You, I find no safe place for my soul except in You, where my scattered parts may be gathered together, and nothing of me may depart from You. And sometimes You admit me, in my inmost being, into a state of feeling that is most unusual, rising to a strange sweetness which, if it were brought to completion in me, would be something, I know not what, that this present life is not. But through my wretched burdens I fall back into these lower things, and I am swallowed up again by my usual habits, and I am held; and I weep greatly, but I am greatly held. So heavy is the burden of bad habit! Here I am able to stay, but do not want to; there I want to be, but am not able; miserable both ways.

@@ 65
And so I have considered the sicknesses of my sins in that threefold concupiscence, and I have called on Your right hand to save me. For with a wounded heart I saw Your brightness, and, beaten back, I said, "Who can reach it? I am cast out from the sight of Your eyes." You are the Truth who presides over all things, but I, in my greed, did not want to lose You; I wanted to possess a lie along with You, just as no one wants to speak falsely in such a way that he himself does not know what is true. So I lost You, because You do not consent to be possessed together with a lie.

@@ 66
Whom could I find to reconcile me to You? Was I to turn to the Angels? With what prayers? With what sacraments? Many who were trying to return to You and could not do so by themselves have, as I hear, tried this, and have fallen into a craving for curious visions, and have been judged to deserve delusion. For in their pride they sought You with the arrogance of learning, puffing out their chests rather than beating them; and so, through the likeness of their hearts, they drew to themselves the powers of the air, fellow conspirators in their pride, by whom they were deceived through magical powers. They were looking for a mediator through whom they might be cleansed, and there was none. For it was the devil, transforming himself into an Angel of light. And it greatly enticed their proud flesh that he himself had no body of flesh. For they were mortal and sinners; but You, Lord, to whom they proudly sought to be reconciled, are immortal and without sin. But a mediator between God and man must have something like God and something like men, so that he is not, by being like men in both respects, far from God, or, by being like God in both respects, far from men, and so not a mediator at all. That deceitful mediator, then, by whom, through Your secret judgments, pride deserves to be deluded, has one thing in common with men, namely sin; the other he wishes to appear to have in common with God, so that, since he is not clothed in the mortality of flesh, he may pass himself off as immortal. But since the wages of sin is death, he has this in common with men: that together with them he is condemned to death.

@@ 67
But the true Mediator, whom in Your secret mercy You have shown to the humble, and sent, so that by His example they too might learn that same humility, that Mediator between God and man, the Man Christ Jesus, appeared between mortal sinners and the immortal Just One: mortal with men, just with God. And because the wages of righteousness is life and peace, He did this so that, by a righteousness joined to God, He might make void the death of sinners who have been made righteous, a death which He chose to share with them. So He was shown to the holy men of old, so that they might be saved through faith in His Passion still to come, as we are saved through faith in His Passion now past. For as Man, He is Mediator; but as the Word, He is not in the middle between God and man, because He is equal to God, and God with God, and together one God.

@@ 68
How You have loved us, good Father, who did not spare Your only Son, but gave Him up for us ungodly ones! How You have loved us, for whom He, who did not think it robbery to be equal with You, was made subject even to the death of the cross; He who alone was free among the dead, having power to lay down His life and power to take it up again: for us, to You, both Victor and Victim, and Victor because Victim; for us, to You, both Priest and Sacrifice, and Priest because Sacrifice; making us, who were servants, into Your sons, by being born of You and serving us. Rightly, then, is my hope strong in Him, that You will heal all my infirmities through Him who sits at Your right hand and intercedes for us; otherwise I would despair. For my infirmities are many and great, many they are and great; but Your medicine is mightier. We might have thought that Your Word was far removed from any union with man, and despaired of ourselves, had He not become flesh and dwelt among us.

@@ 69
Terrified by my sins and the weight of my misery, I had turned it over in my heart and had planned to flee into the wilderness; but You forbade me and strengthened me, saying, Therefore Christ died for all, that those who live may no longer live for themselves, but for Him who died for them. See, Lord, I cast my care upon You, that I may live and consider wonderful things out of Your law. You know my ignorance and my weakness; teach me and heal me. He, Your only Son, in whom are hidden all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge, has redeemed me with His blood. Let not the proud speak evil of me, because I meditate on my ransom, and eat and drink it, and share it out; and, being poor, I long to be filled from Him among those who eat and are filled; and they shall praise the Lord who seek Him.

