@@ 9
For nearly the whole of those nine years in which I had listened to the Manichees as a disciple, with a restless mind, I had been waiting for this Faustus to arrive, with a longing that was far too intense. The other members of the sect I happened to come across, when they could not answer the objections I raised about these matters, kept holding out to me the prospect of this Faustus's coming. Once he came and I could talk with him, they said, these difficulties, and any greater ones I might have, would be cleared up very easily and very fully. So when he did come, I found him a man of pleasant speech, who could talk fluently and in better language, but he was still saying exactly the same things they usually said. What good was the most elegant cup-bearer to my thirst for a more precious drink? My ears had already had their fill of such things. They did not seem any better to me because they were better said, nor true because they were eloquent, nor did the soul seem wise because the face was attractive and the language graceful. The people who had held him out to me were not good judges of things; so he seemed to them intelligent and wise simply because his speaking pleased them. I was aware, however, of another kind of people who are suspicious even of the truth and refuse to accept it if it is presented in polished and abundant speech. But You, my God, had already taught me in wonderful and hidden ways. I believe it was You who taught me, because it is the truth, and there is no other teacher of truth besides You, wherever and from whatever source it may shine on us. So I had already learned from You that nothing should seem true just because it is said eloquently, or false because the sounds coming from the lips are clumsy; and again, that nothing is true because it is expressed roughly, or false because the language is splendid. Rather, wisdom and folly are like wholesome and unwholesome food, and elaborate or plain words are like fine city dishes or rustic ones: either kind of food can be served on either kind of dish.

@@ 10
So the eagerness with which I had waited so long for that man was certainly delighted by his energy and feeling in debate, and by the fitting words that came so readily to him to clothe his ideas. I was delighted, and along with many others, and even more than they did, I praised him and spoke highly of him. It bothered me, though, that in the gathering of his listeners I was not allowed to put forward the questions that were troubling me and share them with him in a friendly exchange, giving and taking in conversation. When at last I could do so, I began, together with my friends, to claim his attention at a time when it was not unfitting for him to discuss things back and forth with me. I brought up some of the things that troubled me, and I discovered first of all that he was a man with no knowledge of the liberal arts except grammar, and even that only in an ordinary way. But he had read some of Tully's speeches, a very few books of Seneca, some of the poets, and whatever volumes of his own sect were written in Latin and in good style; and he had daily practice in speaking. From all this he had acquired a certain eloquence, which became all the more pleasing and seductive because it was controlled by a good mind and had a kind of natural charm. Is it not so, as I remember it, O Lord my God, judge of my conscience? My heart and my memory lie open before You, who were guiding me even then by the hidden secret of Your providence, and were already turning my shameful errors around to face me, so that I might see them and hate them.

@@ 11
For once it was clear enough that he was untrained in the arts in which I had thought he excelled, I began to lose hope that he could open up and resolve the problems that troubled me. He could, of course, have been ignorant of them and still hold the truth of piety, but only if he had not been a Manichee. Their books are full of endless fables about the sky and the stars and the sun and moon, and I no longer thought he could do what I very much wanted: to compare these things with the calculations I had read elsewhere and explain precisely whether the account given in the books of Manichaeus was the better one, or at least an equally good one. But when I put these things forward to be considered and discussed, he was modest enough not to dare to take up the burden. He knew that he did not know these things, and he was not ashamed to admit it. He was not one of those talkers, many of whom I had put up with, who tried to teach me these things and said nothing. This man had a heart which, though not right toward You, was still not altogether careless of itself. He was not wholly unaware of his own ignorance, and he did not want to rush into an argument and get himself trapped in a position from which he could neither get out nor easily retreat. Even for this I liked him more. For the moderation of a mind that admits the truth is more beautiful than the knowledge I was longing for; and that is how I found him in all the harder and subtler questions.

@@ 12
So my enthusiasm for the writings of Manichaeus was broken, and I lost hope even more in their other teachers, since the famous Faustus had turned out as he did on so many of the points that troubled me. I began instead to spend time with him on account of his own enthusiasm for literature, which he was keen on and which I was by then teaching to young men at Carthage as a teacher of rhetoric. I read with him either books he wanted to hear or ones I judged suited to a mind like his. But all the efforts by which I had meant to advance in that sect came completely to an end once I got to know that man. It was not that I cut myself off from them altogether; rather, finding nothing better, I had decided to be content for the time being with what I had somehow stumbled into, unless something more worth choosing should happen to dawn on me. So that Faustus, who was a snare of death to so many, had now begun, without wanting it or knowing it, to loosen the snare in which I was caught. For Your hands, my God, in the hidden depths of Your providence, did not abandon my soul. Out of my mother's heart's blood, through the tears she poured out day and night, a sacrifice was offered to You for me, and You dealt with me in wonderful ways. You did it, my God: for the steps of a man are directed by the Lord, and He shall choose his way. Or how are we to obtain salvation except from Your hand, remaking what it made?

