@@ 13
You were at work in me so that I would be persuaded to go to Rome and teach there instead the same subjects I was teaching at Carthage. I will not fail to confess to You how I was persuaded to do this, because here too the deepest recesses of Your wisdom and Your mercy, so very present to us, must be thought about and acknowledged. My reason for wanting to go to Rome was not that the friends who urged me to go promised me larger earnings and higher rank, although at that time even these things had a hold on my mind. My chief and almost only reason was that I had heard that young men studied more peacefully there and were kept in order by the restraint of a better-regulated discipline. They did not rush wildly and rudely whenever they liked into the classroom of a teacher whose students they were not, and they were not admitted at all unless he gave them permission. At Carthage, by contrast, the students have a disgraceful and uncontrolled license. They burst in shamelessly and, with an almost crazed look, throw into confusion the order that each teacher has set up for his pupils' progress. They commit many outrages with an astonishing dullness of mind, things that would be punished by law if custom did not protect them. That very custom shows them to be all the more wretched, since they now do as though it were allowed what by Your eternal law will never be allowed. And they think they do it without punishment, when in fact they are punished by the very blindness with which they do it, and suffer incomparably worse than what they inflict. So the behavior I refused to make my own when I was a student I was forced to put up with in others when I was a teacher; and that is why I was glad to go to a place where, as everyone who knew it told me, such things did not happen. But it was You, my refuge and my portion in the land of the living, who, so that I would change my earthly home for the salvation of my soul, applied goads to me at Carthage to tear me away from it, and held out attractions to me at Rome to draw me there. You did it through people who love a life that is really death, some of them doing insane things, the others promising empty ones; and to correct my steps You secretly made use of their perversity and my own. For those who disturbed my peace were blinded by a disgraceful frenzy, and those who invited me elsewhere had a taste only for earthly things. And I, who here hated a real misery, was there seeking a false happiness.

@@ 14
But why I was leaving one place and going to the other, You knew, O God, yet You did not reveal it either to me or to my mother. She bitterly grieved over my going and followed me all the way to the sea. But she clung to me with all her strength, determined either to call me back or to go with me, and I deceived her. I pretended that I had a friend I did not want to leave until he had a good wind to sail. So I lied to my mother, and such a mother, and got away. This too You have mercifully forgiven me, saving me, full as I was of detestable filth, from the waters of the sea to bring me to the water of Your grace. Once I was washed in it, the rivers flowing from my mother's eyes would be dried, the tears with which she watered the ground beneath her face every day for my sake. Still, since she refused to go back home without me, I barely managed to persuade her to stay that night in a place close to our ship, a shrine in memory of the blessed Cyprian. But that night I secretly set out, while she stayed behind, praying and weeping. And what was she asking of You, O Lord, with so many tears, except that You would not let me sail? But You, taking a deeper counsel and hearing the heart of her desire, did not grant what she was asking for then, so that You might make me what she was always asking for. The wind blew and filled our sails and took the shore out of our sight. The next morning she was there on that shore, wild with grief, filling Your ears with complaints and groans, which You then disregarded. For You were sweeping me along through my own desires to put an end to those very desires, and the earthly part of her love for me was being chastened by the just scourge of grief. She loved to have me with her, as mothers do, but far more than many mothers; and she did not know what great joy You were going to bring her out of my absence. She did not know, so she wept and wailed, and in that agony the inheritance of Eve showed itself in her, as she sought in sorrow the child she had brought forth in sorrow. And yet, after accusing me of treachery and cruelty, she turned again to praying to You for me and went back to her usual life, and I went on to Rome.

