@@ 15
And look: there in Rome I was greeted by the scourge of bodily illness, and I was already on my way down to hell, carrying all the sins I had committed against You, against myself and against others, many and grievous sins, on top of that bond of original sin by which we all die in Adam. For You had not yet forgiven me any of these things in Christ, and He had not yet abolished on His Cross the enmity I had brought on myself with You by my sins. How could He have abolished it by the crucifixion of a phantom, which is what I believed Him to be? So the death of my soul was as real as the death of His flesh seemed to me unreal; and as real as the death of His body was, so unreal was the life of my soul, which did not believe it. And as the fever grew worse I was already going, already perishing. For if I had left this world then, where would I have gone except into the fire and the torments my deeds deserved, in the truth of the order You have established? She did not know about this, yet she was praying for me from far away. But You, present everywhere, heard her where she was and had pity on me where I was, so that I recovered the health of my body, though my heart was still sick and sacrilegious. For in all that danger I did not ask for Your baptism. I had been better as a boy, when I begged for it from my mother's devotion, as I have already recalled and confessed. But I had grown up to my own disgrace, and in my madness I laughed at the counsels of Your medicine, You who would not let me die a double death in the state I was in. If my mother's heart had been struck by that wound, it could never have been healed. For I cannot adequately express the love she had for me, and how much greater was the anguish with which she was now in labor with me in the spirit than when she had given birth to me in the flesh.

@@ 16
So I do not see how she could have been healed if a death like that had pierced the very depths of her love. And what would have become of all those prayers of hers, so intense and so frequent, offered without ceasing to You alone? Would You, God of mercies, despise the contrite and humbled heart of that chaste and sober widow? She gave alms so often; she was so dutiful and so ready to serve Your saints; she never let a day pass without making her offering at Your altar. Twice a day, morning and evening, without fail, she came to Your church, not for idle gossip and old wives' tales, but so that she might hear You in Your sermons and You might hear her in her prayers. Could You despise such a woman's tears and turn them away from Your help, when with them she was asking You not for gold or silver or any changeable, passing good, but for the salvation of her son's soul? Could You, by whose gift she was what she was? Never, Lord. No, You were there, hearing and acting, in the order You had determined beforehand that it should be done. Far be it from You to deceive her in those visions and answers of Yours, some of which I have mentioned and some not. She kept them in her faithful heart and, always praying, pressed them on You as though they were Your own signed pledges. For since Your mercy endures forever, You graciously consent to become a debtor through Your promises to those whose debts You forgive entirely.

@@ 17
So You brought me through that illness and made the son of Your handmaid well, for the time being in body, so that he might live for You to give him a better and more lasting health. And even then, in Rome, I was joining up with those deceived and deceiving "holy ones." I associated not only with their hearers (the man in whose house I had fallen ill and recovered was one of them) but also with those they call "the Elect." For it still seemed to me "that it is not we who sin, but some other nature, I do not know what, that sins in us." It pleased my pride to stand outside all blame, and when I had done something wrong, not to confess that I had done it, so that You might heal my soul, since it had sinned against You. Instead I loved to excuse myself and to accuse some other thing, I did not know what, that was with me but was not I. But in truth it was all I, and my own ungodliness had divided me against myself. And that sin was all the more incurable because I did not think I was a sinner. It was a detestable wickedness that I would rather have You, You, almighty God, be overcome in me to my ruin than have myself be overcome by You to my salvation. So You had not yet set a watch before my mouth, and a door of safe keeping around my lips, so that my heart would not turn aside to wicked words, to make excuses for sins with men who work iniquity. And that is why I was still united with their Elect.

