@@ 18
But by now I had given up hope of making any progress in that false teaching, and even the things I had decided to be content with if I found nothing better I now held more loosely and carelessly. For a thought had half arisen in me that the philosophers they call Academics were wiser than the rest, because they held that people ought to doubt everything and had laid it down that no truth can be grasped by a human being. That is what I, too, was plainly convinced they thought, as they are commonly reported to, since I did not yet understand even what they really meant. Yet I did not hesitate to warn my host, freely and openly, against the excessive confidence I could see he had in the fables that fill the books of Manichaeus. Still, I lived on closer terms of friendship with them than with others who did not belong to that heresy. I no longer defended it with my old eagerness; but my intimacy with that sect (Rome hides a good many of them) made me slower to look for any other way. This was especially so because I had given up hope of finding the truth in Your Church, O Lord of heaven and earth, Creator of all things visible and invisible, for they had turned me away from it. It seemed to me very degrading to believe that You had the shape of human flesh and were bounded by the bodily outlines of our limbs. And because, whenever I wanted to think about my God, I did not know how to think of anything except a mass of bodies (for whatever was not like that did not seem to me to exist at all), this was the greatest and almost the only cause of the error I could not escape.

@@ 19
For this is why I believed that evil, too, was some such kind of substance, with its own foul and hideous bulk. It might be dense, which they called earth, or thin and fine, like the body of the air, which they imagine as a malignant mind creeping through that earth. And because some kind of piety, such as it was, forced me to believe that the good God never created any evil nature, I pictured two masses opposed to each other, both of them infinite, but the evil one narrower and the good one larger. From this poisonous starting point all my other sacrilegious notions followed. For whenever my mind tried to go back to the Catholic faith, I was thrown back, because what I took to be the Catholic faith was not the Catholic faith. I thought myself more reverent if I believed that You, my God (to whom Your mercies make confession through my mouth), were infinite at least on the other sides, even though on the one side where the mass of evil stood against You I was forced to admit that You were bounded, than if I imagined You bounded on every side by the shape of a human body. And it seemed better to me to believe that You had created no evil than to believe that the nature of evil, as I pictured it, came from You. In my ignorance, evil seemed to me not merely a substance of some kind but a bodily one, because I could not think of mind except as a fine body, spread out through the spaces of place. I even believed that our Saviour Himself, Your Only Begotten, had been stretched out, as it were, for our salvation from the mass of Your most shining substance, so that I believed nothing about Him except what I could imagine in my emptiness. I thought, then, that a nature like His could not be born of the Virgin Mary without being mixed with the flesh; and I could not see how something like what I had pictured could be mixed with the flesh and not be defiled. So I was afraid to believe that He was born in the flesh, in case I should be forced to believe that He was defiled by the flesh. Your spiritual ones will smile at me gently and lovingly if they read these confessions of mine. But that is what I was.

@@ 20
Moreover, I thought that the things the Manichees had attacked in Your Scriptures could not be defended. Yet at times I really did want to talk over these points one by one with someone very learned in those books and find out what he thought about them. For even at Carthage I had begun to be stirred by the words of a certain Helpidius, who spoke and argued face to face against these same Manichees. He brought forward things from the Scriptures that could not easily be resisted, and the Manichees' answer to him seemed weak to me. They did not like to give this answer publicly, only to us in private. It was that the Scriptures of the New Testament had been corrupted by someone or other who wanted to graft the law of the Jews onto the Christian faith; yet they themselves never produced any uncorrupted copies. But since I could think only of bodily things, I was held down above all, crushed and in a way suffocated, by those "masses." Gasping under them for the breath of Your truth, I could not breathe it in its pure and simple air.

