@@ 21
So I began to work hard at what I had come to Rome to do, teaching rhetoric. First I gathered a few students at my house, people through whom, and to whom, I had begun to become known. And then I discovered that other offenses were committed at Rome which I had not had to put up with in Africa. It was true, as I had been told, that those "wreckings" by dissolute young men did not go on there. But suddenly, they told me, to avoid paying their teacher's fee, a group of young men conspire together and move to another teacher: breakers of their word, who for love of money think nothing of justice. My heart hated these people too, though not with a perfect hatred. For perhaps I hated them more because I was going to suffer at their hands than because they were doing things that were wrong in themselves. Certainly such people are base, and they go whoring away from You, loving the fleeting mockeries of temporal things and filthy gain, which dirties the hand that grasps it. They embrace a world that is running away and despise You, who remain, who call back the adulterous human soul and forgive her when she returns to You. And now I hate such twisted and crooked people, though I love them as people who can be corrected, so that they may come to prefer the learning they acquire to money, and to learning prefer You, O God, the truth and abundance of sure good and the purest peace. But back then I was more unwilling to put up with their wickedness for my own sake than I was wishing them to become good for Yours.

@@ 22
So when the people of Milan sent to the prefect of the city of Rome asking him to provide their city with a teacher of rhetoric, and to send him with travel at public expense, I put myself forward. I did it through those very people who were drunk on Manichaean foolishness, the very people I was going away to be rid of, though neither they nor I knew it. I asked that Symmachus, who was then prefect of the city, should test me by setting me a speech to deliver, and so send me. And I came to Milan, to Ambrose the bishop, known throughout the world as one of the best of men, Your devout worshipper. In those days his eloquent sermons were vigorously giving out to Your people the finest flour of Your wheat, the gladness of Your oil and the sober intoxication of Your wine. I was being led to him by You without knowing it, so that through him I might be led to You knowing it. That man of God welcomed me like a father and, as a bishop should, was kind about my coming there as a stranger. And I began to love him, at first not as a teacher of the truth, for I had entirely given up hope of finding that in Your Church, but as a man who was kind to me. I listened carefully when he preached to the people, not with the intention I should have had, but as if I were testing his eloquence to see whether it lived up to its reputation or flowed more or less freely than people said. I hung intently on his words, but as for their content, I stood by uninterested and scornful. I was delighted by the charm of his speech, which was more learned than that of Faustus but, in its manner of delivery, less lively and soothing. As for the substance, though, there was no comparison: the one was wandering among Manichaean deceptions, while the other was teaching salvation in the soundest way. But salvation is far from sinners, and such was I as I stood there then. And yet I was drawing closer, little by little and without knowing it.

@@ 23
I did not take the trouble to learn what he was saying, only to hear how he said it, since that empty concern was all I had left, now that I had given up hope that any way to You lay open to human beings. Yet along with the words I enjoyed, the things I did not care about also came into my mind, for I could not separate them. And while I opened my heart to take in "how eloquently he spoke," there also came in "how truly he spoke," though only by degrees. For first, these things too began to seem to me capable of being defended. The Catholic faith, for which I had thought nothing could be said against the attacks of the Manichees, I now thought could be upheld without shame. This was especially so after I had heard one or two passages of the Old Testament explained, and often "in a figure," passages which had been killing me when I took them literally. So when many passages of those books had been explained in a spiritual sense, I now began to blame my despair, at least the despair in which I had believed that no answer at all could be given to those who hated and mocked the Law and the Prophets. But I did not yet feel that the Catholic way was the one I must hold just because it too could have its learned defenders, who could answer objections fully and not unreasonably. Nor did I feel that what I held should be condemned just because the two sides were equally matched in defense. For the Catholic cause seemed to me not defeated, but not yet victorious either.

@@ 24
Then I set my mind hard to work, to see whether I could somehow convict the Manichees of falsehood by some certain proofs. If I had been able to conceive of a spiritual substance, all their strongholds would at once have been broken down and thrown out of my mind; but I could not. Still, as I considered and compared things more and more, I judged that most of the philosophers had held far more probable views about the physical frame of this world and about the whole of nature that the senses of the flesh can reach. So, in the manner of the Academics as they are commonly understood, doubting everything and wavering among all views, I did at least decide that the Manichees must be abandoned. I judged that even during my time of doubt I should not remain in a sect to which I already preferred some of the philosophers. Yet I absolutely refused to entrust the cure of my sick soul to those philosophers, because they were without the saving Name of Christ. So I decided to be a catechumen in the Catholic Church, which my parents had commended to me, for as long as it took until something certain should dawn on me by which I could steer my course.

