@@ 0
You, my hope from my youth, where were You for me, and where had You gone? Had You not created me and set me apart from the beasts of the field and the birds of the air? You had made me wiser than they, and yet I walked in darkness and on slippery ground, searching for You outside myself, and I did not find the God of my heart. I had come down into the depths of the sea, and I lost confidence and despaired of ever finding the truth. By now my mother had come to me, strong in her devotion, following me over land and sea, and in every danger secure in You. When the sea was perilous she even comforted the sailors themselves (though it is usually they who comfort passengers new to the deep when they are frightened), promising them that they would arrive safely, because You had promised her this in a vision. She found me in grave danger through my despair of ever finding the truth. But when I told her that I was no longer a Manichee, though not yet a Catholic Christian either, she did not leap for joy as though she had heard something unexpected. Yet she was now reassured about that part of my misery for which she had been mourning me as one dead, though one You would raise again. She was carrying me out on the bier of her thoughts, so that You might say to the widow's son, Young man, I say to you, Arise; and he would come back to life and begin to speak, and You would give him back to his mother. So her heart was not shaken by any wild rejoicing when she heard that what she daily begged of You with tears had already been so largely accomplished: though I had not yet reached the truth, I had been rescued from falsehood. Rather, because she was sure that You, who had promised the whole, would one day give the rest, she answered me very calmly, with a heart full of confidence, "She believed in Christ that before she left this life she would see me a faithful Catholic." That much she said to me. But to You, Fountain of mercies, she poured out still more prayers and tears, that You would hurry Your help and light up my darkness. She hurried all the more eagerly to church and hung on the lips of Ambrose, longing for the fountain of that water which springs up to eternal life. She loved that man as an angel of God, because she knew that it was through him that I had been brought, for the time being, into that wavering state of faith I was now in. Through it she fully and confidently expected that I would pass from sickness to health, after going through, as it were, a sharper attack, the kind that physicians call "the crisis."

@@ 1
In Africa my mother had been in the habit of bringing cakes, bread and wine to the churches built in memory of the saints. Once, when she did this, the doorkeeper stopped her. As soon as she learned that the bishop had forbidden it, she accepted his wish so devoutly and obediently that I myself was amazed at how readily she found fault with her own custom rather than argue about his ban. For no craving for wine laid siege to her spirit, and no love of wine goaded her into hating the truth, as it does to a great many men and women, who are sickened by any call to sobriety the way drunkards are sickened by a drink mixed with water. When she brought her basket of the customary festival food, to be tasted first by herself and then given away, she never set out more than one small cup of wine, diluted to suit her own very sober palate, from which she would take a sip for courtesy's sake. And if there were many shrines of the departed saints that seemed to deserve this kind of honor, she carried the same single cup around to set down at each. By then it was not only thoroughly watered but also unpleasantly lukewarm, and she would share it in tiny sips with those around her, because what she sought there was devotion, not pleasure. So when she discovered that this famous preacher and most devout bishop had ordered that it should not be done, even by those who did it soberly, so that no opening for gorging might be given to drunkards, and because these quasi-memorial feasts for the dead closely resembled the superstition of the pagans, she gave it up most willingly. In place of a basket full of the fruits of the earth, she had learned to bring to the shrines of the martyrs a heart full of purer prayers, and to give what she could to the poor. In this way the communion of the Lord's Body could be rightly celebrated in the place where the martyrs, in imitation of His Passion, were sacrificed and crowned. And yet it seems to me, O Lord my God, and this is how my heart judges it in Your sight, that perhaps she would not so easily have given up this custom if it had been forbidden by someone else whom she did not love as she loved Ambrose. She loved him dearly for the sake of my salvation, and he loved her for her deeply religious way of life, so fervent in spirit, as she went constantly to church doing good works. Often when he saw me he would break out in praise of her, congratulating me on having such a mother. He did not know what kind of son she had in me, a son who doubted all these things and did not believe the way of life could ever be found.

@@ 2
I was not yet groaning in prayer for You to help me. My mind was wholly bent on inquiry and restless for argument. I regarded Ambrose himself as a fortunate man by the world's standards, since such important people held him in such honor; only his celibacy struck me as a hard burden. But what hope he carried within him, what struggles he had against the temptations that came with his very excellence, what comfort he found in hardship, and what delicious joys the hidden mouth of his heart tasted as it chewed over Your Bread, I could neither guess nor had I experienced. Nor did he know the surges of my feelings or the pit of my danger. For I could not ask him what I wanted, in the way I wanted, because crowds of people with business, whose weaknesses he served, shut me off from his ear and his speech. When he was not with them, which was only a very short time, he was either refreshing his body with the food it strictly needed or refreshing his mind with reading. When he read, his eyes moved over the pages and his heart probed the meaning, but his voice and tongue were still. We often came to him, for no one was forbidden to enter, and it was not his custom to have visitors announced, and we would see him reading like this, silently, and never any other way. After sitting a long while in silence (for who would dare to burden a man so absorbed?) we would leave. We guessed that in the little time he managed to get for restoring his mind, free from the noise of other people's affairs, he did not want to be drawn away to anything else. Perhaps, too, he was wary that if the author he was reading put something obscurely, some listener hanging on his words might need him to explain it, or to argue over some of the harder questions, and that with his time spent on this he would get through fewer books than he wanted. Then again, the need to save his voice, which became hoarse very easily, may have been the truer reason for his reading silently. But whatever his purpose in doing it, in such a man it was certainly a good one.

@@ 3
In any case, I was given no chance to ask what I wanted of that holy oracle of Yours, his heart, unless the matter could be heard briefly. But the surges within me that I needed to pour out to him required him to be wholly at leisure, and they never found him so. I did hear him every Lord's Day, rightly handling the word of truth before the people, and I became more and more convinced that all the knots of cunning slander that those deceivers of ours had tied against the divine Books could be untied. And when I also learned that "man, created by You in Your own image," was not understood by Your spiritual sons, whom You have given new birth through grace from the Catholic Mother, to mean that they believed and pictured You as bounded by the shape of a human body (although I had not even the faintest or dimmest idea of what a spiritual substance could be), I blushed, yet with joy, that for so many years I had been barking not at the Catholic faith but at the fictions of fleshly imaginings. I had been so rash and impious that I had condemned outright what I ought to have learned by asking. For You, Most High and most near, most hidden and most present, who do not have limbs, some larger and some smaller, but are everywhere whole and nowhere in space, are certainly not of such a bodily shape. And yet You have made man in Your own image, and look, from head to foot he is contained in space.

@@ 4
Since I did not know how this image of Yours could exist, I should have knocked and put forward the question of how it was to be believed, not mocked and opposed it as though it were believed in that way. So the question of what I could hold as certain gnawed at my heart all the more sharply the more ashamed I was that, having been deluded and deceived so long by the promise of certainties, I had babbled about so many uncertain things as if they were certain, with a child's error and passion. That they were actually false became clear to me only later. But I was certain that they were uncertain, and that I had once treated them as certain when I blindly and contentiously attacked Your Catholic Church. I had not yet found that she taught the truth, but I had found that she did not teach the things I had so harshly accused her of. So I was put to shame and turned around, and I rejoiced, my God, that the one only Church, the body of Your only Son, in which the name of Christ had been given to me as an infant, had no taste for infantile nonsense. Nor did her sound doctrine hold any teaching that would squeeze You, the Creator of all things, into a region of space, however lofty and vast, yet bounded on every side by the shape of human limbs.

