@@ 10
Those of us who lived together as friends lamented these things together, but I spoke of them most of all, and most intimately, with Alypius and Nebridius. Alypius was born in the same town as I was, to a family of the leading rank there, but he was younger than me. He had studied under me, both when I first taught in our town and later at Carthage. He loved me very much because I seemed to him kind and learned, and I loved him for his great natural bent toward virtue, which stood out clearly enough in someone so young. But the whirlpool of Carthaginian habits, where those frivolous shows are followed with passion, had sucked him into the madness of the Circus. While he was wretchedly swirling around in it, I was teaching rhetoric there and had a public school, but he did not yet attend my classes, because of some ill feeling that had arisen between his father and me. I had found out how fatally he loved the Circus, and I was deeply distressed, because he seemed to me about to throw away, or even to have already thrown away, such great promise. Yet I had no way of warning him or of drawing him back by some kind of pressure, whether by the goodwill of a friend or by the authority of a teacher. For I supposed that he felt about me as his father did; but he did not. So, setting aside his father's wishes in this matter, he began to greet me, and sometimes came into my lecture room, listened a little, and left.

@@ 11
I, however, had forgotten to take the matter up with him, so that he would not ruin such a fine mind through a blind and headlong passion for empty games. But You, Lord, who guide the course of everything You have created, had not forgotten him, who was one day to be among Your children, a priest and dispenser of Your Sacrament. And so that his correction might plainly be credited to You, You brought it about through me, but without my knowing it. One day, as I sat in my usual place with my students before me, he came in, greeted me, sat down and turned his mind to what we were dealing with. I happened to have a passage in hand, and while I was explaining it, a comparison with the Circus races occurred to me as likely to make my point more pleasant and clearer, flavored with biting mockery of those whom that madness had enslaved. You know, our God, that I was not thinking at the time of curing Alypius of that disease. But he took it wholly to himself and believed that I had said it only because of him. What someone else would have taken as a reason to be angry with me, that honest young man took as a reason to be angry with himself and to love me more warmly. For You had said it long ago and woven it into Your book: Rebuke a wise man, and he will love you. But I had not rebuked him. It was You, who make use of everyone, whether they know it or not, in the order You know (and that order is just), who made burning coals out of my heart and tongue, to set on fire a mind of good promise that was wasting away, and so to cure it. Let anyone keep silent in Your praise who does not consider Your mercies, which confess to You from the depths of my being. For after those words he tore himself out of that deep pit into which he had been willingly plunging, blinded by its wretched pleasures. He shook his mind free with strong self-control, and all the filth of the Circus games dropped away from him, and he never went there again. After this he overcame his reluctant father's objections so that he might have me as his teacher. His father gave way and gave in. And when Alypius began to attend my lectures again, he became entangled with me in the same superstition, loving in the Manichees that display of continence which he supposed to be real and genuine. But it was a senseless and seductive continence, which ensnared precious souls that could not yet reach the depth of virtue and were easily deceived by the surface of what was only a shadowy and counterfeit virtue.

@@ 12
Not abandoning the worldly path that his parents had charmed him into following, he had gone ahead of me to Rome to study law. There he was seized, unbelievably, by an unbelievable craving for gladiatorial shows. He had loathed and detested such spectacles. But one day he happened to meet some of his acquaintances and fellow students coming back from dinner, and with the rough force of friends they dragged him, though he fiercely refused and resisted, into the amphitheater during the days of those cruel and deadly games. He protested, "You may drag my body to that place and set me down there, but can you make me turn my mind or my eyes to those shows? I will be absent though present, and so I will get the better of both you and them." When they heard this, they took him along all the same, perhaps wanting to test that very thing, whether he could do what he said. When they arrived and had taken what seats they could, the whole place was seething with that savage pleasure. But he shut the doors of his eyes and forbade his mind to go out after such evils. If only he had blocked his ears as well! For at some turn in the fight, when a man fell, a huge roar from the whole crowd struck him hard. Overcome by curiosity, and as if ready to despise and rise above whatever it was even once he had seen it, he opened his eyes. And he was struck by a deeper wound in his soul than the man he wanted to see had received in his body, and he fell more wretchedly than the man whose fall had raised that great roar. The roar came in through his ears and unlocked his eyes, opening the way for the striking and beating down of a soul that was bold rather than strong, and all the weaker for having relied on itself when it ought to have relied on You. As soon as he saw that blood, he drank in savagery along with it. He did not turn away but fixed his gaze, gulping down frenzy without knowing it, delighting in the wicked contest and getting drunk on the bloody pleasure. He was no longer the man who had come, but one of the crowd he had come into, and a true companion of those who had brought him there. What more is there to say? He watched, he shouted, he caught fire, and he carried away with him a madness that would goad him to come back, not only with those who had first dragged him there, but even ahead of them, and dragging others along too. Yet from there You rescued him with a most strong and most merciful hand, and taught him to put his confidence not in himself but in You. But that was long afterward.

@@ 13
Still, this was already being stored away in his memory as medicine for the future. So was another incident. When he was still studying under me at Carthage, he was going over at midday in the marketplace what he was to recite, as students usually practice, and You allowed him to be arrested by the marketplace officers as a thief. I think You allowed it, our God, for no other reason than that this man, who was one day to be so great, should begin to learn already that in hearing cases a person should not easily be condemned by another person through rash credulity. He was walking up and down alone in front of the judgment seat with his writing tablets and pen, when suddenly a young man, a lawyer, the real thief, secretly carrying a hatchet, slipped in without Alypius noticing, as far as the lead railings that stand above the silversmiths' street, and began to hack away the lead. But when the sound of the hatchet was heard, the silversmiths below started muttering and sent men to seize whoever they might find. The thief heard their voices and ran off, leaving his hatchet behind, afraid of being caught with it. Now Alypius, who had not seen him go in, noticed him leaving and saw how fast he was getting away. Wanting to know what was going on, he went into the place, found the hatchet, and was standing there looking at it in wonder when suddenly the men who had been sent found him alone, holding the very tool whose noise had alarmed them and brought them there. They grabbed him and dragged him off, and gathering the people who lived around the marketplace, they boasted of having caught a thief red-handed. And so he was being led away to be brought before the judge.

@@ 14
But this was as far as Alypius's lesson was to go. For at once, Lord, You came to the aid of his innocence, of which You alone were the witness. As he was being led off either to prison or to punishment, they were met by a certain architect who had chief charge of the public buildings. They were especially glad to meet him, because he usually suspected them of stealing the goods that went missing from the marketplace, and now at last, they thought, he would see who was committing these thefts. But this man had often seen Alypius at the house of a certain senator whom he regularly visited to pay his respects. He recognized him at once, took him by the hand and drew him aside, and asked the reason for such a disaster. He heard the whole story and ordered everyone present, who were in an uproar and making threats, to come with him. So they came to the house of the young man who had committed the crime. In front of the door was a boy, so young that he was likely to tell the whole story without fearing any harm to his master, for he had gone with his master to the marketplace as his attendant. As soon as Alypius remembered him, he told the architect, who showed the hatchet to the boy and asked him, "Whose is this?" "Ours," he said at once, and when he was questioned further he revealed everything. So the charge was shifted to that house, and the crowd that had begun to gloat over Alypius was put to shame. And he who was to be a dispenser of Your Word and a judge of many cases in Your Church went away more experienced and better taught.

@@ 15
I had found him, then, at Rome, and he clung to me with the strongest bond and went with me to Milan, both so as not to leave me and so as to practice something of the law he had studied, more to satisfy his parents' wishes than his own. There he had already sat three times as an assessor, with an integrity that others found astonishing, while he was more astonished at those who could prefer gold to honesty. His character was also tested, not only by the lure of greed but by the goad of fear. At Rome he served as assessor to the Count of the Italian Treasury. At that time there was a very powerful senator, to whom many were bound by favors and of whom many stood in fear. As his power allowed, he wanted to be permitted something that the laws did not permit. Alypius resisted. A bribe was promised; he scorned it with all his heart. Threats were made; he trampled on them. Everyone marveled at such an unusual spirit, which neither wanted the friendship nor feared the enmity of a man so great and so widely famed for his countless ways of doing good or harm. Even the judge whose counselor Alypius was, though he too did not want it done, did not openly refuse. Instead he shifted the matter onto Alypius, claiming that Alypius would not let him do it; and in truth, if the judge had done it, Alypius would have left. The one thing that very nearly tempted him was his love of learning: he could have had books copied for himself at Praetorian rates. But he consulted justice and changed his mind for the better, judging the fairness that forbade him more profitable than the power that would have allowed him. These are small things, but whoever is faithful in little is faithful also in much. And what came from the mouth of Your Truth can in no way be empty: If you have not been faithful in the unrighteous mammon, who will entrust to you the true riches? And if you have not been faithful in what belongs to another, who will give you what is your own? Such was the man who clung to me at that time and wavered with me over what way of life we should take.

