@@ 16
Nebridius, too, had come to Milan. He had left his native place near Carthage, and Carthage itself, where he had spent much of his time; he had left his excellent family estate and his house, and a mother who was not going to follow him. He had come for no other reason than to live with me in a most ardent search for truth and wisdom. Like me he sighed, like me he wavered, an eager seeker of the happy life and a very sharp investigator of the hardest questions. So there were the mouths of three needy people, sighing out their wants to one another and waiting on You, that You might give them their food in due season. And in all the bitterness that, by Your mercy, followed our worldly dealings, when we looked to the end, asking why we should suffer all this, darkness met us. We turned away groaning and said, How long will these things go on? We said this often, and yet, saying it, we did not give them up, because nothing certain had yet dawned on us that we could take hold of once we had let these things go.

@@ 17
As I looked back and went over things, I was most amazed at how long it had been since my nineteenth year, when I had begun to burn with the desire for wisdom, resolving that once I found her I would abandon all the empty hopes and lying frenzies of vain desires. And here I was, already in my thirtieth year, stuck in the same mud, greedy to enjoy present things that slipped away and scattered me, while I kept saying to myself: "Tomorrow I will find it. It will become plain, and I will grasp it. Look, Faustus the Manichee will come and explain everything! O you great men, you Academics, is it true, then, that nothing certain can be grasped for the conduct of life? No, let us search more diligently and not despair. Look, things in the Church's books that once seemed absurd no longer seem absurd to us, and they can be understood differently and in a good sense. I will plant my feet on the step where my parents set me as a child until the clear truth is found. But where is it to be sought? When is it to be sought? Ambrose has no time; we have no time to read. Where can we even find the books? From where, or when, can we get hold of them? From whom can we borrow them? Let times be set aside and hours assigned for the health of the soul. A great hope has dawned: the Catholic faith does not teach what we thought and what we vainly accused it of. Its learned members hold it sacrilege to believe that God is bounded by the shape of a human body. And do we hesitate to 'knock,' so that the rest 'may be opened'? Our students take up the mornings; what do we do with the rest of the day? Why not do this? But then when do we pay calls on our influential friends, whose support we need? When do we prepare what our students will pay for? When do we restore ourselves, relaxing our minds from the strain of our cares?

@@ 18
"Let everything go to ruin! Let us dismiss these empty vanities and give ourselves to the one search for truth! Life is wretched, death uncertain. If it creeps up on us suddenly, in what state will we leave this world? And where will we learn what we neglected here? Will we not rather have to pay the penalty for this neglect? And what if death itself cuts off and ends all care along with all feeling? Then that too must be looked into. But God forbid that it should be so! It is not for nothing, it is no empty thing, that the towering dignity of the authority of the Christian faith has spread over the whole world. Such great things would never have been done for us by God if the life of the soul came to an end with the death of the body. Why, then, do we delay to give up worldly hopes and devote ourselves wholly to seeking God and the happy life? But wait! These things are pleasant too; they have some sweetness of their own, and not a little. We must not lightly break off our pursuit of them, for it would be shameful to go back to them again. Look, how little it would take now to obtain some official post! And what more should we want than that? We have plenty of influential friends. If nothing else comes along, and we press hard, we could at least be given a governorship. And a wife with some money, so that she does not add to our expenses; and that will be the limit of our desire. Many great men, most worthy of imitation, have devoted themselves to the study of wisdom while married."

@@ 19
While I talked like this, and these winds shifted back and forth and drove my heart this way and that, time went by, and I was slow to turn to the Lord. From day to day I put off living in You, and yet I did not put off dying in myself every day. I loved the happy life, yet I feared it in its own dwelling place, and I sought it while running away from it. For I thought I would be too miserable if I were deprived of a woman's embraces. I did not think of the medicine of Your mercy for curing that weakness, because I had never tried it. As for continence, I supposed it lay in our own power (though I did not find that power in myself). I was so foolish that I did not know what is written, that no one can be continent unless You give it; and that You would surely give it if I knocked at Your ears with inward groaning and, with firm faith, cast my care on You.

@@ 20
Alypius, for his part, kept me from marrying. He insisted that if I did, we could in no way live together in the love of wisdom with the undisturbed leisure we had long desired. He himself was even then remarkably pure in this respect, which was all the more wonderful because at the start of his youth he had entered on that experience but had not got stuck in it. Rather, he had felt regret and disgust at it, and from then until now had lived in the most perfect continence. But I countered him with the examples of those who, as married men, had cherished wisdom, served God acceptably, kept their friends and loved them faithfully. I fell far short of their greatness of spirit. Bound by the disease of the flesh and its deadly sweetness, I dragged my chain along, afraid to be set loose, and, as though my wound had been rubbed raw, I pushed away his good advice like the hand of someone trying to unchain me. What is more, through me the serpent spoke to Alypius himself. Through my tongue it wove sweet snares and laid them in his path, to entangle his honest and unencumbered feet.

