Read these three short excerpts from a modern reading edition of Jane Eyre. Answer the questions using only your first natural reading; do not re-read to 'solve' anything. Be honest if you were briefly confused.

EXCERPT 1 (Rochester sings a love song; these are consecutive verses)
I care not in this moment sweet, Though all I have rushed o'er Should come on pinion, strong and fleet, Proclaiming vengeance sore:
Though haughty Hate should strike me down, Right, bar approach to me, And grinding Might, with furious frown, Swear endless enmity.
My love has placed her little hand With noble faith in mine, And vowed that wedlock's sacred band Our nature shall entwine.

Q1. In the second verse, who or what does what to the singer? List each actor and action.

EXCERPT 2 (St. John and Jane walk up a valley on the moors)
“Let us rest here,” said St. John, as we reached the first stragglers of a battalion of rocks, guarding a sort of pass, beyond which the stream rushed down in a waterfall; and where, still a little farther, the mountain shook off turf and flower, and had only heath for raiment and crag for gem — where it exaggerated the wild to the savage, and exchanged the fresh for the frowning — where it guarded the forlorn hope of solitude, and a last refuge for silence.

I took a seat: St. John stood near me. He looked up the pass and down the hollow; his glance wandered away with the stream, and returned to traverse the unclouded heaven which coloured it: he removed his hat, let the breeze stir his hair and kiss his brow. He seemed in communion with the genius of the haunt: with his eye he bade farewell to something.

Q2. In your own words, what is St. John doing/feeling in the second paragraph? What does 'in communion with the genius of the haunt' mean to you?

EXCERPT 3 (St. John wants Jane to marry him and come to India; she offers to go only as a fellow missionary)
“I repeat I freely consent to go with you as your fellow-missionary, but not as your wife; I cannot marry you and become part of you.”

“A part of me you must become,” he answered steadily; “otherwise the whole bargain is void. How can I, a man not yet thirty, take out with me to India a girl of nineteen, unless she be married to me? How can we be forever together — sometimes in solitudes, sometimes amidst savage tribes — and unwed?”

“Very well,” I said shortly; “under the circumstances, quite as well as if I were either your real sister, or a man and a clergyman like yourself.”

“It is known that you are not my sister; I cannot introduce you as such: to attempt it would be to fasten harmful suspicions on us both. And for the rest, though you have a man’s vigorous brain, you have a woman’s heart and — it would not do.”

Q3. When Jane says her line starting 'Very well', what is she saying to St. John? Is she agreeing with him, disagreeing, or something else? On first reading, did it read as agreement?
