1|The most useful and least developed of all human studies is, in my opinion, the study of man, and I dare say that the inscription on the temple at Delphi contained by itself a more important and difficult lesson than all the thick volumes of the moralists. I therefore regard the subject of this Discourse as one of the most interesting questions philosophy can raise and, unfortunately for us, one of the thorniest that philosophers can try to settle. For how can we discover the source of inequality among men without knowing men themselves? And how can man see himself as nature made him, in spite of all the changes that a long succession of years and events must have worked on his original constitution, and tell what belongs to his own essence from what circumstances and his own progress have added to or altered in his primitive condition? The human soul is like the statue of Glaucus, which time, sea and storms had so disfigured that it looked more like a wild beast than a god. Altered in the heart of society by a thousand ever-changing causes, by countless discoveries and errors, by changes in the make-up of the bodies around it, and by the constant clash of its own passions, the human soul has lost so much of its original appearance that it can scarcely be recognized. Instead of a being that always acts on fixed and unvarying principles, instead of that heavenly and majestic simplicity its Author stamped on it, we find only the shocking contrast of passion that believes it is reasoning and an understanding in delirium.
2|What is still crueler is that every improvement made by the human species only carries it further from its primitive condition, so that the more new knowledge we accumulate, the more we cut ourselves off from acquiring the most important knowledge of all. In a sense it is by studying man that we have made ourselves unable to know him.
3|It does not take great insight to see that the first origin of the differences between men must be sought in these successive changes in the human frame. It is generally agreed that men are naturally as equal among themselves as the animals of every species were before various physical causes produced the varieties we now see in some of them. In fact, it is impossible to imagine how these first changes, whatever caused them, could have altered all the individuals of the species at once and in the same way. Clearly, while some improved or worsened their condition and picked up various good or bad qualities that were not part of their nature, the rest stayed longer in their original state. Such was the first source of inequality among men, which it is far easier to point out in general terms than to trace back precisely to its true causes.
4|So my readers should not imagine that I flatter myself with having seen what I consider so hard to discover. I have opened up some arguments and ventured some conjectures, not so much in hope of settling the question as to throw some light on it and to state it truly. Others will easily be able to go further along the same road, but none will find it easy to reach the end. For it is no simple task to separate what is natural from what is artificial in man's present constitution, and to become well acquainted with a state that perhaps never existed, no longer exists and probably never will, yet of which we must have sound notions in order to judge our present state correctly. Indeed, a man must be more of a philosopher than most people think to take it upon himself to say exactly what precautions are needed for making reliable observations on this subject. In my opinion, a good solution to the following problem would not be unworthy of the Aristotles and Plinys of our age: what experiments would be needed to know man as nature made him, and what are the best ways to carry out those experiments within society? Far from claiming to solve this problem, I believe I have thought enough about it to dare say in advance that the wisest philosophers would not be too wise to direct such experiments, nor the most powerful rulers too powerful to carry them out. That combination of circumstances is hardly to be expected, or at least not with the perseverance, or rather the continuing supply of knowledge, insight and goodwill on both sides, that success would require.
5|These investigations, so hard to carry out and so little thought of until now, are nevertheless the only means we have left to clear away a thousand difficulties that keep us from seeing the true foundations of human society. It is our ignorance of man's nature that so confuses and obscures the true definition of natural right. For the idea of right, as Monsieur Burlamaqui says, and still more the idea of natural right, are plainly ideas that depend on the nature of man. It is therefore from man's very nature, this great philosopher goes on, from his constitution and his condition, that we must derive the principles of this science.
6|It is impossible to observe without surprise and scandal how little agreement there is on this important matter among the different authors who have written about it. Among the most serious writers you will hardly find two of the same opinion. To say nothing of the ancient philosophers, who seem to have set out to contradict one another on the most basic principles, the Roman jurists make man and every other animal alike subject to the same natural law. This is because they apply that name to the law nature imposes on herself rather than to the one she lays down for others, or, more probably, because of the particular sense the word "law" had for these jurists, who here seem to have meant by it nothing more than the general relations nature establishes among all living beings for the sake of their common survival. The moderns, by admitting under the word "law" only a rule prescribed to a moral being, that is, one that is intelligent, free, and considered in his relations with other beings, naturally limit natural law to the one animal endowed with reason, man. But then each of them defines this law in his own way and bases it on such abstract metaphysical principles that, far from being able to find these principles for themselves, very few of us are even capable of understanding them. So all the definitions of these learned men, which disagree on everything else, agree only in this: that it is impossible to understand the law of nature, and therefore to obey it, without being a very subtle reasoner and a very deep metaphysician. That is exactly the same as saying that, in establishing society, men must have used a store of knowledge which most people can hardly develop, indeed cannot develop at all, even within society.
7|Since men know so little about nature and agree so badly on what the word "law" means, we can hardly expect them ever to settle on a good definition of natural law. Accordingly, all the definitions found in books, besides lacking uniformity, are drawn from many insights that men do not naturally have, and from advantages they can have no idea of while they remain in the state of nature. The authors of these books start by asking what rules it would be good, for their common interest, for men to agree on among themselves, and then, without further ado, they give the name of natural law to a collection of those rules. The only proof they offer that the collection deserves that name is the advantage they see would result if everyone followed it. This is certainly a very easy way of producing definitions and of explaining the nature of things by an almost arbitrary appropriateness.
8|But as long as we remain ignorant of the constitution of man as he came fresh from the hands of nature, it is pointless to try to determine what law he received or what law suits him best. All we can plainly make out about that law is this: for it to be a law, the will of the person it binds must submit to it knowing he is under that obligation; and for it to be natural, it must speak directly through the voice of nature.
9|So I set aside all the scholarly treatises that teach us only to look at men as they have made themselves, and confine myself to the first and simplest workings of the human soul. In it I think I can distinguish two principles that come before reason. One makes us take a deep interest in our own survival and well-being, and the other fills us with a natural reluctance to see any other being, above all any being like ourselves, suffer or die. From the cooperation and combination that our mind is able to form between these two principles, without any need to add sociability as a third, flow, in my opinion, all the rules of natural right. Reason is later forced to rebuild these rules on other foundations, when by gradually developing its powers it has finally smothered the authority of nature.
10|By proceeding in this way we are freed from having to make a man a philosopher before he can be a man. His obligations are not dictated to him only by the slow voice of wisdom. As long as he does not resist the inner prompting of compassion, he will never harm another man, or even any other sentient creature, except in those lawful cases where his own survival is at stake and it is therefore his duty to put himself first. This also puts an end to the ancient disputes over whether other animals share in the law of nature. It is clear that, lacking reason and free will, they cannot know that law. But since they share to some extent in our nature through the sensitivity with which they are endowed, we may well suppose they should also share in the benefit of natural law, and that man owes them certain kinds of duty. Indeed, if I am bound not to harm any being like myself, it seems to be less because he is a rational being than because he is a sentient one; and since this quality is common to men and animals, it should at least exempt the animals from needless ill treatment by men.
11|This same study of original man, of his real needs and the basic principles of his duties, is also the only good method for overcoming an endless number of difficulties about the origin of moral inequality, the true foundations of political bodies, the mutual rights of their members, and a thousand similar questions that are as important as they are poorly understood.
12|When we look at human society with a calm and disinterested eye, at first sight it seems to show us only the violence of the powerful and the oppression of the weak. The mind is shocked at the cruelty of the one and saddened by the blindness of the other. Since nothing in human life is less stable than those outward relations that chance produces more often than wisdom, and that we call weakness or power, poverty or wealth, human institutions look at first glance like so many castles built on quicksand. Only by examining them more closely, and by clearing away the dust and sand that surround and disguise the building, can we see the unshakable base on which it stands and learn to respect its foundations. Now, unless we seriously study man, his natural abilities and their successive development, we can never make these distinctions or separate, in the present state of things, what is the work of the divine will from what human art claims as improvements. The political and moral reflections prompted by the important question I am examining are therefore useful in every way, and the hypothetical history of governments is for man an instructive lesson in every respect. By considering what we would have become if left to ourselves, we should learn to bless the One whose kind hand, correcting our institutions and giving them an unshakable foundation, has prevented the disorders that would otherwise have followed from them, and has made our happiness come from means that, to all appearances, would have completed our misery without his intervention.
13|Quem te Deus esse jussit, et humana qua parte locatus es in re, disce.
