1|However important it may be, for forming a sound judgment of man's natural state, to look at him from his origin and examine him in the first germ of the species, I will not trace his bodily organization through its successive stages toward perfection. I will not stop to ask what he may have been in the animal system at the beginning, in order to become in the end what he now is. I will not inquire whether, as Aristotle thinks, his uncut nails were at first no better than crooked claws; whether his whole body was thickly covered, like a bear's, with coarse hair; or whether, walking on all fours with his eyes on the ground and confined to a horizon a few paces wide, he thereby revealed both the nature and the bounds of his thoughts. On this topic I might only form hazy, almost fictional guesses. The science of comparative anatomy has not yet advanced far enough, and the observations of natural science are not yet well enough established, to lay the base of a solid system on such foundations. For this reason, without appealing to the supernatural information we have been given on the matter, and without paying attention to the alterations that must have occurred in the shape of his inner and outer parts as he put his limbs to new uses and took to new foods, I will suppose his build to have always been what we now see: that he always walked on two feet, used his hands as we use ours, cast his gaze over the whole face of nature, and gauged with his gaze the vast breadth of the heavens.
2|If I strip this being, so constituted, of whatever supernatural gifts he may have been given and of all the artificial abilities he could only have acquired slowly, and consider him, in a word, as he must have emerged from nature's hands, I see an animal that is less strong than some and less nimble than others, but on the whole better organized than any. I see him satisfying his hunger under the first oak and quenching his thirst at the first stream, lying down to sleep at the foot of the same tree that gave him his meal; and behold, all his needs are met.
3|Abandoned to its own natural fertility and blanketed with vast forests never marked by an axe, the earth offers food and shelter at every step to every kind of animal. Men, scattered among them, watch and imitate their skills, and so rise to the level of the beasts' instincts. They have this advantage, that while each animal species is limited to its own particular instinct, man, who perhaps has none that is specially his, takes over the instincts of all the others and feeds equally well on most of the different foods that the animals divide among themselves. This puts him in a position to find his living more easily than any of them.
4|Men who are used from infancy to bad weather and the harshness of the seasons, who are hardened by fatigue and forced to defend their lives and their prey, naked and unarmed, against the other wild inhabitants of the forest, or at least to escape their fury by running, develop a robust and almost unchangeable bodily constitution. Their children are born with the excellent constitution of their parents and strengthen it through the same exercises that first produced it, so that they reach all the vigor the human frame is capable of. Nature treats them precisely as Sparta treated its citizens' children: the ones born well formed she makes strong and sturdy, and she destroys the rest. In this she differs from our societies, where the state, by letting children become a burden to their parents, kills them all without distinction, even in their mothers' wombs.
5|Since the body is the only tool savage man knows, he puts it to many different uses of which ours, for lack of practice, are incapable; and we have our own industry to thank for the loss of the strength and agility that necessity forces him to acquire. If he had an axe, would his hand so easily break so stout a branch off an oak? If he had a sling, would it hurl a stone so far? If he had a ladder, would he climb a tree so nimbly? If he had a horse, would he race so swiftly across the plain? Allow civilized man time to collect every one of his machines near him, and he will surely defeat the savage. But if you wish to witness a contest even more lopsided, set them naked and unarmed against each other, and you will quickly grasp the benefit of having all one's forces always at one's disposal, of being constantly ready for any event, and of always carrying oneself, as it were, whole and entire.
6|Hobbes claims that man is naturally without fear and always eager to attack and fight. A distinguished philosopher thinks the opposite, and Cumberland and Pufendorf say the same, that nothing is more timid than man in a state of nature, that he is forever trembling and ready to flee at the first movement he notices or the first noise that reaches his ears. This may well be true of things unfamiliar to him, and I am sure that he is frightened by every new sight, whenever he cannot tell what physical good or harm to expect from it, or compare his strength with the dangers he will face. Such circumstances seldom arise in a state of nature, where everything proceeds so evenly and the surface of the earth is not exposed to the sudden, continual changes that the passions and instability of crowded communities bring about. But savage man, living among other animals with no society and no fixed home, and finding himself early obliged to measure his strength against theirs, soon makes the comparison. Finding that he beats them in skill by more than they beat him in strength, he learns to stop fearing them. Pit a bear or a wolf against a sturdy, nimble, determined savage, and and all of them are, equipped with stones and a stout stick, and you will soon find that the danger is at least equal on both sides, and that after several such trials wild beasts, which do not like to attack one another, will have little taste for attacking a creature they have found every bit as wild as themselves. Concerning animals whose strength truly exceeds man's skill, his position toward them is that of other weaker species, which manage to survive anyway. He even has this great advantage over those weaker species: being as fast as they are, and finding on every tree an almost inviolable refuge, he is always free to take it or leave it, and so to fight or flee as he pleases. We may add that no animal makes war on man by nature, except in self-defense or from extreme hunger, nor shows toward him any of those violent antipathies that seem to indicate that some species are meant by nature to be food for others.
7|But there are other, more formidable enemies against which man lacks the same means of defense: natural infirmities, infancy, old age and sickness of every kind. These are sad proofs of our weakness, of which the first two are shared by all animals and the last mostly afflicts man living in society. It is even notable that, as regards infancy, a mother who can carry her child with her wherever she goes can nurse it with much less trouble than the females of many other animals, who must keep going back and forth with considerable effort and weariness, one way to look for their own food and another to suckle and feed their young. True, if the woman dies, her child is in great danger of dying with her. But this danger is shared by a hundred other species whose young need a lot of time before they can look after themselves; and while our infancy lasts longer than theirs, so do our lives too, so that in this respect everything is more or less equal. There are other rules about the length of the first stage of life and the number of offspring in man and other animals, but they do not belong to my subject. With old people, who move and perspire little, the need for food declines along with their ability to obtain it. A savage life would spare them gout and rheumatism, and of all ills old age is the one that human help can least relieve, so they would finally pass away without others noticing that they had ceased to exist, and almost without noticing it themselves.
8|On the subject of sickness, I will not repeat the empty and false speeches most people make to discredit medicine while they are healthy. I will only ask whether there are any solid observations from which we may conclude that in countries where the healing art is most neglected, the average human lifespan is shorter than in those where it is most cultivated. And how could that be so, if we bring upon ourselves more diseases than medicine can provide cures for! The extreme inequality in the ways of life of the different classes, the excess of idleness in some and of toil in others, the ease with which we stir up and satisfy our appetites and sensuality, the over-refined and exotic dishes of the rich that fill them with burning humors and cause indigestion, the unwholesome food of the poor, which, bad as it is, they often go without, so that at every opportunity they eat greedily and overload their stomachs, late nights, excesses of every kind, uncontrolled outbursts of every passion, exhaustion, drained spirits, in short the countless pains and anxieties attached to every condition and which constantly torment the human mind: these are fatal proofs that most of our ills are our own work, and that we might have escaped almost all of them by adhering to the plain, regular and solitary life that nature laid down for us. If nature intended us always to enjoy good health, I almost dare claim that a state of reflection is a state against nature, and that the man who thinks is a depraved animal. We need only recall the good constitution of savages, at any rate of those whom we have not yet destroyed with our strong drink, and consider that they are strangers to almost every disease except those caused by wounds and old age, to be nearly convinced that the history of human diseases could easily be written by following the history of civil societies. That at least was the opinion of Plato, who concluded from certain remedies used or endorsed by Podalirius and Machaon during the siege of Troy that several disorders those remedies were known to cause in his own day were not known among men at that remote time.
9|In a state of nature, then, where there are so few sources of sickness, man has little need of medicine and still less of doctors, and the human species is no more to be pitied in this respect than any other animal species. Ask those who hunt for sport or for a living whether they meet many sick or feeble animals on their outings. They meet many with the marks of serious wounds that have healed and closed perfectly, many whose bones were once broken and whose limbs were almost torn off but have knit and joined completely, with no surgeon but time, no regimen but their ordinary way of living, and whose cures were no less perfect for never having been tortured with incisions, poisoned with drugs or worn down by diet and fasting. In short, however useful well-administered medicine may be to us who live in society, it remains beyond doubt that if the sick savage with no help has nothing to hope for from nature, he also has nothing to fear except his disease, a circumstance that often makes his situation better than ours.
