19|If it were necessary, I could easily cite facts to support this view and show that everywhere the progress of the mind has kept exact pace with the needs that nature left people exposed to, or that circumstances imposed on them, and therefore with the passions that drove them to meet those needs. I could show the arts springing up in Egypt and spreading with the flooding of the Nile. I could follow them among the Greeks, where they were seen to sprout, grow and soar among the sands and rocks of Attica without being able to take root on the fertile banks of the Eurotas. I would point out that, in general, northern peoples are more industrious than southern ones because they can less afford to be otherwise, as if nature meant to even things out by giving their minds the fertility she denied their soil.
20|But setting aside the uncertain testimony of history, who cannot see that all things seem to take away from savage man all temptation and the ability to change his condition? His imagination paints no pictures for him; his heart asks nothing of him. His modest needs are so easily met by what he finds everywhere at hand, and he is so far from the level of knowledge needed to desire more, that he can possess neither foresight nor curiosity. The spectacle of nature, by becoming wholly familiar to him, finally becomes a matter of equal indifference. It is always the same order, always the same cycles. He lacks the wit to be amazed at the greatest wonders, and it is not in his mind that we should look for the philosophy that a man needs in order to notice for once what he has seen every day. His soul, which nothing disturbs, abandons itself entirely to the sense of its present existence, with no thought of even the nearest future, and his plans, as limited as his outlook, hardly stretch to the end of the day. Such, even now, is the foresight of the Carib: he sells his cotton bed in the morning and comes in the evening, in tears, to buy it back, having failed to foresee that he would need it again the next night.
21|The longer we think about this matter, the wider the gap between mere sensation and the simplest knowledge appears, and it is impossible to see how man, by his own powers alone, without the help of communication and the goad of necessity, could have crossed so wide a distance. How many centuries may have passed before men saw any fire but that of the heavens? How many different accidents must have combined to teach them the most ordinary uses of this element? How often did they let it die out before they learned to make it again? And how often, perhaps, did each of these secrets perish with its discoverer? What should we say of farming, an art that demands so much labor and foresight, that depends on other arts, and that obviously cannot be practiced except in a society, if not one fully formed then at least one of some standing? Its purpose is not so much to draw food from the earth, since the earth would yield food without all that effort, as to force her to produce the things we like best in preference to others. But let us suppose that men had multiplied so far that the earth's natural yield no longer sufficed to feed them, a supposition which, incidentally, would prove that this way of life was very advantageous to mankind. Let us suppose that, without forge or anvil, farming tools had fallen from heaven into savages' hands; that these men had overcome the deadly dislike they all have of steady work; that they had learned to anticipate their needs so far ahead; that they had worked out how to break the ground, sow seed in it and plant trees; that they had discovered how to grind grain and ferment the juice of grapes. We would have to say they learned all these operations from the gods, since we cannot imagine how they could possibly have found them out unaided. After all these fine gifts, what man would be mad enough to cultivate a field that could be plundered by the first person or animal that took a fancy to its crop? And would anyone agree to spend his days in toil and weariness when the rewards of that toil became more uncertain in proportion to his need of them? In a word, how could this situation persuade men to cultivate the earth as long as it was not divided up among them, that is, as long as the state of nature lasted?
22|Even if we supposed savage man as skilled in the art of thinking as philosophers make him, even if we made him, as they do, a philosopher himself, discovering the loftiest truths on his own and forming for himself, by the most abstract arguments, maxims of justice and reason drawn from the love of order in general or from the known will of his Creator; in a word, even if we supposed his mind as intelligent and enlightened as it is in fact found to be dull and stupid, what benefit would the species receive from all these metaphysical discoveries, which could not be shared and would die with the individual who made them? What progress could mankind make in the forests, scattered here and there among the other animals? And to what extent could men better and enlighten one another when they had no fixed home and no need of each other's help, when the same people hardly met twice in their lives and, on meeting, neither spoke to nor even recognized one another?
23|Consider how many ideas we owe to the use of speech, how much grammar trains the mind and makes its operations easier, and reflect, too, on the immense trouble and time the earliest invention of languages must have required. Add these reflections to the previous ones, and we can judge how many thousands of centuries must have been needed to develop, one after another, the operations of which the human mind is capable.
24|I must now ask permission to pause for a moment to consider the puzzles surrounding the origin of languages. I could simply cite or repeat the inquiries the Abbé de Condillac made into this question, which all fully confirm my system and perhaps even gave me the first idea of it. But the manner in which this philosopher resolves the difficulties he raises himself about the origin of arbitrary signs shows that he assumes what I doubt, namely that some kind of society was already established among the inventors of language. So while I refer to his reflections, I think it my duty to give my own, in order to set out the same difficulties in a light fitted to my subject. The first to appear is how languages could have become necessary. Since men had no dealings with one another and no need for any, we cannot conceive either the need for this invention or its possibility, if it was not indispensable. I might say, like many others, that languages are the fruit of domestic life among fathers, mothers and children. But this would not answer any of the difficulties, and it would commit the same fault as those who, in reasoning about the state of nature, carry into it ideas gathered in society, always imagine families living together under one roof, and suppose their members to keep up between themselves a bond as close and durable as the one we see in a civil state, where so many common interests work to bind them together. In that primitive state, by contrast, there were no houses or huts and no kind of property, and everyone took up lodging at random and seldom stayed more than one night in the same place. Males and females came together by chance, as occasion or desire brought them, without any plan, and they had no great need of language to tell each other their thoughts. They parted just as easily. The mother suckled her children at the start for her own sake, but later, once habit had made them precious to her, out of love for them. The moment they were strong enough to run about looking for food, they left even her of their own accord. Since they had scarcely any means of not losing one another except by staying constantly in each other's sight, they soon reached such a state of forgetfulness that they no longer even recognized one another when they met again. I must also point out that the child, with all his needs to make known and hence more to tell his mother than she has to say to him, is the one who must bear the main cost of invention, and the language he uses must be largely his own work. This makes the number of languages equal to the number of individuals who speak them, and the multiplicity is further increased by their wandering, vagabond way of life, which gives no idiom time to settle into any consistency. To say that the mother would have dictated to the child the words he must use to ask her for this thing or that may well explain how languages already formed are taught, but it does not show us how they are first formed.
25|Let us suppose this first difficulty overcome. Let us for a moment place ourselves on this side of the immense space that must have separated the pure state of nature from the one in which languages became necessary, and, granting that necessity, ask how languages could begin to be established. This is a new difficulty, still more stubborn than the first. For if men needed speech in order to learn to think, they needed the art of thinking even more to invent the art of speaking. Moreover, even supposing we could picture how vocal sounds came to be taken as the agreed interpreters of our ideas, we would be no closer to knowing who the interpreters of this agreement could have been for ideas that, having no sensible objects, could not be shown by gesture or voice. So we can scarcely frame any acceptable guesses about the birth of this art of communicating our thoughts and setting up a correspondence between minds. It is a sublime art, which, although so close to its origin, philosophers still see at such a prodigious distance from perfection that I have never met one bold enough to say it would ever reach it, even if the revolutions that time unavoidably brings were paused in its favor, even if prejudice could be banished from our academies or would at least consent to keep silent in their presence, and even if these societies devoted themselves entirely, for whole ages, to the study of this knotty subject.
26|The first language of man, the most universal and most forceful of all languages, in short the only one he needed before it became necessary to persuade assembled crowds, was the cry of nature. Since this cry was drawn from him only by a kind of instinct in the most urgent cases, to beg for help in great danger or relief in great suffering, it was of little use in ordinary life, where gentler feelings generally prevail. When people's ideas started to grow and multiply, and closer contact began to be established among them, they worked to devise more numerous signs and a richer language. They multiplied the tones of the voice and joined gestures to them, which are by nature more expressive and whose meaning depends less on prior agreement. So they expressed visible and moving objects by gestures, and things that strike the ear by imitative sounds. But gestures indicate hardly anything except objects that are present or easily described, and visible actions; they are not universally usable, since darkness or an opaque obstacle makes them useless; and besides, they demand attention rather than attract it. So men finally thought of replacing them with articulations of the voice, which, though they have no similar relation to any particular object, are better suited, as conventional signs, to represent all our ideas. Such a substitution could only have been made by common consent, and in a way that must have been quite hard to carry out for men whose crude organs were untrained by practice. In itself it is still harder to imagine, since the motives for this unanimous agreement must somehow have been expressed, and speech thus seems to have been very necessary in order to establish the use of speech.
27|We must admit that the words first used by men carried a much broader meaning in their minds than those used in languages of long standing, and that, since they were ignorant of how speech divides into its component parts, they at first gave each word the meaning of an entire sentence. When they later began to notice the difference between subject and attribute and between verb and noun, a distinction that took no small effort of genius, nouns for a time were only so many proper names, the infinitive was the only tense, and as for adjectives, great difficulties must have attended the development of the idea they represent, since every adjective is an abstract word, and abstraction is an unnatural and very painful operation.
