28|At first they gave every object its own name, without regard to genus or species, which these first creators of language were in no position to distinguish, and each individual presented itself alone to their minds, just as it stands in the table of nature. If they called one oak A, they called another oak B, so that their vocabulary must have been larger the more limited their knowledge of things was. Getting rid of so sprawling and cumbersome a system of names could not but be very difficult. To arrange the various beings under common, general headings, they would first have had to know their properties and differences, and to be equipped with observations and definitions, that is, to understand natural history and metaphysics, advantages the men of those times could not have had.
29|Besides, general ideas cannot be conveyed to the mind without words, nor can the understanding grasp them without sentences. This is one reason why mere animals cannot form such ideas or ever acquire the perfectibility that depends on that operation. When a monkey goes from one nut to another without the slightest hesitation, are we to think he has a general idea of that kind of fruit and compares these two particular nuts with an archetype of them in his mind? Certainly not. The sight of one nut calls back to his memory the sensations he received from the other, and his eyes, affected in a certain way, warn his palate of the sensation it is about to have. Every general idea is purely intellectual; let the imagination meddle with it ever so slightly, and it at once becomes a particular idea. Try to picture a tree in general, and you will never manage it. In spite of all your efforts it will come out big or small, sparse or leafy, light or dark; and if you could make yourself see in it only what is common to all trees, the picture would no longer look like any tree at all. Purely abstract beings are perceived in the same way, or can be conceived only with the help of speech. The definition of a triangle alone gives you a true idea of that figure. As soon as you form a triangle in your mind, it is this or that particular triangle and no other, and you cannot avoid giving its lines thickness and its area color. We must therefore use sentences, and so we must speak, in order to have general ideas; for the moment imagination stops, the mind stops too, unless speech supports it. If, then, the first inventors could only name ideas they already had, it follows that the first nouns could never have been anything but proper names.
30|But when, by means I cannot conceive, our new grammarians began to extend their ideas and make their words general, the inventors' ignorance must have kept this method within very narrow limits. Since at first they had multiplied the names of individuals too much, for lack of knowing the distinctions called genus and species, they afterward made too few genera and species, for lack of having considered beings in all their differences. To carry the divisions far enough they would have needed more knowledge and experience than we can grant them, and more research and trouble than we can suppose them willing to take. Now if even today we discover new species every day that had escaped all our observation, how many must have escaped the notice of men who judged things only by their first appearance! As for the primary categories and the most general notions, it would be pointless to add that they must have overlooked these too. How, for example, could they have thought of or understood the words matter, spirit, substance, mode, figure and motion, when our own philosophers, who have been using these terms constantly for so long, can barely understand them themselves, and when the ideas attached to these words are purely metaphysical and no models of them could be found in nature?
31|I stop at these first steps, and I beg my judges to pause their reading a moment and consider how far language still has to go, even in the invention of physical nouns alone, though they are the easiest part of language to invent, before it can express all of man's feelings, take a fixed form, bear being spoken in public and influence society. I earnestly ask them to consider how much time and knowledge must have been needed to find numbers, abstract words, the aorists and all the other tenses of verbs, particles, syntax, the way of linking sentences and arguments and of building up the whole logic of discourse. For my part, I am so alarmed by the difficulties that multiply at every step, and so convinced of the almost demonstrated impossibility that languages could have arisen and been established by merely human means, that I leave to anyone who cares to take it up the discussion of this difficult problem: "Which was more necessary, a society already formed to invent languages, or languages already invented to form a society?"
32|But however mysterious the origin of these things may be, we can at least infer, from how little care nature took to bring men together through mutual needs and to make the use of speech easy for them, how little she did to make them sociable, and how little she contributed to anything they themselves have done to become so. In fact, it is impossible to see why, in this primitive state, one man should need another's help any more than one monkey or one wolf needs another of its kind; or, supposing he did, what could induce the other to help him; or even, in that case, how the one who wanted help and the one who was asked could agree on terms. Authors, I know, keep telling us that in this state man would have been a most miserable creature. If it is true, as I believe I have shown, that he must have continued for many ages without either the desire or the opportunity to leave that state, this claim could only serve to indict nature, not the being nature made so. But if I properly understand the word "miserable," it either has no meaning or signifies nothing but a painful deprivation and a suffering state of body or soul. Now I would like to know what kind of misery could belong to a free being whose heart is perfectly at peace and whose body is perfectly healthy. And which is more likely to become unbearable to those who live it, civil life or natural life? In civil life we can hardly meet a single person who does not complain of his existence; many even throw away as much of it as they can, and the combined force of divine and human laws can scarcely curb this disorder. Was any free savage ever known to be so much as tempted to complain of life and lay violent hands on himself? Let us judge, then, with less pride, on which side real misery lies. On the contrary, nothing could be more wretched than savage man dazzled by flashes of knowledge, tormented by passions, and reasoning about a state different from the one he found himself in. It was by a very wise providence that the faculties he held in potential were meant to develop only as occasions arose to exercise them, lest they be superfluous or burdensome to him before he needed them, or slow and useless when he did. In his instinct alone he had everything he needed to live in a state of nature; in his cultivated reason he has barely what he needs to live in society.
33|It seems at first sight that, since there was no kind of moral relation among men in this state, nor any known duties, they could be neither good nor bad and had neither vices nor virtues, unless we take these words in a physical sense and call vices, in the individual, the qualities that may harm his own survival, and virtues those that may help it. In that case we would have to consider as most virtuous the man who put up the least resistance to the simple impulses of nature. But without departing from the usual meaning of these terms, it is right to suspend the judgment we might form about such a situation and to guard against prejudice, until we have weighed up, scales in hand, whether there are more virtues or vices among civilized men. We should also ask whether the improvement of their understanding is enough to make up for the harm they do each other as they become better informed about the services they ought to render, or whether, on the whole, they would not be much happier in a condition where they had nothing to fear or hope for from each other than in the one where they have submitted to universal dependence and bound themselves to rely for everything on the goodwill of those who do not consider themselves obliged to give anything in return.
34|But above all, let us beware of concluding with Hobbes that because man has no idea of goodness he must be naturally bad; that he is vicious because he does not know what virtue is; that he always refuses to do any service for his fellows because he believes none is owed; and that, by virtue of the right he rightly claims to everything he needs, he foolishly regards himself as the owner of the whole universe. Hobbes saw very clearly the flaws in all the modern definitions of natural right, but the consequences he draws from his own definition show that, in the sense he understands it, it is just as open to objection. To argue from his own principles, this author should have said that the state of nature, being the state in which concern for our own survival interferes least with the survival of others, was by that very fact the most favorable to peace and the best suited to mankind. He says the very opposite because he rashly included, among the objects of the care savage man should take for his survival, the satisfaction of countless passions that are the work of society and have made laws necessary. A bad man, he says, is a robust child. But this does not prove that savage man is a robust child; and even if we granted that he was, what could this philosopher infer from it? That if this man, when robust, depended on others as much as when feeble, there is no excess he would not commit. He would not hesitate to hit his mother if she was slow giving him the breast; he would claw, bite and strangle without remorse the first of his younger brothers who happened to jostle or annoy him. But these are two contradictory suppositions in the state of nature: to be robust and to be dependent. Man is weak when dependent, and is his own master before he grows robust. Hobbes did not see that the same cause that keeps savages from using their reason, as our jurists claim, also keeps them from misusing their faculties, as he himself claims. So we can say that savages are not bad precisely because they do not know what it is to be good; for it is neither the growth of understanding nor the restraint of law, but the calm of their passions and their ignorance of vice, that stops them from doing ill: tanto plus in illis proficit Vitiorum ignorantia, quam in his cognitio Virtutis. There is also another principle that Hobbes missed. It was given to man to moderate, on certain occasions, the blind and impetuous outbursts of self-love, or the desire for self-preservation that existed before that passion appeared, and it tempers the ardor with which he naturally pursues his own welfare through an innate repugnance at seeing beings like himself suffer. I will surely not be contradicted if I grant man the one natural virtue that even the most passionate detractor of human virtues could not deny him, I mean pity, a disposition suited to creatures as weak as we are and exposed to so many ills. It is a virtue all the more universal and useful to man because it comes before any kind of reflection, and so natural that the beasts themselves sometimes show clear signs of it. Not to speak of the tenderness of mothers for their young and the dangers they face to shield them from danger, consider how reluctant horses are to trample living bodies. One animal never passes the dead body of another of its species without being disturbed; there are even some that give their dead companions a kind of burial; and the mournful lowing of cattle as they enter the slaughterhouse reveals the impression the horrible sight there makes on them. It is a pleasure to see the author of the Fable of the Bees forced to acknowledge man as a compassionate and sensitive being, and, in the example he gives to prove it, setting aside his cold, subtle style to put before us the moving picture of a man who, with his hands tied, is forced to watch a wild beast tear a child from its mother's arms, crush the tender limbs with its teeth, and rip the throbbing entrails of the innocent victim with its claws. What horrible emotions must such a spectator feel at an event that does not concern him personally? What anguish must he suffer at being unable to help the fainting mother or the dying infant?
35|Such is the pure impulse of nature, prior to any kind of reflection; such is the force of natural pity, which the most dissolute morals have so far found hard to extinguish. We see every day in our theaters that men sympathize with the unfortunate and weep at their sufferings who, in the tyrant's place, would only make their enemies' torments worse. Mandeville clearly saw that, despite all their morality, men would never have been anything but monsters if nature had not given them pity to assist reason. But he did not see that from this quality alone flow all the social virtues he wishes to deny mankind. What are generosity, mercy and humanity, in fact, but pity applied to the weak, to the guilty, or to the human species in general? Even benevolence and friendship, rightly understood, turn out to be the effects of a constant pity fixed on a particular object; for to wish that someone not suffer, what is that but to wish him happy? Even if it were true that compassion is no more than a feeling that puts us in the place of the sufferer, a feeling dim but active in the savage, developed but dormant in civilized man, how could that idea affect the truth of what I say, except to make it plainer? Compassion must in fact be all the stronger the more intimately the animal that witnesses the distress identifies itself with the animal that suffers it. Now it is evident that this identification must have been infinitely closer in the state of nature than in the state of reason. It is reason that engenders self-love and reflection that strengthens it. Reason turns man in on himself; reason makes him keep away from anything that might trouble or afflict him. Philosophy isolates him; it is through her teaching that he mutters, at the sight of another in distress, "Perish if you like, I am safe." Nothing less than evils threatening the whole species can disturb the philosopher's quiet sleep and drag him from his bed. A man can be murdered beneath his window with impunity; the philosopher has only to put his hands over his ears and argue with himself a little to keep nature, which rebels within him, from identifying him with the victim. Savage man lacks this admirable talent; for want of wisdom and reason he always rushes foolishly to obey the first whisper of humanity. In riots and street brawls the crowd gathers while the prudent man slips away. It is the rabble, the market women, who separate the combatants and stop gentlemen from cutting each other's throats.
36|It is certain, then, that pity is a natural feeling which, by tempering in each individual the activity of self-love, contributes to the mutual preservation of the whole species. It is pity that carries us without reflection to the aid of those we see suffering. In the state of nature it stands in for laws, morals and virtue, with the added advantage that no one is tempted to disobey its gentle voice. It is pity that will always keep a strong savage from robbing a weak child or a frail old man of the food they have gained with pain and difficulty, so long as he has any hope of finding his own by other means. It is pity that, in place of that lofty maxim of reasoned justice, "Do to others as you would have them do to you," inspires all men with that other maxim of natural goodness, far less perfect but perhaps more useful: "Pursue your own good with as little harm as possible to others." In a word, it is in this natural feeling, rather than in subtle arguments, that we must look for the cause of the reluctance every man would feel to do evil, even apart from the lessons of education. It may be the particular good fortune of Socrates and other minds of his kind to reason themselves into virtue, but the human race would long ago have ceased to exist if its preservation had depended entirely on the reasoning of the individuals who make it up.
