1|The first man who fenced off a piece of ground and took it into his head to say "This is mine," and found people simple enough to believe him, was the true founder of civil society. How many crimes, wars and murders, how many miseries and horrors, would the human race have been spared by the one who pulled up the stakes or filled in the ditch and cried out to his fellows: "Do not listen to this impostor. You are lost if you forget that the fruits of the earth belong to all of us and the earth itself to no one!" But it is very likely that things had by now reached a point where they could not go on much longer as they were. For the idea of property depends on several earlier ideas that could only arise gradually, one after another, and it was not formed all at once in the human mind. Men must have made great progress, gained a large store of skill and knowledge, and passed it on and added to it from age to age, before they reached this final stage of the state of nature. Let us therefore take up matters from a little earlier and gather into a single view, in their most natural order, this slow succession of events and mental advances.
2|Man's first feeling was that of his own existence, and his first concern was to preserve it. The produce of the earth gave him all the help he needed, and instinct led him to use it. Among the various appetites that made him experience different modes of existence at different times, there was one that urged him to perpetuate his species. This blind inclination, quite without anything like true love or affection, produced only a purely animal act. Once the immediate heat was spent, the sexes took no further notice of each other, and even the child had no tie to its mother as soon as it no longer needed her help.
3|Such was the condition of infant man, such was the life of an animal confined at first to pure sensations, and so far from thinking of forcing nature's gifts from her that he hardly made use even of those she offered him freely. But difficulties soon arose, and he had to learn how to overcome them. The height of some trees, which kept him from reaching their fruit; the competition of other animals just as fond of the same fruit; the ferocity of many that threatened his very life: all these circumstances forced him to train his body. He had to become active, fleet of foot and tough in a fight. The natural weapons, stones and tree branches, soon came to his hand. He learned to overcome nature's obstacles, to fight other animals when necessary, to contest his food even with other men, or to make up for whatever he had to give up to the strongest.
4|As the human race grew more numerous and spread out, its hardships multiplied and grew too. Differences of soil, climate and season may have forced men to adopt different ways of living. Bad harvests, long hard winters and scorching summers that dried up all the fruits of the earth demanded extraordinary efforts of ingenuity. On seacoasts and riverbanks they invented the fishing line and the hook and became fishermen and fish-eaters. In the forests they made bows and arrows and became hunters and warriors. In cold countries they covered themselves with the skins of the beasts they had killed. Thunder, a volcano or some lucky accident acquainted them with fire, a new resource against the rigors of winter. They found out how to keep this element alive, then how to produce it again, and finally how to use it to prepare the flesh of animals, which they had until then devoured raw from the carcass.
5|This repeated application of different beings to himself and to one another must naturally have produced in man's mind the idea of certain relations. These relations, which we express by the words great, small, strong, weak, fast, slow, timid, bold and the like, were compared from time to time, almost without his thinking about it. They produced in him a kind of reflection, or rather a mechanical prudence, that pointed out the precautions most essential to his survival and safety.
6|The new insights that came from this development increased his superiority over other animals by making him aware of it. He set himself to trap them and played them a thousand tricks. Though several surpassed him in strength or speed, in time he became master of those that could be of use to him and a dangerous enemy to those that could harm him. Thus his first look into himself produced his first stirring of pride. Thus, at a time when he could scarcely tell the different ranks of existence apart, by giving his species first rank among animals in general he prepared himself from afar to claim it as an individual among his own kind in particular.
7|Although other men were not to him what they are to us, and he had hardly more contact with them than with other animals, they were not overlooked in his observations. The similarities he might in time discover among them, and between them and his mate, led him to judge about those he could not see. Noticing that they all acted as he would have done in similar circumstances, he concluded that their way of thinking and wanting was entirely like his own. Once this important truth was engraved deeply on his mind, it made him follow, by a presentiment as sure as any logic and much quicker, the best rules of conduct that it was wise for his own safety and advantage to observe toward them.
8|Taught by experience that the love of happiness is the sole principle of all human actions, he found himself able to pick out the few cases in which shared interest might justify counting on the help of his fellows, and the even fewer in which a clash of interests might rightly make it suspect. In the first case he joined them in the same herd, or at most in some kind of free association that bound none of its members and lasted no longer than the passing need that had produced it. In the second case, each one sought his own advantage, either by open force if he felt strong enough, or by cunning and skill if he thought himself too weak to use violence.
