9|This is how men may have gradually acquired some crude idea of their mutual commitments and of the advantage of keeping them, but only so far as their immediate and tangible interest required. Foresight was entirely foreign to them, and far from worrying about the distant future, they hardly thought of the next day. If a deer was to be caught, everyone saw that to succeed he must faithfully hold his post. But if a hare chanced to run past within reach of one of them, we may be sure he chased it without scruple, and having caught his prey never reproached himself for making his companions miss theirs.
10|We can easily imagine that such dealings hardly required a more refined language than that of crows or monkeys, which flock together in much the same way. Inarticulate cries, many gestures and some imitative sounds must have been the universal language of mankind for a long time. By adding to these, in each country, some articulate and conventional sounds, whose establishment, as I have already hinted, is not very easy to explain, particular languages arose, though rough and imperfect ones, much like those still found today among several savage nations. My pen, hemmed in by the hurry of time, by the wealth of what I have to say, and by the barely noticeable progress of the first improvements, flies like an arrow over countless ages; for the slower the succession of events, the faster I may allow myself to be in reporting them.
11|At length these first advances enabled man to advance faster. Skill grew more perfect as the mind became more enlightened. Men soon ceased dropping off to sleep beneath the first tree or taking shelter in the first cave. They came across certain hard, sharp kinds of stone that resembled spades or axes and used them to dig the ground, cut down trees, and build huts from the branches, which they later thought of plastering with clay or mud. This was the era of a first revolution, which set up and differentiated families, and brought in a kind of property and with it perhaps a thousand quarrels and fights. Yet since the strongest were likely the first to make huts for themselves that they knew they could defend, we may conclude that the weak found it quicker and safer to copy them than to attempt to drive them out. As for those who already had huts, no one could have had much temptation to seize his neighbor's, not so much because it did not belong to him as because it would be of no use to him, and because, to take possession of it, he would have to expose himself to a very fierce fight with the present occupants.
12|The first developments of the heart were the result of a new situation that united husbands and wives, parents and children under one roof. The habit of living together gave birth to the sweetest feelings the human species knows, conjugal and parental love. Each family became a small society, all the more firmly united because mutual attachment and freedom were its only bonds. It was then that the sexes, whose manner of living had until now been the same, began to adopt different manners and customs. Women became more settled and grew used to staying at home and looking after the children, while the men roamed abroad in search of food for the whole family. By living a little more comfortably, the two sexes also began to lose some of their usual fierceness and toughness. But if on the one hand individuals became less able to fight wild beasts one by one, on the other they were more easily brought together to resist them in common.
13|In this new state of affairs, the simplicity and solitude of man's life, the smallness of his wants, and the tools he had devised to meet them gave him plenty of free time, which he used to give himself several comforts unknown to his forebears. This was the first yoke he unknowingly laid on himself and the first source of trouble he prepared for his children. For besides continuing in this way to soften both body and mind, these comforts, having through use lost nearly all their power to please and even turned into genuine needs, made going without them far more unbearable than having them had been pleasant. To lose them was a misfortune, but to possess them was no happiness.
14|Here we may perceive a bit better how the use of language gradually begins or improves in the heart of each family, and we may also form conjectures about how various particular causes might have spread language and speeded its progress by making it more necessary every day. Great floods or earthquakes surrounded inhabited regions with water or cliffs. Portions of the mainland were torn off by upheavals of the globe and split into islands. It is clear that among men thus brought together and forced to live side by side, a common idiom must have sprung up much sooner than among those who roamed freely through the forests of the mainland. So it is quite possible that the inhabitants of the islands formed in this way, after their first attempts at navigation, brought speech to us; and it is at the very least probable that society and languages began on islands and even reached perfection there before the inhabitants of the continent knew anything of either.
15|Everything now begins to take on a new look. Those who had until now wandered through the woods, by adopting a more settled way of life, gradually draw together, join into separate groups, and finally form distinct nations in each country, united in character and customs not by any laws or regulations but by a uniform way of life, the same foods and the shared influence of climate. Permanent neighborhood must in the end inevitably create some connection between different families. The passing contacts demanded by nature soon produced, among the young people of both sexes living in neighboring huts, another kind of contact, which besides being equally pleasant is made more lasting by frequent meeting. Men begin to look at different objects and make comparisons; they gradually acquire ideas of merit and beauty, and these soon produce feelings of preference. By seeing each other often they form a habit that makes it painful not to see each other always. Tender and pleasant feelings steal into the soul and are wound up by the slightest opposition into the most violent fury. Jealousy awakens with love; discord triumphs; and the gentlest of passions demands sacrifices of human blood to appease it.
16|As ideas and feelings follow one another and the head and heart are exercised, men continue to shake off their original wildness, and their relations become closer and wider. They now begin to gather around a great tree. Singing and dancing, the genuine children of love and leisure, become the amusement, or rather the occupation, of idle men and women thus assembled. Each begins to look at the others and to want to be looked at himself, and public esteem acquires a value. The one who sings or dances best, the handsomest, the strongest, the most skillful, the most eloquent, comes to be the most respected. This was the first move toward inequality and, simultaneously moment, toward vice. From these earliest preferences came vanity and contempt on one side and envy and shame on the other; and the fermentation produced by these new leavens eventually produced combinations fatal to happiness and innocence.
17|No sooner had men begun to value one another and to know what esteem was, each claimed a right to it, and it was no longer safe for anyone to withhold it from another. From this came the first duties of civility and politeness, even among savages; and from this every deliberate injury became an insult, because, besides the harm it caused, the offended party was sure to find in it a contempt for his person that was harder to bear than the harm itself. Thus, since each man punished the contempt shown him in proportion to the value he set on himself, revenge became terrible, and men learned to be bloodthirsty and cruel. Such precisely was the stage reached by most of the savage nations we know. It is because of a failure to distinguish ideas clearly and to notice how far these peoples were from the first state of nature that so many authors have hastily concluded that man is naturally cruel and needs a regular system of policing to be tamed. Nothing is milder than man in his primitive condition, when nature has placed him at an equal distance from the stupidity of brutes and the harmful cleverness of civilized man, and when, held by instinct and reason alike to protecting himself against the harm that threatens him, he is held back by natural compassion from inflicting any injury to others, so far from being in the least inclined to repay even one he has received. For, according to the axiom of the wise Locke, "Where there is no property, there can be no injury."
