18|But we must notice that the society now formed, and the relations now established among men, required qualities different from those they had from their primitive constitution. As a sense of morality began to enter into human actions, and every man, before there were laws, was the only judge and avenger of the wrongs he suffered, the goodness of heart suited to the pure state of nature was by no means suited to infant society. Punishments had to become harsher as opportunities to offend became more frequent, and the fear of vengeance had to add strength to the too weak curb of the law. So although men had become less patient and natural compassion had already suffered some change, this stage in the development of human faculties, holding a middle point between the indolence of the primitive state and the restless activity of self-love, must have been the happiest and most lasting period. The more we think about this state, the more convinced we become that it was the least subject to upheaval and the best for man, and that nothing could have drawn him out of it except some fatal accident which, for the common good, should never have happened. The example of the savages, most of whom have been found in this condition, seems to confirm that mankind was made to remain in it forever; that this condition is the real youth of the world; and that all later advances have been so many steps, apparently toward the perfection of the individual, but in fact toward the decline of the species.
19|As long as men were satisfied with their rustic huts, as long as they limited themselves to clothes made of animal skins sewn together with thorns and fishbones, as long as they thought feathers and shells enough for decoration and painted their bodies different colors, as long as they improved or decorated their bows and arrows, carved little fishing boats or clumsy musical instruments out of wood with sharp-edged stones, in a word as long as they undertook only tasks that one person could finish and stuck to arts that did not need the combined efforts of several hands, they lived free, healthy, honest and happy, as far as their nature allowed, and continued to enjoy the pleasures of independent dealings with each other. But from the moment one man needed another's help, from the moment it seemed useful for one man to have enough supplies for two, equality vanished, property appeared, work became necessary, and the boundless forests turned into smiling fields that had to be watered with human sweat, and in which slavery and misery were soon seen to sprout and grow along with the crops.
20|Metallurgy and agriculture were the two arts whose invention brought about this great revolution. For the poet it is gold and silver, but for the philosopher it is iron and corn that civilized men and ruined mankind. Accordingly both were unknown to the savages of America, who for that very reason have always remained savages. Other nations seem to have stayed barbarous as long as they practiced only one of these arts without the other. Perhaps one of the best reasons for why Europe has been, if not earlier, at least more steadily and better civilized than the other parts of the world is that it is both the richest in iron and the best suited to growing corn.
21|It is very hard to say how men came to know about iron and the art of using it. We should not suppose they could have thought by themselves of digging it out of the mine and preparing it for smelting before they knew what such a process would produce. On the other hand, there is even less reason to credit this discovery to some accidental fire, since mines form only in dry and barren places bare of trees and plants, so that it looks as if nature had taken pains to hide so harmful a secret from us. Nothing remains, then, but the extraordinary circumstance of some volcano that, spewing out molten metal, gave those who watched the idea of imitating nature's operation. Even so, we must suppose them to have had an uncommon stock of courage and foresight to undertake so laborious a task and to see so far ahead the advantages they might gain from it. These are qualities hardly suited to minds more practiced than we can imagine those of such discoverers to have been.
22|As for agriculture, its principles were known long before its practice began, and it is hardly possible that men, constantly busy drawing their food from trees and plants, would not early have hit on the means nature uses to produce vegetation. But it was in all probability very late before their industry turned that way. Perhaps trees, which together with land and water game gave them enough food, did not need their attention; or they did not know the use of grain; or they had no tools to cultivate it; or they lacked foresight about future needs; or finally, they had no means of stopping others from carrying off the fruit of their labor. We may suppose that, once they became more industrious, they began farming by growing a few beans or roots around their huts with sharp stones and pointed sticks, and that it was a long time before they learned to prepare grain and had the tools necessary to grow it in quantity. And there is also the need, in order to pursue this occupation and sow fields, to agree to lose something now in order to gain much later, a precaution very foreign to the turn of mind of man in the savage state, in which, as I have already noted, he can hardly foresee his needs from morning to night.
23|For this reason the invention of other arts must have been necessary to force mankind to take up agriculture. As soon as men were needed to smelt and forge iron, others were needed to feed them. The more hands were employed in manufacturing, the fewer were left to provide food for everyone, though the number of mouths to feed stayed the same. And as some demanded goods in exchange for their iron, the rest at last discovered how to make iron serve to multiply goods. Hence arose, on the one hand, farming and agriculture, and on the other the art of working metals and multiplying their uses.
24|From the cultivation of the earth, its division necessarily followed, and from property once recognized, the first rules of justice. For in order to secure to every man what is his, every man must have something. Moreover, as men began to look ahead to the future and all found themselves holding more or less goods that could be lost, each had reason to fear reprisals for any wrong he might do to others. This origin is all the more natural because it is impossible to conceive how property could come from any source other than labor. For what can a man add, in order to acquire property in things he has not made, except his work? It is labor alone that, by giving the farmer a claim to the produce of the land he has tilled, gives him a claim to the land itself, at least until the harvest, and so from year to year; and since this continuous use amounts to uninterrupted possession, it is easily turned into property. The ancients, says Grotius, by giving Ceres the epithet of lawgiver and calling a festival in her honor the Thesmophoria, suggested that the division of lands created a new kind of right, that is, the right of property, different from the one that follows from the law of nature.
25|Things so arranged might have remained equal if men's talents had been equal, and if, for instance, the use of iron and the consumption of goods had always been in exact proportion to each other. But since nothing supported this balance, it was soon broken. The strongest did the most work; the most skillful made the best use of his work; the most inventive found ways of reducing his labor. The farmer needed more iron, or the smith more grain, and while both worked equally, one earned a great deal by his labor while the other could barely live by his. In this way natural inequality gradually unfolds itself alongside that which arises from various combinations, and the differences among men, developed by differences in their circumstances, become more noticeable and more lasting in their effects, and begin to influence the condition of individuals in the same proportion.
26|Once matters had reached this point, it is easy to imagine the rest. I will not stop to describe the successive inventions of the other arts, the progress of language, the testing and use of talents, the inequality of fortunes, the use or abuse of wealth, nor all the details that follow from these and that anyone can easily supply. I will only glance at mankind placed in this new order of things.
