27|Behold, then, all our faculties developed: memory and imagination at work, self-love engaged, reason made active, and the mind almost at the furthest limits of the perfection it is capable of. Behold all our natural qualities set in motion. The rank and condition of every man is now established, not only by the amount of his property and his power to help or harm others, but also by intelligence, beauty, strength or skill, merit or talent. Since these were the only qualities that could win respect, it became necessary to have them or at least to pretend to. Men had to seem to be what they really were not. To be and to appear became two very different things, and from this distinction came ostentation and deceit and all the vices that follow in their train. On the other hand, man, formerly free and independent, was now, through a multitude of new needs, brought into subjection, so to speak, to all of nature and especially to his fellows. He became their slave in a sense even by becoming their master: if rich, he needed their services; if poor, their help; even a middling condition could not let him do without them. He had to keep working, therefore, to get them interested in his welfare and to make them, if not in reality then at least in appearance, find their advantage in laboring for his. This made him sly and devious with some, domineering and harsh with others, and forced him to treat badly all those he needed whenever he could not frighten them into obeying and did not find it in his interest to buy their compliance with real services. In short, an insatiable ambition, a burning desire to increase their relative fortunes, not so much from real need as to rise above others, inspires in all men a wicked inclination to harm each other and a secret jealousy that is all the more dangerous because, to gain its end more safely, it often puts on the face of kindness. In a word, there was on one side competition and rivalry and on the other a clash of interests, while a secret desire to profit at others' expense always prevailed. Such were the first effects of property and the inseparable companions of infant inequality.
28|Before the invention of signs to represent it, wealth could hardly consist of anything but land and cattle, the only real goods men can possess. But when estates grew so numerous and large as to cover whole countries and touch one another, it became impossible for one man to increase his holdings except at another's expense. The surplus inhabitants, who were too weak or too lazy to make such acquisitions in their turn, grew poor without losing anything, because while everything around them changed they alone stayed the same, and they were obliged to receive or seize their living from the hands of the rich. From this began to flow, according to each person's character, domination and slavery, or violence and plunder. The rich for their part had scarcely begun to taste the pleasure of commanding when they preferred it to every other, and using their old slaves to win new ones, they thought of nothing but subduing and enslaving their neighbors, like ravenous wolves that, having once tasted human flesh, refuse all other food and from then on devour only men.
29|In this way the most powerful or the most wretched, each regarding their strength or their misery as a kind of claim on other people's property, equivalent even to a right of ownership, brought about, once equality was broken, the most shocking disorders. In this way the usurpations of the rich, the robberies of the poor and the unbridled passions of all, by stifling the cries of natural compassion and the still feeble voice of justice, made man greedy, wicked and ambitious. Between the right of the strongest and the right of the first occupant there arose a perpetual conflict, which always ended in fighting and bloodshed. Infant society became the scene of the most horrible warfare. Mankind, thus degraded and tormented, no longer able to turn back or to give up the unhappy gains it had made, and working only toward its own ruin through the abuse of faculties that in themselves do it so much honor, brought itself to the very brink of destruction.
30|Attonitus novitate mali, divesque miserque, effugere optat opes; et quae modo voverat, odit.
31|But it is impossible that men should not sooner or later have reflected on so wretched a situation and on the calamities that overwhelmed them. The rich in particular must soon have realized how much they suffered from a perpetual war whose whole cost they alone bore, and in which, although everyone risked his life, they alone risked their property. Besides, whatever color they tried to give their usurpations, they saw well enough that these were basically founded on false and shaky claims, and that what they had acquired by mere force others could take back from them by mere force, without giving them the least ground for complaint. Even those who owed all their wealth to their own industry could hardly rest their holdings on a better claim. It did them no good to say, "I built this wall; I earned this land by my labor." Someone could object: "Who marked it out for you, and what right have you to expect payment at our expense for doing what we never required of you? Do you not know that many of your brothers die or suffer badly for lack of what you have in excess of what nature requires, and that you needed the express and unanimous consent of mankind to take from the common stock more than you needed for your own living?" Lacking sound reasons to justify himself and enough strength to defend himself, able to crush individuals with ease but just as easily crushed by crowds, one man against all, and unable, because of mutual jealousies, to unite with his equals against bandits united by the shared hope of plunder, the rich man, driven by necessity, finally conceived the cleverest plan that ever entered the human mind. It was to use in his favor the very forces that attacked him, to make allies of his enemies, to instill other maxims in them and make them adopt other institutions as favorable to his claims as the law of nature was unfavorable.
32|With this aim, after setting before his neighbors all the horrors of a situation that armed them against one another, made their possessions as burdensome as their needs were intolerable, and in which no one could expect any safety in either poverty or wealth, he easily devised plausible arguments to bring them round to his purpose. "Let us unite," he said, "to protect the weak from oppression, restrain the ambitious and secure for each man the possession of what belongs to him. Let us establish rules of justice and peace that everyone must follow, that favor no one, and that in some way make up for the whims of fortune by subjecting the powerful and the weak alike to mutual obligations. In a word, instead of turning our forces against ourselves, let us gather them into a supreme power that will govern us by wise laws, protect and defend all the members of the association, repel common enemies and maintain lasting harmony among us."
33|Far fewer words of this kind were enough to win over a crowd of rustics, who were easy to deceive, who had too many quarrels among themselves to live without arbiters, and too much greed and ambition to live long without masters. All of them offered their necks to the yoke in hope of securing their liberty. They had enough sense to see the advantages of a political constitution but not enough experience to foresee its dangers. Those among them best able to foresee the abuses were precisely those who expected to profit from them, and even the most sober judged it necessary to sacrifice one part of their liberty to protect the other, as a man with a badly wounded limb readily gives it up to save the rest of his body.
34|Such was, or must have been if man had been left to himself, the origin of society and of laws, which gave new fetters to the weak and new strength to the rich; irretrievably destroyed natural liberty; fixed forever the law of property and inequality; turned a clever usurpation into an irrevocable right; and, for the profit of a few ambitious individuals, subjected the rest of mankind to perpetual labor, servitude and misery. We can easily see how the establishment of a single society made the establishment of all the others necessary, and how, to face united forces, the rest of mankind had to unite in turn. Societies formed in this way soon multiplied and spread until they covered the face of the earth, leaving no corner of the universe where a man could throw off the yoke and withdraw his head from beneath the sword, often wielded badly, that he saw forever hanging over it. Civil law having thus become the common rule for citizens, the law of nature no longer held except between different societies, where, under the name of the law of nations, it was modified by tacit conventions to make trade possible and to take the place of natural compassion. Compassion, gradually losing in societies all the influence it originally had over individuals, now survives only in a few great souls who see themselves as citizens of the world and, breaking through the imaginary barriers that separate peoples, after the example of the Sovereign Being from whom we all derive our existence, make the whole human race the object of their goodwill.
35|Political bodies, thus remaining in a state of nature toward one another, soon experienced the troubles that had forced individuals to leave it, and that state proved much more fatal to these great bodies than it had been before to the individuals who now made them up. From this come those national wars, those battles, those murders, those reprisals that make nature shudder and shock reason; from this come all those horrible prejudices that make it a virtue and an honor to shed human blood. The worthiest men learned to regard cutting their fellows' throats as a duty; at length men began to slaughter one another by thousands without knowing why; and more murders were committed in a single battle, and more horrible disorders at the capture of a single town, than had been committed in the state of nature over ages together across the whole face of the earth. Such are the first effects we may suppose to have arisen from the division of mankind into different societies. Let us return to their institution.
